--- YouTube Channel Transcript Export ---
Channel: 0xResearch (ID: UC4UIG0VvHi6AftF0icVebfw)
Export Date: 2025-06-08 12:29:44
Total Videos Found (in channel): 226
Preferred Languages: en
--- Videos starting from 1st in this file ---
========================================

--- Video 1 ---
Video ID: zVFtxGEg9tk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zVFtxGEg9tk
Title: 0xResearch | Friday, June 6th
Published: 2025-06-06 17:37:15 UTC
Description:
Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Felix: https://x.com/fejau_inc
Follow Westie: https://x.com/WestieCapital
Follow James: https://x.com/JamesChristoph_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/⁠

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
[Music] [Music] This music is supposed to stay. [Music] No, it's uh this is a Streamyard special, I'm pretty [Music] sure. There he is. Didn't even want to show that. I like the beats. [Music] We're figuring it out here. I don't know why it's doing that. Just [Music] [Applause] [Music] There's Ryan. All right, guys. Let's hop into it. I got to pause the music before it rips another round through. Welcome to another run of the Zerox live stream. Joined today we've got Felix from Forward Guidance. Glad to have you on, sir. James Christopher from the Telegram. Uh known individual. Ryan Cash flows Connor and Westy from the data team. How we all doing today, guys? We're still alive and we're not crashing out. Yeah, we're here. We're doing a community outreach for uh for our brethren, you know, pulling in people like James from the Telegram and uh giving them some followers, giving them some clout. What's up, James? You're here for the second ox research pod now. That's impressive. second time. It's very, very exciting. Happy to be here. First time pre-recorded, second time live. We love it. Um, Felix, glad to have you on. Uh, I don't we don't usually get to pull you in. you know, the macro and the DGEN and the deep research pieces don't often collide that frequently, but uh we the last time we had you on on on the pod, I know we we tried to get a little bit into your uh onchain enjoyments, if you want to call it that. Um would love to do that today as well, but we also want some of your macro takes and I think it's probably a great idea to start off on markets. Actually, a ton of stuff happened yesterday. Um, I was just listening actually to the to the forward guidance app. You guys just dropped you and Tyler. Um, would love to just dive in, get your thoughts on the market and maybe some of the recent, you know, crash out news the other day and then let's just dive into it like how are people people feeling? Um, yeah. So yeah, Tyler and I talked about this in the roundup, but uh I think the fact that the fact that the government is just going to keep on spending and running high def the fiscal deficits can basically be the uh catalyst for breaking up the the previous bromance that was Elon and Trump. Just goes to show how ingrained these dynamics are. Um, that was my biggest takeaway from this whole thing is just that you just cannot fight the beast that is Congress trying to be reelected and throwing money at their constituents. And the fact is, no matter, you know, how much you bang the drum about fiscal austerity and all these things, there's there's midterms that need to be won. There's uh taxes that need to be cut. And so, here we are. You know, it basically it basically broke them up. And I think that just goes to show how ingrained these dynamics are. And it it really really revitalizes my conviction in owning assets that can both be a tailwind and a hedge to that dynamic. So I've been talking a lot about how important it is to focus on the fiscal side of things as opposed to the monetary, which is what we've been used to for the past two decades of just looking at, oh, what's pal going to say at whatever press conference? And I mean, you just look at the past 5 years, like we are, especially the past like 3 years or so. We're we're three years into having rates be quite a bit above the zero lower bound. And I feel like there's a lot of detractors that thought that that would cause a recession, that would cause, you know, speculative assets like Bitcoin to do badly. And it's just the complete opposite. And I think because that is so much driven by this fiscal side of things and that do I mean, you hear this idea of fiscal dominance and I don't think we're quite there for me. The definition of that is when the fiscal side of things completely leads the charge and the Fed and the monetary policy side of things is there just to basically smoothen out that process and also to basically monetize any excess uh issuance that is required to lead fiscal policy. But we're getting closer and closer to that point. Um obviously, you know, Powell is still the head of the Fed, but that's going to end in 2026. And whoever replaces him is going to be somebody who's blessed by Trump. And I think that'll be some some meaningful catalyst further towards this idea of fiscal dominance. So yeah, when I just look through the noise, when I set aside all the tariff stuff, all of these different things to me, all the the core components are are still there and accelerating that uh make me bullish on on monetary hedges. So still very excited about Bitcoin, still very excited about gold, still very excited about US equities. um bearish, anything that is a fixed rate asset like treasury bonds. Um I think we're just going to continue into this world of of cyclically and secularly higher inflation. So yeah, I don't know. It feels like there's just, you know, there's narratives that pull us in one way or the other every single week, but when you just look at the core buckets of of what's there and what's driving things, it's it's all the same thing. So there's there's no real reason for me to change my mind. Obviously, you know, we're heading into the summer here and we could talk a bit about that, I'm sure, in terms of just how choppy and illquid summers are typically for crypto. And I think it's totally possible that we just mess around for a little while, drive people insane and um accelerates mental illness, but overall when I look at the big picture, it's just like it's the same old thing and it's and it's accelerating really. Um yeah, so that's where I'm at. Felix, do you think like h how do you quantify traditional markets and kind of like Trump exhaustion where the marginal headline and the marginal escalation on tariffs is having less and less of an effect? And do you think we get to a point where like we're we're just totally looking past that kind of stuff? Um, yeah, it's it's so funny because like you just you track through the headlines basically since Liberation Day and it's just been every week some sort of marginal in in the right direction. At the same time that you know we saw we saw Trump come out and say oh we're going to potentially add 50% tariffs on Europe and that quickly got revised and the market didn't even really take it seriously that time. So obviously that's been the driving factor of this whole like taco thing which I don't know feels like we're probably now opening up the risk of that being taken uh waiting it too too heavily. This idea of just Trump always chickens out. Um so I don't know it's like with anything in markets you know is that when you just when you see the same thing hit the tape every single time. Every single time it hits the tape it has a lower impact on it. And that can be Trump you know tariff headlines. It can be yeah earnings releases pretty much anything you know. Um, so I feel like it's just, yeah, the way markets anticipate and and price in for changes. And for some reason, it just feels like a lot of people get too stuck up in where things are in the present day and and this like static thinking I kind of complain about um that too many people have. And yeah, you just have to look at like what's likely next as opposed to where it stands today. But also balancing that with this like diminishing returns of pricing in those if that makes sense. Shout out to Kristoff with the worst mic I've ever heard in my life. Oh my god. Is that bad? Send him a pod mic now. I told him it was okay beforehand. Are you using wired headphones from 2011? Like what's going on? Well, first I had AirPod Pros and then Danny told me they sucked. So now I'm on my computer. They were worse. Oh yeah, and you have the Lenovo. I'm on an Asus Vivo book now. Times are tough, man. Can't afford it. That's fair. He need He really needs the markets to go up higher to afford new gear, I think. Um well, I guess maybe we start diving in into the more cryptocentric views as part of the recent market activity. I think really one of the big ones here is Circle the IPO um list listing at what like opening at 31. And could I jump in? I can we can we actually go back to macro for a moment there? Sure. Um I have a question for Felix. Um like I thought two interesting things from what you just said. One is you didn't really talk about the Trump Elon breakup. Does that matter to macro at all in terms of like Trump's ability to get things done? Because he has a very tech- ccentric cabinet and there's like a potentially like I don't know maybe I'm reading too much in between the tea leaves but like he has a very Elon influenced cabinet and I think that there's potentially some risk of infighting there. And then two, from a macro perspective, I didn't hear a mention of AI um in terms of like what that does to the macro backdrop, like either near-term or long term. I'm wondering if you have any thoughts there. Um I'll before I answer both of those, I'll just say that I have no real good uh unique view on these, but I will say just off the cuff, um I think it's a good flag on the first part. You know, I think it's it's really easy to look at these headlines of this uh you know, tech oligarchy breakup with the Trump administration and extrapolate it out into, you know, what does that mean for, you know, JD Vance sitting in the middle of of those two and trying to have to pick a side and, you know, the the Mark Andreas of the world, the the Chamas of the world, all these people that have sort of been been married between the two. Yeah, it's a it's a decent um it's a decent risk. I I don't know really how it trickles out to be honest with you. Um you don't think the market cares like they're you don't think that they're thinking like I don't know. I'm just wondering if you think that people who are managing macro risk like are actually thinking about that thing. Yeah. I mean it's a decent one, but we've also seen like a complete reversal already of it. I mean, maybe part of that is the draws report today that was like decent compared to the the ADP was pretty weak and people got off off a off base there and a little too bearish on the economy and the labor market. So maybe it's part of that, but it also feels like a big reversal when people just stop for a second and think like what are the actual mechanical impacts and sure maybe it creates a few more headwinds around some of the more tech-centric policy decisions that they make. But I think overall you have to weigh that against like the these these fiscal impulse dynamics that I mentioned that I just think are are so much more powerful. Like I've been thinking a lot about how what it means to be in this economic regime that we're in now where there's a lot of debt and now that debt is paying a pretty significant uh yield on it now. It's it's paying four and a half% and that's happening at the same time that people's mortgages are sitting at 2 and a half% in a 30-year fixed rate mortgage. That is, you know, you could jack rates to the Fed could jack rates to 10% and what would that actually do to mortgages? It wouldn't change anything and then they would actually get a higher interest payment on their yield. So I just feel like these dynamics just overwwayigh so many other things and it's it's why you see you have this you have the passive flows constantly going into markets you have the buybacks of every equity company. So just it feels like every time we get one of these little shocks you just I think it's the reason why you see these V recoveries where you have you have the catalyst that brings it lower and then it's like a beach ball underwater because eventually those other flows I mentioned just have to take it up and come forth. So yeah, I think it's a decent risk, but I just don't feel like it it overpowers those more powerful flows. Anyway, um and on the second question about AI, it's I mean I feel like some some other people here probably have better takes on AI than I am. Um I'm definitely a tourist, but I feel like you know there's the other day I was like working in in a spreadsheet and there were some charts I needed to make like 10 of them. And typically if I just did that manually it would have taken me a couple hours and instead there's like the Gemini integration into Google Sheets now and I just put in one prompt and it was done in 30 seconds and just that little tidbit in terms of extrapolating that across the world in terms of productivity. It's it's going to improve things a lot. Will it improve, you know, to the point where we see like the the big, you know, spicy takes of like the anthropics EU talking about unemployment doubling in the next few years. Yeah, maybe that's that's the case. But I just have no edge in in in forecasting that. But I don't know. I've talked a lot. I'd love to hear what other people's takes are on the impact of of AI on the uh the economy in the world. Yeah. I my my personal belief, and this is someone who used to do macro, no longer does, and now just mostly focuses on AI and crypto, is that um you know, in 2022, I think a lot of macro people just got everything wrong. uh 2002 22 into into 23. Um all like you know you used to see these lead lag models pretty popular on um at least like retail like in retail macro circles and you know they were they were popular in professional macro circles as well and they all stopped working. So if you were at if you're going to have a model that predicted the change in unemployment which would also signal a recession because unemployment spikes in a recession. I think if you had 50 met metrics that would predict that on a league lead lag basis, 49 of them said that unemployment should have ripped in 20 in the back half of 23. It did not or pro or actually sorry probably the first half of 24 it did not. Um and like so what caused that? Um I think you have a very obvious inflection in the fourth quarter of 2023 which was AI capex spend and just like um you know the Keynesian animal spirits around this technology. You saw it in construction spending in the US that went parabolic that was mostly dri driven by data centers and you have the largest components of the S&P 500 all who generate um either high tens of billions or low hundreds bill hundreds of billions in free cash flow per year. the most cash flowing uh generating entities in the history of capitalism all spending as much as they can on capex in the United States, right? And that filters into local economies and creates job growth. So you you you have this like weird um you actually have this weird trend now in U3 unemployment that it just doesn't look like it does historically or it's taking longer to like kind of take off than it has. you have this weird trend in PMI that you know the chart hasn't looked that way for 15 or so years. Um, but like I'm willing as someone who just knows like the highle data, I'm willing to say that that's all the animal spirits coming from uh AI investment out of the largest companies in the United States that have to put cash to work there. Um, so I don't know. I I personally believe that like that that's the biggest um force in macro like you mentioned earlier um you know high rates happened everyone thought the economy couldn't handle it I think that that was almost true until AI right like because like now you have ROI is potentially higher and that that hurdle rate of interest rate expense matters a lot less so I don't know I'm I'm of the opinion that like the cycle keeps going like I understand all the flow stuff and fiscal spending and stuff but I I even think that you could get a decline in fiscal spending and it wouldn't matter because um the the the mega caps are just going to just going to pick that up and all the startup and and venture funding is going to keep flowing into the economy to capture this AI opportunity which I believe all these biggest players view as existential right so they have to spend that cash yeah th those are great points I feel like it's that's definely a huge chunk of it I would say it's that compared with just inaccurate analysis because you know you rewind back to 2021 and it's like the Fed can't you know there was I remember there's like you know Jamie Diamond is saying Fed funds might go to 2 and a half% and everybody was like no way that's ridiculous like the the economy can't handle that and I think a lot of it is for sure the AI cap expand and productivity gains but also I think just an incorrect analysis of what happens when you have corporates that have turned out their debt on the long end for for many many years and households doing that on their household balance sheets, in terms of mortgages, in terms of the fact that the the flow through of interest rate hikes does not affect the economy like it used to. So, I feel like it's a combination of both. I think that's a really good point that I probably underweight that side of things. Um, but the two together I think just makes the entire economy less cyclical and and more just other secular exponential. For sure. I I remember looking at the 2-year rate in the back half of 21 and thinking to myself, this is never going to get off zero. Like I literally like said that to myself and that was my expectation. And then when it went to two and a half or maybe it was it was two um yeah I was certain that the economy couldn't handle it. I think everyone was and and look where we are. So I think something that's interesting, Ben Eert had a really good tweet thread last week of to your point Ryan of like yeah the capex spend is totally real but I think people are extrapolating and kind of being a little too doomerism on productivity gains right like we have yet to hear on an earnings call like a CEO of a big corporate coming out and saying hey we're we're jamming five billion into buying productivity tools and we're going to fire you know 10% of our workforce as a result of this. And I'm not saying it's not going to happen, but I think it's probably a bit further off than people think. And it's going to be predominantly capex driven for the next couple of years before we start to see like mass layoffs um and like, you know, real implementation of this stuff. I will say anecdotally, I have a lot of family members and their friends that are in the like graduating college like new to the workforce class and like I'm hearing a lot of stories of the job market for them being like horrible due to a mix of like just the way things are currently, but also like hearing that AI is the reason that they're hiring less for those like junior your entry level positions. And so I think yeah, anecdotally it's already being felt, but on the macro you're not really seeing it quite yet. Did you guys see circle just hit an alltime high? Yeah. 108. Oh, 118. Oh, wow. I'm delayed, I guess. 100x long or short right now. What do you say, Felix? Oh my god. Um, I got my finger on the the green. It's like I don't know. I haven't looked at what the the float is of the circle IPO, but uh it's just that yeah, these things are crazy when they first launch. And you have that compared with just like the lack of lack of cash flowing companies in in crypto. Maybe Ryan Cashful Connors can elaborate a bit on it, but uh yeah, it just feels like it's just like the valuation is not the concern right now just because of just the lack of options for crypto exposure sort of. So, it's like I have no idea where this thing can go. Yeah, Ryan, you shared some info on like a model the other day in an internal chat. But I guess I'm curious like if you have a deeper take there, but I that's the the feeling I get is what Felix said like there are very limited options and it's just like if you want to allocate to this that's like one of the very few public options to do so right now. Yeah. I I think that circle and IBIT are all market structure. I mean all I don't want to be um all all is strong but I I think that there are two forces here that are somewhat contradictory but are both true is that one uh hedge fund managers and and RAAS they want crypto exposure so they're going toward the things that are most familiar which is why Bitcoin did well ETH did poorly and why circle is doing well because they're stable coin adjacent and adjacent and people understand stable coins and trify But I also think that like a huge part of their story is market structure. There are so few options that the you know if you want a pure play which every hedge fund manager RA wants a pure play like you don't want to buy JP Morgan to get stable coin exposure even though they're going to make money from stable coins one day. You want to buy circle because it's easy to explain to a client. You can more easily like manage that direct exposure um rather than within a conglomerate uh exposure. Um, so yeah, I I think that there's a large market structure story here. Um, so like first to market on these products like matters, right? Like Salana getting an ETF therefore matters because market structure matters. Um, it's just like kind of the state that that that we're in right now. Um, you know, what would happen to Circle if Bitfinex were, you know, able to IPO? Like I don't think we're ever going to know, but um yeah. Yeah, it's all market structure, I think. Yeah. What other way do you have to get exposure to stable coins directly? Like every other way is completely indirect. I guess Coinbase might be a decent proxy given, you know, their proximity to circle, but yeah, this is like the purest way to get exposure to stable coins. anyone who was at DAS, I mean I wasn't there, but it was all I heard from takeaways of the conference was every single person there was bullish on stable coins and their growth and potential. You have Shimoth every week on Allin mentioning stable coins in some way, shape or form. It's very clearly hit the Trafi uh mainstream, if you will, where everyone I think has come to the conclusions that stable coins are good. They have product market fit. They're growing fast. And so, yeah, it's like, okay, how do you get exposure to that? It's it's literally just the circle IPO. There's no other pure way. It it begs the question, go ahead, James. No, no, please. Okay. I was going to say it begs the question of um like you mentioned both Ryan's here, the uh market structure question I think is interesting because it's, you know, let's say circle wasn't the only option. I mean, if we look out a few years from now, I mean, how do we expect things to unfold? I mean, do we really do we think Circle is going to be a big winner here or are we looking at other things now and and forecasting, you know, these guys are eventually going to go public? This token is eventually going to come to market and that's where I would really want to like put my cards on the table. Yeah. The big question for me is about so it feels like this double-edged sword now where one side is going to have to be a loser. So the reason I say that has to do with where does the interest go for these stable coins. So if if the Genius Act goes like it's proposed right now and there won't be interest allowed on these stable coins that means 100% net interest margin for these stable coin issuers that is very profitable for them. Like you think about money market funds you know they they will collect fees but overall most of that interest gets passed on to the owners of the money money market funds. Um so you have this situation where either you have something like you know obviously circle part of it is that if you own on Coinbase you get part of that yield but just in speaking in general terms it's either these stable coin issues issuers get 100% of the net interest margin and the consumers get zero yield in which case if you're if we're talking about that trady money that wants to be in like money market funds or you know the money market funds 2.0 know, which is how I see stable coins. Either they have to sacrifice not getting any yield as opposed to getting four and a half% in money market funds or on the other side of things is the stable coin issuers get to keep that 100% net interest margin and make a [ __ ] ton of money. And so I feel like the biggest question at hand is where does that end up? And yeah, I mean, if it gets passed in Congress and these these uh big stable coin issuers can't pass on the yield to consumers, that's going to be great for the companies, but it means that adoption from money market funds will probably not exist because why the hell would they own it if the owners of those stable coins can't get a yield? It's uh it's a weird one. Um I don't really know where it goes. So that's kind of like exactly where I was going to go, Felix. Like if if you go down this route of massive trady, stable coin adoption and the issuers keeping the interest, I think it's very very unlikely that names like Croup, JP Morgan, BA are happy to dive deep into this business and support stable coin rails, but somehow allow this weird nichy little company called Circle to own everything. That That's the Circle. No pun intended. That's a terrible joke that I can't square. Like I I just don't understand why you would want to bet on this standalone business to be totally honest. Like you you can price forward-looking NIM very very well. Um and if you look at Circle right now, I don't I don't know why you would buy it at the current valuation if you're bullish on stable coins and it's a cruel of NIM. I agree. It's it's certainly pricey right now. Also, non non-zero chance that a lot of retail capital is moving it, but I have no I have no inside baseball there, guys. I got to run. Um, but I'll be back in 30 minutes. Peace y'all. See you, Ryan. I'll see you, Ryan. Yeah. So, I don't know. It feels like somebody's going to win, somebody's going to lose. um it feels like it's more likely for the consumer base to lose assuming the Genius Act gets passed and you can't have interest on these stable coins in which case maybe the the runway for Circle is is more attractive but yeah if you start to get interest bearing stable coins these like you know we obviously we can't see the profitability of these other stable coin issuers like we can with Circle now that they're public um and overall what you can see in those is that yeah the gross margin is entirely just because of the fact that they don't have to pass on these uh well obviously they do through Coinbase. Um but you can just extrapolate that and kind of set it aside and just be like okay well the only reason they're like somewhat profitable is because this weird situation where they have 100% net interest margin and the consumer base does not expect yields. But uh if if we go into the direction that like James is talking about where the JP Morgans and like the the Schwabs of the world come in with their like digital money market funds and start passing on yield, suddenly those margins get compressed and these valuations just just don't make sense. But again, you have to set that aside against the dynamic that is that it's one of the only options for exposure and people hit buy and market structure, you know, if that happens in a situation where the float is super low, which I assume it is. Um, I haven't looked at the numbers, but you know, to see it just whipping around like this, I assume the float is very, very small. Yeah, I'll tell you right now. So, two, what is it? 202 million shares outstanding, 175 million float. Not terrible, actually. Yeah, that's decent. One of the things that's been interesting is I would have thought given the success of the circle IPO that stable coin protocol like governance tokens would perform really well and to be honest like there hasn't been much outperformance of like your your makers or Athenas. I've also been seeing a ton of people float uh Forax thesis recently given their like ties to um like the Genius Act stuff like they're really trying to penetrate um like DC in a weird way and also funds are super underexposed which I thought was like a super interesting thesis but and that has been like outperforming recently but ever since the circle IPO just absolutely thing. Do you guys remember when Frack was going to get a Fed Master account? I do remember that. Yeah. I mean, it's it it brings up the debate of like these useless governance coins versus Yeah. actual cash flow occurring to stable coin issuers, right? like Ethe I I love the project but the token itself is is is a tough one in terms of the you know value flow through into it and yeah maker seems like another one that's a little bit better um I don't know too much about the specifics maybe you guys can expand but yeah it just feels like the the endless issue of the tokconomic structures and the the governance coins that just that don't have anything that they can claim onto it versus like these actual equity ownership and stable coins. And it just feels like a continuation of that dynamic of like, huh, these governance coins like may not be the best framework for for creating uh, you know, exposure to crypto markets, right? Like I think there's a good fundamental reason why we've seen a lot of people get really excited about like crypto stocks like Robin Hood as opposed to, you know, the the 10th iteration of a random governance coin, right? like this just it's just a way better form format. Yeah, we talked about this a lot on the pod. I want to say a few months back maybe when Kaio was a hot topic or when when that token dropped and just discussing, you know, there's the endless debate of of the token versus the labs entity or the equity or whatever. We have this kind of dual structure that's been very pervasive. um not quite stable coin specific, but maybe this is worth discussing Morpho um in this recent announcement from them. But to that point, I I do agree with you to an extent, Felix. I think as long as we continue with this structure of there's some labs or other entity equity structure loosely associated with then this token to some basically you know if it's a successful protocol some cash flow generating business and then you're choosing to divvy up the revenue between multiple places it's like you just you end up with a much less attractive offering and a lot of uncertainty there in terms of you know am I always only going to get 25 or 50% of the revenue. Am I going to get 75 or 100% in the future? Do I actually even have any right to that? Like, can they just yank that away at any point? Um, I think that's a big problem. I I'm curious. I'm just going to read a quick note here from Morpho, but they they mentioned that what they're going to be doing here is Morpho Labs will become a wholly owned subsidiary of the Morpho Association to eliminate perceived conflicts with equity value and ensure that token holders and the contributing entities share the same incentive. It sounds like a good step in the right direction to me. I'm curious your guys thoughts like should more protocols just be doing this like do away with the conflict with labs have it all under the token. Yeah. I mean initial thoughts are this is fantastic and a step in the right direction. I think it became sort of the norm to have like a foundation labs arm like once one person did it uh and like no one discounted the token as a result of having that kind of structure. You just saw it pop up again and again. But there was one interesting talk from DBA's recent research day from Felipe at Thea talking about how uh liquid token markets right now are broken. And there's a bunch of different elements to that. One of them definitely being this like equity versus token uh mismatch um making it really really hard to invest in actual tokens because you don't know whether like the cash flow will actually acrue to the token or not. Uh and you don't know whether things will change in the future versus now uh given that the foundations and labs have so much control over the supply and can just change things via governance at will. There's also other pieces of like you need to discount uh token liquidity versus equity in like a huge way. And so just off the bat, tokens need to be valued at less than equity. I I highly recommend people go uh listen to that talk. But yeah, I mean the only way you really solve this is through creating new norms and also the market starting to price these things in that like the token should be valued at much less than the equity if there's no value going to that token. hands like we're also working on something uh that should help with this sort of uh transparency or rather like creating norms within the industry that these teams should follow and that the market should should price these things based on those uh sort of elements. So yeah, I think Morpho is doing a fantastic job sort of putting their foot down, putting things in the right direction and and setting an example for other teams going forward that you you don't have to do this like I feel like people felt in the past they had to do this kind of structure because that's that's what teams do. That's what you do. So having a a path that's different I think is very very valuable. And the Morpho team is great and I'm not surprised that they they did this as well. So yeah, I'm happy about it. Yeah, that that data video video was really really good. I think the other thing too from this announcement that I really appreciate is lower in the article, they talk about how it's become the norm for when when we start to move towards this idea of fee switching for protocols. The the assumption is, oh well, let's like give these out to equity owners as a dividend. And you know, maybe James can riff on this too as we bring in the like crypto once again like it always falls pl to this idea of just like reinventing the mistakes that try has already worked through. And so now we're in this situation where there's like this this owner base that is like well I want 100% dividend on retained earnings from this company. And when you like that is just if if you started to ask that against like early stage growth companies they'd be like what the hell are you talking about? like why would we give out a 100% like dividend payout ratio? That's absolutely ridiculous versus reinvesting in the company. So they also mentioned in there about how they want to do away with this notion of just spitting out cash flows to others because the idea there like when you when you think about capital structure and equity structure. The idea is that we like when you go through the calculus of deciding your dividend pay ratio, you're you're making the calculus of is it more creative for us to give it to the equity owner or do we think we can get a higher internal rate of return on it internally investing it? And this this notion of the expectation of giving out all the fees to equity owners and not reinvesting it into the company is is just way too far to the other side of the extreme. But it's it's somewhat valid of a criticism because they've been so burned on the fact that they haven't gotten anything. They've just had governance tokens. So I think the combination of fixing equity structure along with this idea of let's rethink these as actual companies and actually be a bit more pragmatic about our dividend payout ratios, i.e. throwing off these to equity owners is a is a really good thing. Um yeah, James, what's what's your take on that? I'm curious. I I think it's just like kind of obvious, right? Like I think people are people are done listening to protocols say, "Well, we're not we're not in control of this. The foundation is and the foundation saying, "Well, we're not in control of that. The labs is." And like I feel like people are totally totally exhausted of that over the last year or two. Um so yeah, I've got nothing but good things to say about it. I think it's very very obviously a good thing. Yeah, I I think I'm I'm inclined to agree completely with you here, Felix. I feel like if you collapse this structure that is has been pervasive, you remove a lot of the I think you made the point so well that just like you know as maybe a token purchaser today of a lot of these weird structures that probably you're going to get a small fraction of revenues maybe redirected at the thing at at maybe not even now, maybe at some point in the future. And so it it makes sense that the thought is well if they're going to give me anything like you know buy back the token or just like give it all to me you know because we don't you know if if 75% is going to labs team like we don't even know if they're reinvesting it in the protocol are they paying themselves fat salaries and just sitting around like you have no we have no insight there's very little transparency I think to a lot of these activities today and so it doesn't surprise me that a lot of the sentiment today around the flows that go to the token are very much just like pay it out. We want we want the money for the investment. Um and I think if you if you eliminate a lot of that stuff, you get more transparency around what the spending looks like, how we're allocating, how what growth strategies look like going forward. Um and it's all under this one common investment vehicle or token or asset or whatever you want to call it. Um it it can remove a lot of that friction, which is what I see it as today is it's this is an expression of all that friction. And Danny, I don't want to jump the gun, but I think it kind of dovetales into this conversation. Like I think that's probably the number one reason that people are so pissed off about the pump ICO, right? Like this this split. Like this is like this is it, right? Third biggest ICO of all time. And it's unclear, right? Like even if it gets 25% of the revenue, it's still to me that's that's not enough, right? To to come out and raise a billion dollars. Yeah, I think it's a I think it's a fair point and I and I understand and I'd love your guys takes here. I understand why teams still operate this way. One, it it's good for them, right? They get a kind of a double win here. They have some equity, they have some tokens, they can, you know, the the equity gets raised up, they drop the token, they can use the token to incentivize things. Maybe the incentivization of the thing then raises the value of the, you know, the perceived value of the equity. There's a lot of things going on there. Um, but also like the prior regulatory climate, like I'm sure there are still teams who would be scared or very cautious about saying, "Hey, we don't we're not even going to have equity." Like it's all just the token. You know, I think there's been a few, right? Kite Kaido was one where they're just like the token is the thing. You know, we're doing the token and like that represents like what we're building here. Um, but, you know, it doesn't surprise me that that other teams would maybe still be hesitant. But in the new administration, it seems like maybe you can maybe you can step on the regulatory gray line a little bit more. Um, you know, the SEC is certainly leaning far more openly than they have, you know, in the prior sort of regime. Um, and it it seems like it's an opportunity to to push those boundaries and like, you know, if we need to go fully, you know, token operated businesses basically, um, now's the time to test that out. And I agree with you, right? The kind of current rumor is that 25% of revenues would go to the token, which is is far different than if all of the, you know, they're on they're on track for 500 million plus in annualized revenue this year. So, it's it's a ton of money. Um, and to see 75% of that go to a team and be opaque and transparent like all the other projects of the past, yeah, it would be a big letown. Yeah. Yeah, I I think they would do themselves a service if they were like, you don't we don't need the full road map, but give us an idea of like what are you going to spend it on because like there's a very nonzero probability that they just special dividend out like half a billion dollars to VCs and like that's totally fine. I guess they can do it, but I think like some transparency. Are you guys going to buy streamers? Are you going to do contracts? like just give the community an idea of like what you think you're going to spend this money on before you raise it to to just to just take a billion is is very tough to me. Yeah. It's it's like if they went through a traditional route to raise this kind of money, obviously the investors are going to ask that like what are you going to do with the money? So the fact like ICOs and and one of the downfalls and I'm I'm a big proponent of ICOs. One of the downfalls is just you don't really have to have that much transparency like the community will just like for the most part fund you especially if you get enough people like enough eyeballs on your ICO like you're probably going to get the money without having to actually disclose what you're going to do with it. And that was a lot of issues of the previous ICO era is people just threw money at anything and you could just literally have a fake project and rug it. So yeah, I think they should have way more transparency over what they're doing with a billion dollars. Um I strongly agree and one of the things that I feel like every day frustrates me is that we we work in an industry that like one of the the number one values is transparency. the fact that we're working with blockchains and that everything is available to see um that like we still have such crazy opakqueness when it comes to you know teams launching tokens and what they're doing with the money like it's it's pretty absurd like we as an industry should be setting a standard way above tradfi of like in real time tracking where money is going, how it's being spent, how much revenue is being driven and what are users doing? Like we should have this all in real time in a much faster pace than Trafy. And the fact we're not doing that like blows my mind and and frustrates me a lot. Yeah, 100%. I'm curious what you guys think about what that does for L1 tokens versus like the applications that sit on top of them that end up being the ones that end up having cash flows and profitability and and revenues and like it just I mean it it feels like every L1 is going through this existential moment of like doing some weird trickery of not even trickery maybe that's too exaggerated but just like trying to jump through every sort of hoop to try to get any sort of value curl So it's like L1 token meanwhile these applications come in find product market fit start getting fees like crazy and then yeah you start to wonder okay pump token versus salana right like which one is the better hold if I don't know most of the activity is just like on pump fun and you know what if they just go off and and start their own blockchain right like that's where what does that do for the L1 token it just I don't know it feels like a huge headwind for James, look like you had thoughts. I have a lot of thoughts on this topic. Yeah, I I think like first at a high level like I'm perpetually confused that people in crypto are still obsessed with valuing things on the near term on cash flows. Like it's it's to me like I think Rev is Rev is really cool in terms of showing momentum and directions. I think it tells you very very little if not nothing about the value of something. Um, but also like if you look at like early stage venture, which is kind of what I think we're all doing here, like no, no one would look at Open AI and say like, "Hey, let's slap a multiple on this thing. What do the cash flows look like in 10 years? What's the immediate term value acrruel?" I'm not really sure why or if anyone is really accurately modeling this stuff for cash flows and kind of what the obsession is with that. Um, and you even see stuff that like every every single time there's a token in a cycle that occurs tons of cash flow, right? I'm thinking of like Sushi Swap in 2020, 2021, right? Everyone had all these amazing DCF models and God, I was going to print so much money and it just never works out. Um, so I don't know, Westy, what do you think? I'm glad you brought that up as well. So yeah, I like mostly agree that like in the short term like right now if you're looking at re of the major chains that doesn't really tell you much because we are like these are still early stage venture bets but at the same time when you look in the future you're optimizing for growth now but at a certain point you want that growth to actually capture value and if you're a blockchain the way you capture value is people paying to be in the chain which is rev. So you're optimizing for future rev. Now there's obviously a debate on whether current rev is a good predictor of future rev which it's probably not especially when there's a bunch of memecoin trading. You don't know how long that'll last. Maybe that's here forever. Maybe it's just here uh for a short time. But you're still optimizing for rev. And so this gets to the questions of like L1 valuations. I think for the most part L1's and like really a lot of chains as a whole are pretty overvalued. There's a like I think right now they're basically valued on like people dreaming about okay smart contracts are going to be really big. What's the probability chance that this takes a certain percentage of market share of that and so it gets priced at in the billions tens of billions of dollars. The problem is like that sort of worldview is is like very much future-looking and so there's no way to actually come back to reality of like okay in the future how much cash flow are these things going to generate and really what you should be looking for is again future rev and over time we're going to see the amount of margins that come from REV go down over time because right now a lot of it is like sandwich uh like arbitrage really like inefficient uh price discovery It's like a lot of memecoin trading and and yeah, like people that have insensitive uh like buys and also like yeah just and also yeah people exploiting that via sandwiching etc. And so that's going to come down over time and as a result like L1's are very low margin business in the long run. Um, and when you like think terminally of like, okay, let's say we ramp up TPS and like the median fee is like less than a penny because we want as much activity as possible. These things don't make that much money uh when you like you actually calculate things out. And so yeah, I think L1's are like for the most part overvalued unless they have an enshrined application uh and that application is generating revenue. Oh, speaking of [ __ ] tell us tell us about applications that fit that. No, no. Um, so there's this one called Hyperliquid. It is Boy, you wouldn't believe it. Um, Wesley, I have a question about this. Yeah. How, Cuz I didn't I was I wasn't listening. I'm sorry. I just Yeah, you just What's up? What's up? I was wondering um how long is this like L1 valuations are I guess L1 fees are going to go to zero like in what time frame do you say that it's is it like a fiveyear thing is it like a three-year thing is it like a 15-year thing what are we talking about here I mean in terms of like like a per transaction basis it's probably like a fiveyear thing I think you just you see basically like the whole thing is you want median fees to go down, you want number of transactions to go way up. Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah. So, like I think on the next five years, you see median fees go way down as there's just like more efficient me architecture, more competition and like apps also like sequencing things and taking a lot of that me like margins would compress the median fee goes down. But the hope is that you're the place that everyone congregates and there's value in having shared state which I think there is and that like you become a chain for a bunch of these things or again you have an enshrined application and that application can have high margins or its own form of revenue in the case of hyperlquid purping. Yeah. Do you see anything like if you look at it from a call like a value fundamental perspective that you'd be comfortable holding for like four or five years and just locking it away where like we're still in this momentum um market where where Yeah. It's just BTC is the only thing you're comfortable holding and everything else is just a trade. Yeah. I mean that's how I view things. Yeah. Bitcoin is like the only thing that I can hold on a five plus year time horizon and feel comfortable. Everything else is a trade for the most part. And like even looking at that like let's say we're like right now forming the the future mag seven of crypto and that like you as a as an example maybe that eventually gets to trillions, right? But in the meantime it's going to go through waves of like up and down 80% like down 80% from tops. And so if you can trade it well, you can also compound that. So to me, it makes the most sense to trade everything that isn't Bitcoin. Yeah, I think you saw this this year as well with Oh, Felix, he just disappeared, man. He said, "Fuck you. I want to Sorry, I'm still here. I got to jump in a minute, but I didn't want to interrupt the conversation, but I'm still sorting here." Yeah. I want to Let's cut in the middle here real quick. I think we'll we'll get back to this conversation because I think it's a good topic, but I want to say thanks Felix for coming on. Appreciated the macro takes. Love getting into the details. Uh if you have any last takeaways here on just this this valuation piece or if you're just excited to see it play out. Uh happy to hear it. But then also Ian, glad to have you on as well. Kyros research boy. Um we will pick up the conversation here. Um any last last words, Felix? Otherwise, we will see you on the Forward Guidance podcast as per usual. Um, yeah, no major final thoughts. I think it's just like I think Jay brought up a decent point that this obsession with like near-term cash flows just feels like a natural reaction to just how shitty the situation has been the past few years for the token structures that we've had. So, I feel like it's a reasonable just reaction to the other side of things. But I feel like now, and this is what I really liked about that morpho piece was just this like understanding of okay, we need to have a bit more pragmatism around like basically like dividend payout ratio of fees like how much do we just reinvest in the firm versus give it to equity holders. So yeah, I I'm I'm excited about the next iteration of things because obviously so much of this too has just been so hamstrung by the regulatory situation where it's just been so difficult to create these token structures. So I feel like my high level is just we're in this interesting transition stage where a lot of these useless governance coins that were created the last few years just because out of necessity. Well, you know, we're we're still seeing them go basically down only. And I think that's just a natural progression of markets. Meanwhile, you know, things like like Circle and then other projects like Hyperlid that show actual like product market fit and good tokconomic structures start to decouple from those. And I'm really excited for the token structures that are going to be probably worked on right now by devs and coming out in like a year and a half. I think they're going to be really really great. So yeah, I feel like things are going in the right direction. We're just like in this weird transition stage out of like the terrible SEC regulatory situation we had and where we're headed from here and the token structures just don't really exist yet except for like a few exceptions. So yeah, I'm optimistic. Um, yeah, don't want to fall plate to financial nihilism and go punch [ __ ] coins all the time. Um, I think good things are coming overall. Love it. Thanks for coming on and hopefully we'll have you on again sometime soon. Definitely love to do this. See you guys. Actually, this would have been relevant for Felix as well, but I wanted to ask you were too late. Sorry. what the blowup risk for these new um vehicles are. You know what I mean? Like meta planet. I don't understand what the like I understand that eventually there might be a cascading issue, but I I just don't understand why exactly it is, which is why which is what I wanted to ask him. If there's any bank or anybody in like traditional finance on this call, that would also be beneficial. But we can see Yeah. If only we had someone like that who could, you know, just give us some some valuable insights. What do we want to talk about, Bach? I don't understand why like what's the Can you explain to me like you're speaking to a very stupid child? Yeah. What like the micro strategy bad scenario end game is, but like really dumb it down for me. Sure. So like think think of a very traditional company that wants to borrow money in capital markets, right? So Apple goes out there and they float unsecured general corporate debt, right? So maybe they'll issue at like I don't know x percentage, they'll repay it in seven years and they make regular coupon payments. Super super vanilla. Now think of a convertible bond as an unsecured debt instrument that pays a very very low coupon basically effectively zero. But the difference is convertible bond like its name can be converted into equity right so at a certain conversion price and a conversion ratio and these are all different for each type of convert it's convertible into common equity so you basically have piece of straight debt with a call option embedded in it right so you can you can price this with like black shaws and tons of traditional models um so that's that's kind of like super high level how a convert works right so micro strategies obvious obviously found a ton of buyers for that debt mostly within the convertible arbitrage community. Um, and just to keep it super super basic, the way that those types of trades work, a convert arb fund will long the debt and then short the common equity and they'll delta hedge that on a regular basis, right? So, so there's a there's a natural buyer for the paper there. Um, in terms of like the blowup risk for for Micro Strategy, I agree with most people that there's not really like a blowup risk where he sells all of his Bitcoin, right? Like that's that's not really a thing. So, you have you have two situations with a convertible debt instrument. One, either the equity trades really really well and it converts to equity, right? And then the paper's retired and Micro Strategy doesn't need to to pay anything back. Or you have the other scenario where the converts busted and the equity, this is kind of the more interesting piece, right? Where the equity is trading very poorly. You assume the MNAV of Micro Strategy is also trading pretty poorly. So you get to an end scenario and I don't know, I can I can pull it up on a computer in a second like what the Micro Strategy debt distribution is. Like I'm pretty sure the first um convert doesn't come due until like 2028, something like that. Let me see. Uh, it's loading. Whatever. It doesn't matter. 2028 or 2029. So, assume the convert's busted and you can't repay it. What the seller do to repay that? So, one, he could sell Bitcoin to do it, but more likely he's probably just going to try to issue more debt or more preferred equity or something um to do that, right? So, I don't think there's like a blowup risk in that. You're not going to wake up one day and get like the whale alert that Michael Sailor is selling, you know, 10,000 Bitcoin to repay something. Um, but I think more on like a micro structure basis and what's more interesting to me is not asking the question when Michael Seller is going to sell Bitcoin, but more what's a situation that causes him to buy less Bitcoin and that effect on markets like that that buying pressure like you don't need to sell something for the market to collapse. You can also just buy less, right? And that's something that I think is is is worth thinking about. Yeah. Yeah. To me, it's less about like these strategy and strategy clones blowing up and needing to sell, like being forced sellers. It's that these are the biggest idiosyncratic buyers of of Bitcoin and also like some of the largest tokens in the market. And if all of a sudden there's a reason why they're buying less, then that has a cascading effect on prices. Yeah, I think people underestimate how much he's bought. Um, I should probably pull this up. There's this website called Sailor Tracker. I'm sure everybody's familiar with it, but I think he bought 20 bill in the second half of Yeah, they they own about they own about half as much um as all the the BTC ETFs combined last I checked like two days ago. Yeah. I mean, it's ridiculous. Um but what about this is not related to this as much but what do we think about um the entire like all of the now copycat vehicles popping up and if that is kind of a toppy signal. I don't like saying this is a top signal, but to me that feels a bit like a bit much. You know, I like one of the questions. I mean, yes, c it's certainly different. It's certainly I think accompanied by a lot of additional froth in the market from other things that we're seeing. Um, and I think it's just because there's so much excitement. Uh, like we finally have like the the tailwinds in the industry. But one of the things I'm wondering is like um and James, you might know this, but like how do all of these new treasury companies that are popping up, how do they actually like uh pay their employees? Like how do they make any money at all? like their whole business is predicated on just being able to like issue debt and then buy tokens and like to my understand like it's like at least with Micro Strategy they had like this you know bit of a dinosaur analytics business that kind of like lived for a while and now like it's still there like it has they have like a bit of AR there but like all these new companies like they have no actual business um for the most part. So curious if anyone knows how like they're making any money. Like that's the entire goal as well of that these companies. It's like how how are they paying these people? And also like uh did any of you guys listen to the light speeded pod that Jack did with um the DeFi development corp investor relations guy I believe. Um yeah it was a good pod. I think people should go and listen to that. Um but yeah, I mean just first question I guess first uh around like how do these people make money? How do these companies make money outside of purely this business? James, do you know? I mean you don't have to, right? Is the simple answer. Like you can in the same in the same way that Tether can run their company with 25 people. Like you can spin up an SPV tomorrow. You can raise like 10 million bucks of equity that's going to pay your overhead and your health insurance for for like forever. And that's also one thing like like Micro Strategy's business doesn't make money anymore like it like that like they're they're done, right? Like their their business whatever residual um income is there. So like like the last 12 months their pre-tax income has been negative6 billion, right? So like they're they're not they're not an operating company that's selling SAS to people anymore. Like that notion is kind of gone. Um, so yeah, like you can you can perpetually raise equity and pay two or three employees to, you know, manage that business. You don't need an operating business to do that. So, it's really just more reflective of like this appetite from whoever these private investors are handing out, you know, 50 million, 100 million, 500 million, billion dollar checks to pick your favorite company who's going to go and bid BTC with it. Yeah. And I think one of the most interesting things that came from the light speeded podcast is like there eventually will be a normalization of these SPVS trading at like different NAV premiums, right? Like if you have, let's say two years from now, five Salana, you know, buy and hold treasury companies and one's trading at like a 10 mnav and one's trading at like a four. Um, I think those kind of things are obviously going to get very hairy for people. Um, and there's eventually, you know, I've long thought there's going to be activist investors um that that are going to come into these companies and try to break these things, right? And and force like an orderly liquidation for them. Um, this is like this is like an activist's um dream type of transaction, right? On a maybe maybe Micro Strategy is too big at this point. Um, but if you have a company with a few billion BTC on its balance sheet and you can get it to a hold position in there, um, and take them take them to court or get a get a proxy war going on. Um, I think you can force them to to liquidate if through a big enough nav premium. So like in the longer term, do you eventually just kind of see consolidation amongst these types of companies? And also if any sort of like levered uh style ETF product like you know 3x leveraged BTC ETF or anything like that for any other token like hits the market. Do you think the demand for these types of vehicles is also like greatly diminished? Yeah. And there's like there's there's a whole hedge fund strategy of it's called closedend fund activism, right? So so closedend funds can trade at a discount or a premium um to NAV. And I'd argue like Micro Strategy is just a closed end fund that's that's trading at a huge premium. Um, and you know, hedge funds can get together and and build a position and short short BTC on the side as a hedge and and you know, force shareholder votes and get these companies to liquidate themselves if the premium gets too out of whack. One thing I also want to say is James, you mentioned that the amount of Bitcoin in the ETFs has doubled that of these treasury companies. I think the important piece is that since Q4 of last year, um the treasury companies have been heavily outpacing ETF buyers, especially Q1, there was basically like no ETF flows and treasury companies bought a [ __ ] ton of Bitcoin. Um we had a chart of that on our analyst hour call yesterday. Actually, I sent it to Danny. I don't know. It's a grainy screenshot. Maybe I'll send it in the Zerox research chat, but that might be too much alpha. It's um I think they had outflows yesterday and they also had significant outflows last week from the B BTC ETFs. It was like 350 mil last week at on one day. I can't remember what day and then yesterday it was 280 mil outflows. So not great. Um it is in a weird spot where there's clearly a lot of adoption accoins into the Uber app. Um but also on the other end you you have like random companies spinning up to do treasury strategies which is always like a little scary as if the price isn't going up as well makes you a little nervous and I I I think with a lot of this stuff like I really don't like to overthink it right like a lot of times people are convinced that like these treasury companies have con have like created some new kind of like financial alchemy. Um, and I hate I really hate to use the grayscale analogy because like it's just to me it feels a little bit lazy. Um, but like there were people in 2020 like whose names will remain anonymous that were spinning up their own trust vehicles to do the own to do the same Grayscale trade, right? Like like we actually have just seen this before, right? I mean, it's obviously very different. It's a very different flavor. Um, but I remember back then all of the lenders saying, "Hey, this is like this very exotic way to to juice returns and create revenue." Um, I don't know. I'm not going to say at the top or anything like that because I think that's a fool's game. But yeah, I don't I don't know. At the end of this, I don't see Michael Sailor winning and him being, you know, the richest person on the planet and just continues to issue converts. But who knows? Maybe I'm wrong. Here's that graphic West Wesy was asking about and you can see the uptick in the public companies flows relative to the ETFs um and that flipping that happened between Q324 and then Q424 and then Q1 of this year where like Wesy mentioned ETFs very little and a ton from these treasury companies and the ETFs picked back up Q2 but um you know these companies have been chugging It's also important to know that these Bitcoin flows, the ETF ones, a lot of them are delta neutral and they're shorting somewhere else. So, it's like not really net overall, whereas the treasury companies are net. So when it comes to like again like they're the largest idiosyncratic buyers of Bitcoin and if that starts to drop off in a meaningful way that's not it's no bueno the Bitcoin price. Do you guys have that graphic? I'm going to try to find it. It was I think it came out two days ago. I think the Bloomberg guy retweeted it. Um it was like the breakout of ETF holders by um like investor type and it was actually pretty good. I think it was like I think the largest holder was actually um RAAS which is really good to see there. There was obviously a ton of like RV hedge funds there but there there was a decent amount of um RAAS there which is good. I don't I don't have it off hand but yeah let me pull that up. Eric Belchunis shared this info. I think you're making a great point here. Yeah they uh he said he mentioned previously that they were nowhere near Holy canoli. they were nowhere near the top of this list and then just recently like have kind of jumped up the ranks. Um so it is an interesting point to make that like yeah adviser has surged up the list now number one by a mile. They make up 20% of total assets but he said likely to rise another 354% as more adoption comes. I don't know. Do we have we have broader thoughts there? Like I mean, is the trend just continuing to trend? Could it really be that simple? I mean, are they just going to keep getting dumber and dumber with treasury companies? like are we just gonna continue going out the risk curve and we're well I mean I think if you to spoke to like um you know people with the Bitcoin vision would say like okay now it's in the ETFs and like now investment advisors are telling their clients to buy it and you know now funds are going to start making it part of their you know sample typical port you know options for like 401ks and other different you know investment vehicles that people are typically you know investing through and maybe they're not even managing their own money like is this really just a part of that process. Like we're just it it's it's achieved this like past the transition point of becoming a large enough and like meaningful enough macro asset and then now that you know as it is at this point of the adoption curve where you just you see these numbers that that Belchunis brings out and you know is it there's sort of some unstoppable thing here. It's not quite the same as like when gold kind of had its its big move. um you know maybe a decade or so or two ago um around like ETF you know inflows and people buying that. But I don't know I just wonder if there's like this this broader trend that's just like kind of primed to play out now that the vehicles are out there and people are thinking this is a great place to park money. I mean, for the for the most part, yeah, like this is this is a a ginormous macro trend and like over a long enough time horizon, Bitcoin is going up. Like, I don't know what else to say other than that. Um, yeah, that's all I got. I like the I like the Jeff Park take of the 6040 portfolio is dead and he's like, you have to add Bitcoin into it. You have to buy their ETFs. You have to buy their ETFs. That's his whole point. Makes a lot of sense coming from his angle. It does make a lot of sense. You have to admit. Yeah. I think he's got no bias at all. Well, to be like who's buying bonds? Can I I'm like real question. Do you guys anyone here own bonds in a meaningful allocation? Well, so like largest capital alligators on planet earth are buying bonds. There's a very bigass there's a very big difference between buying like when people are talking about the death of bonds like there's a very different thing between being exposed to 30-year duration risk in US government bonds and then buying like fiveyear corporate paper or like short-term private credit. Like those are those are very different things, right? like corporate credit is not down 50% because of duration risk. Um, so I just think that that's like a very technical but an important point to think about. Like yeah, as a as a 70-year-old pensioner, like having a decent percent of your portfolio in like fiveyear paper, I think is still very very useful and very very smart. Yeah. But if you bought Bitcoin with that money instead, you could retire your entire lineage. It's very very Yeah. But the the point of the point of buying bonds is like duration matching, right? So you have some liability and you need to earn yield over the period at very low risk. So like they serve a portfolio. Like that's why like I kind of I'm I'm kind of a hater on all like the death of bonds story. It's like it it really lacks nuance. Um they're very useful um financial instruments. Uh perhaps, you know, they're not they're less useful for retail or perhaps some of certain durations or risk characteristics are less useful for um a certain subset of retirees or whatever, but they're still like they're not going anywhere, you know. That's fair. Yeah. I mean, I think as an industry and and probably also as a group here, we I mean, we've got a younger bias here as well. So the, you know, allocation to bonds is probably not the most important thing maybe at this stage of life, but I mean, James, you make great points. Ryan, you make great points. There's nuance there. And I think a lot of that gets, it gets skipped a lot because we like to get to the, you know, just allocate 50% to Bitcoin, you'll never lose type of, you know, the stuff that's all over the timeline. And and also like no one wants to own bonds when they're going down, of course. And like they like from an annualized return perspective like the Barclay Zag has not done well in this over the last you know whatever seven or 10 years due to the recent draw down but like the next time we have a banking crisis you're going to want to own 30-year bonds because the yield is going to plummet and you're going to get a lot of nice convexity there and it's going to protect your portfolio and we just haven't had that environment in a long time. Yeah. Or I mean you could just take ETH for the 2% as well instead of the bond. Yeah. Yeah. Bonds are bonds are too risky. So I think we're going to opt instead for the sixmonth PT tokens of USDS. That's what I'm saying. Um Danny, what did you guys cover before I was introduced? Yeah, we talked um talked a little bit of macro with Felix. We talked a little bit about the Elon Trump crash out. I missed it. Circle. Of course, we can talk Elon Trump crash out. I think you covered the celus bit or no? No, we did not. We just covered one crash out. We can cover other crash outs if you'd like. There were more crash outs that occurred. Crash outs. Um, circle came up. Morpho and and and token structures. Pump fund to an extent. Did we do pump fun already? Because I feel like Ryan Connor, not quite. I'd be happy to discuss it in more detail. On it. I I did it already. He said, "Oh, I already did it on another pod, so we don't have to talk about it here." What do we think? Four bill 25%. So, they're raising one bill at four bill. Is that a yes or is that a no? Like, you can put a meaningful percent of your portfolio in it. Would you do it or not? I mean, if if it were trading at four times cash, you would I think, you know, you would put a sizable percentage of your net worth into that thing that's extraordinarily cheap. I think the reality, the reason the valuation is so low is because the token's not getting all of the economics. That's like clear. I think but but the problem is that the market doesn't like only the only the people who participated or saw the deal know that. I don't think the broader market knows the details yet. So I think it's much more likely that the you know the token gets a small portion of the economics something that looks like I don't know like Ato that would make the valuation much more reasonable and fair. Yeah. For on um actually I think this was posted on Zer chat by Daniel Smith. The the rumor is that it's going to get 25% of revenue which at that point would you say yeah this is decent or no? I think it's fair. Yeah, I'm with I'm with Ryan. It seems fair. I think you could look at the just the memecoin launchpad portion of it and call it pretty fair and look at the growth potential and the kind of dominance there and the live streaming whatever community social app growth is like probably basically valued at zero today. Um, so you kind of get like a an opportunity to long that. But I agree with Ryan that like, you know, if there was just the token and there was no equity, then I think that would be a type of scenario where I mean, I would certainly be very interested in in allocating, but it's it's far different if only a portion of the revenue flows to the token and Yeah. And and they might not raise the billion, right? That's still TBD. Yeah, that's a it's a lot of money. I mean that's like you know that's like crypto megaphone size. I think I think this is going to be a good test to see how much like idle liquid capital there is. It doesn't even seem that crazy in the context of circle and bitcoin treasury companies soul treasury companies like I think if they ask for a billion they will 100% get a billion. You think they know they're 100% sure? I imagine they would know. They wouldn't just go out and say yeah we might get a billion. I would be shocked if if they if they formally set an ICO for for a billion. I would be stunned if they didn't fully fill it. Yeah. I I I said before like gun to my head, I guess I would think that they raise it because I think that the appetite from funds is already way higher than I expected. Um, you know, we've seen we've definitely seen funds over time warm to the meme the memecoin market and pump as a business. Uh, but it was only a handful. It was an impressive to even get to a handful, but like clearly there's how much VC capital did they get? Like between 100 300 million. Like it's more than I would have guessed. Yeah. And think of like think of how many think pieces came out within like two days on launchcoin and pasternac and all that kind of stuff like that is if that's emblematic of how much liquid funds want to deploy. I think like yeah they'll they'll they'll ship it into pump fund with with no second um thoughts. Wes, you are unusually quiet. I feel well I was gonna I was I have something to say. So, I'm curious what your guys' thoughts are on Pump Fund, like the quality of their cash flows and Pump Fund dominance as well within the sort of like memecoin trenches market. I personally think that their dominance has like basically peaked or or I don't think there's a lot of growth. The problem with like their business model and their sector being in this like deep in the trenches of like crypto trading, the problem with being there is that the meta always changes. The thing that people are trading always changes uh and the place that people are trading always changes. And so while it has been pumped on historically, I just I have a hard time seeing that like always being the case that this sort of form factor continues to to pull poliferate and you won't see new like launchpads come up with better incentive structures that eat away market share. Uh as well as just like different types of trading like we're trading completely different stuff because the form factor always shifts. Um, so yeah, I'm curious your guys' thoughts on that. I I was gonna say I think this is like mitigated if the token is not locked when you buy it like on the public because I agree with you. I think we could see like a shift away from it. But if the four bill public sale is just um like at TGE you're not locked for a few years or like a year or whatever, I think it's it's a risk that you can probably take. But if they're doing a two-year lock, threeear lock, whatever, even on like the public sale, then I agree with you. I don't think it's like even it might be worth considering. But it's it's a risk that you have to take um with a team who will have already had made a lot of money to continue to dominate when we've seen that they're not um like there's actually bey competitors out now. Um I don't think launch the Believe is one of them. I do think that Meteora and the Jupiter side might um end up taking some more market share. I do think I'll agree to an extent. I think they're more than ever before there's higher likelihood of them being you know having their market share competed out away from them. Um whereas in the past I don't think people took them seriously enough for whatever reason. like it was all the this is all ephemeral, this is all this that or the other thing, it's going to go away. Like Pump Fund's gone in 6 months and so there didn't seem to be like even a desire to compete really outside of like the few, you know, for me on BNB is hanging out and having a great time over there. CZ's, you know, pumping them. That's great for them. Um, nobody else has really been keen to go after pump until just recently, like in the past few months. Um, so I'll say that like I think it's that's a higher risk now than it ever has been, but like I do think that they do still have a very meaningful network effect. Like we've seen a lot of these teams try to come in, you know, Radium kind of punching back after Pump Swap comes out and they drop their launch lab. They do, you know, they have the partnership with Bonk and do Bonk fun. Not really much happening there. Um, same with Believe. Like James mentioned it, people were very excited. um it did a ton of volume really quick like within a few weeks um and sort of had a very strong like blowoff there and I'd agree that there's an opportunity here to like pick on these like little subsectors that pump isn't really they've not catered to anything specific right they've remained like this kind of neutral any token any meme any whatever you want like you can launch here it's just one standard thing like the formula is always the same um but I do think at some point Leaving that completely vanilla does open this playing field a little bit more for something like a believe. You know, maybe maybe they can still execute on it. There's, you know, there's time. It's only been a few weeks. It's not like it's over forever. But, um, if you can pick out these these subniches that maybe tokens of that type are not served so meaningfully on pump and like draw eyes and volume to your platform instead. I do think that is a risk for them. Um, though obviously they're leaning into the live streaming thing. Like maybe they don't really care that much about ICM and they really want to like bet on the kind of social app and like network effect that that that would come with it if let's say your platform is one sort of like a a Twitch or a Twitter type thing that also has the casino baked in. I mean, I think that would just be a very powerful business that would be hard to kind of like to compete with in the future if if if X or Twitter or whoever or YouTube was also the casino. I mean, that would be a very very strong business and I think it would be incredibly hard to compete with them as like an incumb or as a new entrant coming into the space because they've got all the users there and then they've got the really like highly revenue generating and like eyeball popping stuff that the people are interested in doing. Yeah, I think those are all really good takes. I think when I'm thinking about Pump Fun, I think the entire business is like premised on attention, right? Like you need to have people constantly launching these new new tokens and it's not entirely clear that's like people launching these tokens. Like I would imagine there's like a lot of bots that are like scraping the web and finding relevant news articles or like whatever cuz like no matter what like there's always new tokens for whatever new meme and I think like being first to launch the new culturally relevant event token is like pretty probably um profitable. So I imagine like that's a big part of their ecosystem that is kind of more in the shadows. Um I do think like all these streaming stuff is also important but um on in terms of market share I would hope that they use whatever new capital they raise to cement their market share and then continue to grow that as well. Um so it's like if you were to think about what is like pump funds mo I think it really is pronounced on like attention and network effects of that. Um but those are kind of the two main things that I think about there. Uh, I have a question. Um, well, I guess first to answer uh Wesley's question, I think it's all about whoever owns the front end. I think pump's going to get dis intermediated if they don't. Um, but question for the data team. Uh I believe so in preface our data is always right and if it's wrong we very quickly fix it because all the biggest liquid token funds rely on our data. Um but the time series has changed uh for for uh trading volume that comes from external platforms for pump fun. I was looking at it like a few weeks ago and it was at 27%. now like the time series has shifted and it's closer to 54%. And we haven't been at 207% for a while. So like I don't know Westy did do you know who the data analyst responsible for the pump fund dashes and you know what they found because like they found a new contract that's um a new front-end contract that's driving volume to pump. It's almost like there's this app called Axiom that does a ton of volume. Well, this included Axiom before, so it's not like it was I I think they perhaps found a new smart contract or something. Yeah, this is Jacob. Do you have a screenshot of the original? And you're talking about bonding curve volume, right? I probably have a screenshot of the original in my net new asset report. Yeah, bonding curve volume. Yeah, 7% makes sense of like total AMM volume of pup fund coins. We do Ryan have two queries now by the way. One is bonding curve specific and the other is this pump swap. And pump swap it's like 29%. And bonding curve is listed at 51 and it I don't though, right? We've not always had the two. We've not always. Do you know when we got the second one? I don't. But that would could be a good sharp question. Pretty closely after the AMM launch. Yes, we've had for a while for a while. I was I'm going to agree with you as well though, Ryan. I think that's the other big piece here is they really need to own the front end. they need to own their users. Like if Axiom can if if this like assuming this data is very correct, you know, if Axiom and Photon and these other apps can can grow and grow and grow and they're doing 99% of the volume that flows to Pump Fun, then it's like a very different picture to Pump Fun having, you know, 50 or 60 or 70% of its volume originated directly on the platform. or even if that's by bots that just directly interact versus, you know, some other app has the direct connection to all these users. Yeah. So, confirm that it has changed. Um, I do have a screenshot of the historical. I'm I'm sending them along now to the group. James, any thoughts? Mr. No, you lost me. You lost me a data front end. This is not my forte. I'm going to share something as well that is also a bit of a change up um that maybe folks aren't expecting and maybe we'll need to, you know, double check and confirm with triples as well, but uh he's got some new charts cooking on the deck side of things showcasing market share and uh for me on BNB is like really a player in this space if I'm being honest. Pump Fund has been the dominant uh memecoin or just general like sort of launchpad and recently this like run uh that B&B is having is really rocketing for memes dominance which is interesting. Now, I don't know that there's a lot of like user or customer crossover between for meme and like pump fun today or even like between B&B and Salana, but maybe that changes if uh all of the hottest tokens start launching over there. Do we um can we go can we look at the absolute number? Yeah, I I think I I I do you guys know how much I love the market share charts, but I do believe that in like very low um as the cost to participating in these things gets like really really low, I feel like the absolute numbers for like launching tokens, launching individual tokens like matters more. Oh, so sorry. This is a this is a volume number. Yes. Gotcha. Okay. They're doing several hundred million as well. They're, you know, not, you know, they weren't really even in the picture, but they they had a prior sort of move back in in March. There was, you know, sort of a previous memecoin boom when CZ was talking about his dog and all that stuff, and that actually was like a massive amount of volume for them. Um, and then recently again, and I think some of this, you know, I there's been a lot of talk like what's happening on B&B, what's happening with Pancake Swap. Um, our friend of the show, friend of the of Xerox Research and Blockworks, Tumilelet, shared some details in the Telegram the other day as well. There's some trading campaigns going on with certain tokens on on BNB chain. Um, and that's spurring a lot of activity basically select assets have, you know, volume related incentives associated with them right now. So people are trading those then they get you know brought over to Binance Alpha and then Binance Alpha is kind of like a a site line of sight to getting listed on the exchange. So it's it's driving a lot of user activity. Maybe this is reflective of that. You know people are just they're hoping to hit, you know, the new hottest meme that does a thousandx because CZ talks about it. But um there's no reason that train has to stop if they want to keep promoting tokens in the ecosystem. Well, it seems like it's pretty inorganic, right? Or no, counter. I don't know how to make it. Wait, guys. I want to do kind of a segue into the protocol. One sec. Clarifying on the data. Uh, the reason why it was different is because we tagged more Axiom wallets that other sources had not found. And that's probably I don't know if you saw some charts circulating uh X yesterday of like supposedly a huge drop off of Axiom volume, but it's likely because these accounts didn't fully tag the the amount of Axium wallets that exist. So that's why there's a change. Just want to clarify for the audience, but go ahead, Boach. Thanks, Weston. Um, I wanted to bring up I wanted to bring up the protocol. No, he left. I wanted to bring up the protocol um that Ethereum released and their like treasury thing. Did you guys look into it? I know Danny and Ryan Connor are immediately going to say, "I didn't look into it. They're dead in the water." But Westy, I'm hoping that you may have looked into the protocol thing and might be able to actually speak on it a little bit. Looked into what? What are you talking about? The blog post from like three days ago. Oh, like they're firing the research and development team, bringing everybody under Dankrad. In fact, we didn't talk about this, right, ever? I don't think so. We don't know like too much of the details other than what they've publicly announced which is basically they're hunkering down. They're like changing around having specific teams focus on their specific outcomes of choice of scaling the L1 scaling blobs uh and UX improvements and they're putting people in place in each of those categories to lead the charge and then Dankad is overseeing all of those teams. That was the key piece that I read. honestly skimmed over the rest. Uh, but that was a key piece for me of like, okay, they're they're they're having, again, it's at this point it's still all talk, but the talk is way better than it was six months ago, and everything they're saying is the right thing, and they're approaching things in the right way. and Dankrad leading the charge. I love uh because I've always loved, you know, his contributions to Ethereum research and also, you know, his opinions and how he views things, his work ethic. Um, so I'm yeah, I'm a big Dankrad fan. So happy to see him leading the charge. Do you agree that all you you you specifically said that everything they're doing and from a con comm's perspective right now is correct? Do you actually believe that? Well, no. like from a from a process standpoint. Um, so my assumption also with this is that they're like firing people, restructuring, and this is how they're restructuring. Uh, like I wouldn't say it's like like if I were to give it a grade, it's definitely like an A minus. It's not perfect. Like it's great. Yeah. Do you think they're going to be less opinionated on use cases in the future? Like do you think they're going to ever be as agnostic as Solana for example or like on what level how close to that will they be? I don't think they'll be fully agnostic. I do think Vitalic in the past being like weird about DeFi. Like I don't think that's going to be a thing. I think they're going to very much prioritize DeFi on the L1. Uh, and they're, yeah, I think they're going to be somewhat opinionated of like these are the type of use cases we want on the L1 and it's going to be mostly DeFi focused, but yeah, I mean, I feel like you have to be somewhat opinionated, although for the most part agnostic. Like, you don't want to be the chain that's known for like uh, tornado cash and like North Korea coming to your chain, right? like there's some amount of curation you want to do, but for the most part, you should be pretty open to like whatever people want to build. My thing here is that I feel like every four months, Ethereum does one good like comms thing and then everyone's like, "Holy [ __ ] Ethereum's [ __ ] back. Soul is dying." Still all talk, right? It's like they haven't done anything different really. Did you see that arrow that says next year it's going to be a global reserve currency? from the Banklist podcast. I I think just like I have the same view that I did three months ago, four months ago, five months ago when these talks started where it's like, yeah, we put together a new group of people. We we put a new person in. We got a new person in. These are the new missions. Like just ship a product update a little faster than you have in the past. Scale the thing a little faster than you have before like you say you're going to and then like I'll be more positive about it. But until like until the announcement is like, okay, we scaled blobs by X instead of, you know, half of X like we were originally going to, then it's just like, all right, we're waiting until they ship a hard fork in a shorter amount of time than they plan. Like it's still all talk. Like they need to ship. It's a bit weird, too, that like no one who is building an application that is used on the chain seems highly opinionated about the chain's future. like any like who who's the most opinionated DeFi builder in your guys opinion? Have you seen someone who like continuously speaks out on what the direction of Ethereum? That's like the main thing that's used. Mark Zeller. Does he speak out on the chain itself though or just like a No, he just says use a Yeah. And like that's great, but like you know like I think there's a there's a really compelling DeFi use case happening on Ethereum. Like actual DeFi usage outside of like trading is you know much much larger on Ethereum than it is on Salon or anywhere for that matter. And you have no opinionated devs showing up in Discourse around the chain's future which is just kind of crazy because it's like they're using your product. It's like it's just bizarre. It's just so so strange. I feel like this is uh something that has come as a result of in the past Ethereum Foundation never talked to application developers. Like your your biggest DeFi founders are like, "Yeah, I never talked to the EF until like many years after I founded this thing and it had billions in TVL." I think that's just a result of them not like the Ethereum Foundation and App Builders not being close at all and feeling like there's no mode of communication. Hopefully that changes recently and I feel like there are some uh bigger D5 founders like Kane I feel like has been pretty vocal about here are Ethereum's problems and was also like took a leap of faith building on Salana with Infinex and being like this is an okay approach to scaling where like most ees would like never even speak of Salana and you also have like Leshner I'd say has like thrown some criticisms here and there not anything too harsh, but I'd say like app founders for the most part are making themselves known. Um, but it's yeah, few and far between. I think a result of the past relationship between app developers and EF. Yeah, we got a couple months and then Christine Lagarde and everyone the ECB will be will be adopting ETH. So, it looks like we're on track. I think soon. Um, one thing about ETH that I always feel like is kind of relevant is most teams and protocols, um, they create a foundation and they don't really rely on the foundation that much. It's just there. Versus Eve, I feel like really works with the foundation all the time. Almost like they didn't realize that it should not be making all of the decisions. Is this correct or am I being like I feel like in most teams it's like the labs that's like actually making the decisions versus ETH is like the foundation right I so when the the you know when the media push for ETH the ETH the the so-called ETH pivot started um I dove back into ETH media and listened to a bunch of hours worth and all any any EF person who was doing official comms on a pod like I I listened. Um the interesting takeaway is that their framing of decision-m over time um like differs from what the market thought it was. You know, I think the narrative was that ETH decision-making for a long time was too decentralized and disorganized, right? Like our decentralization was too good and we got in our own way. But um I think it was um Tamas and perhaps Donrod or other important people in that ETH core. They specifically said that decision-m would happen from Vitalic with two or three other people in a telegram group and now they're going to be now they're going to get more opinions before they move on things. So they actually had a very highly centralized decision-making process that did not go well for the community. um from you know end of 21 to present and now they're they're actually telling you that they're going to get more decentralized and consider more opinions in their decision-making. So it's actually the opposite the opposite of what the market thought was going on and they're telling you it's they're actually telling you that's going to get worse. It's pretty crazy. Yeah. Yeah, when you put it that way cuz like definitely there can be a lot of benefits from highly opinionated people making decisions when it's like you're not really taking any other ideas in consideration. But maybe they just like weren't super opinionated or I have no idea what was causing them to, you know, stall like they were before. But, you know, thanks for doing your DD there, Ryan. I'm sure there's a lot of mental trauma that you're now, you know, having to deal with. And so I mean just really put yourself through it for for the community there, man. I I think No, I I think that ETH podcasting is like fantastic. They've been doing it for the longest amount of time. Like they're super high quality conversations. Like Yeah. Sorry, Bach. Like it's just it's fantastic over there. The water's warm. Like they're very very good. Very good. And it's entertaining. And if like if you if you are really into just like philosophical musings, like no one does it better. It's really entertaining. I could do it all day. Yeah. Yeah, but what's the point of all that? No offense. Like at the end of the day, like it becomes a bit like not boring, but like show me, right? Like it's been it's been 10 years. Like I feel like just sitting here and having philosophical conversations is fine, but it's not if it's not productive, then there's no real point. You know what I mean? And that's what the market's telling them, right? It's like it's not productive. And even this time, they're not believing it. Um, it's easy to be academic and pontificate when you're when you basically have a monopoly and there's very little competition. But as soon as you have competition up your legs, that's where you do what they're doing now, which is, oh, oh [ __ ] And like hunker down, restructure, wartime. At least I mean that's what they should be doing. And it sounds like that's what they're doing. Do do you think they never realized that it was valid competition until now? Justin Drake on a bankless podcast when Salana had more rev than ETH being like, "Oh, it's over. East one." Like he literally said that verbatim. Yeah. I think they never viewed other smart contract platforms as their competitor and only viewed Bitcoin as their competitor. I don't think they were looking backward at all. I think they were looking forward and like like to your point they were the incumbent so I think that makes sense but I think it's definitely a mistake um for them to have like picked Bitcoin as the only competition and I do think it only really started to kind of actually you know gain a lot more momentum across the crowd when you saw other metrics pop up that Salana was doing much better on uh versus Ethereum. So, I totally agree. And I just don't think like you can't you can't be that opinionated and win, right? Like I think trading meme coins and like gambling is like pretty dumb. I do it a lot of it. I think it's stupid. But like that is the market. Like if you want to sit there and and yell at the market and say it's wrong for six years in a row and you should be focusing on more serious endeavors, like back to the philosophical point, yeah, you can do that. But like that's not what people want. So like too bad. Like the market tells you what it wants, build it. You can be opinionated and win. You just need to be right. Like otherwise you need to let the markets do it do its thing. Yeah. Interesting. I I think there are a lot of problems with the recent comms. one um and I guess that um Darren from our team pointed out that someone in uh in one of like the ETH um monthly meetings or something like recently brought up fees, but in all those hours of ETH official media comms that I listen to, they did not once mention the word revenue, which is a problem and is the fundamental reason why the ETH token is lower is because its revenue has fallen 95% from peak. So, it's not a surprise to me that the token's like whatever 50% from peak. Um so they still fundamentally don't understand the the value driver for the token. Um I think the other issue is that you know just a few days ago Vitalic was at a conference and said Devx is more important than UX and I don't know that was clickbait. I'll clarify it was a clickbait clip. They were asking about a very niche specific thing of like in this specific ZK type of design system he thinks that right now today the devx is more important because it's so early stage I got baited too don't worry gotcha okay so I stand corrected but like if you were to I mean what's okay so yes I am wrong got click baited what would the evidence tell you though like that they think because I don't know I I think that the evidence suggests that UX is still of little fundamental importance. Yeah. I mean, they they hate the users, Ryan. It's like you always say, I agree with you. It it just it's been a worse experience for a long time. I think like the the e Ethereum wallet experience, like the transaction signing experience, like a lot of pieces and like it's gotten much better than it was in the past. You know, there are better wallets today than there were a few years ago. Uh Rabbi's quite good for an ETH wallet. I'm sure there's others. Um, and there's other kind of obviously there's lots of other parts to the to the stack and what the user experience is, but uh, it really has not iterated as fast as I think that they should have been. I don't know why that was like not so much of a care for these teams. I guess launching like the 50th L2 was more important. Well, like also think about our I mean, this is interesting. Think about our pump fund conversation where we're constantly saying like, hey, they have to they have to own the front end. ETH has totally given up the front end. uh the centralized exchanges favor their own native chain. Uh the wallets are no longer solely ETH wallets and don't and in in many cases don't default to ETH. Um you know ETH is not the you know um it's not the favorite chain on Phantom. It's not the favorite chain on Coinbase Wallet. It's not the favorite chain of Coinbase. So ETH is very much fallen further away from the user and um so maybe UX doesn't matter. I I will say UX is distinctively one of the the core pillars of their future visions. You have scale on scale blobs and UX improvements. So that is like one of the things they're working on. Is it too late? I think is an important question like yeah there's so many UX issues like too many to name really with Ethereum the EVM etc. So, like obviously they haven't prioritized in the past, but it sounds like they're going to. Again, all talk. We'll see. On your revenue piece, Ryan, have you read the cyber funds ETH thesis? I think that's like the most grounded Ethereum thesis I've probably read yet of anything. Definitely. What is their significance though? Um well the the um the founders of Cyber Fund were like Lido OGs like Ethereum OGs like very much involved in like governance and uh etc. of Ethereum. Yeah. I mean I think that the fact that they that their priority of scaling the blob market which is in a way um contradictory to scaling the L1 right because the two are competitive with one another. you're supporting L2s, but then you're also saying that we want execution on the L1. Um they still fundamentally I don't think they know it's it's not a clear um they're not prioritizing in fact execution fees on the L1 if you're scaling blobs, right? You're helping out the L2s which are effectively your competitors for execution fees. You can do both at the same time like there's no reason. I mean, maybe with like capacity constraints and how quickly you scale, but in theory, you should be able to like add more blob capacity while also increasing the gas limit. Yeah, you could you could do both, but if you were um if you were focused on maximizing revenue, you would help your you would you would solely focus on that thing, right? Because scaling blobs is going to help L2s get market share faster than you. Yeah. And I I think part of that p like their piece was scaling the L1 will bring revenue back. I think that like the other piece that they really focused on was solving interrop um and like yeah revenue generated from that is sort of a bigger question mark but that's like I think that's like scaling blobs and having more people post DA because DA is super valuable because you get some interop standards from it and then they can charge a higher price for that DA because of those properties. I'm not saying I completely buy the thesis. I I just I understand like where they're coming from and at least in the piece they talked a ton like they used a ton of block works data and did talk about like revenues and like ultimately at the end of the day how much value is ETH acrewing whereas like you never hear that really on other ETH podcasts or ETH media. Yeah, it'd be nice if you if it'd be nice if you heard um whoever's in charge of the EF mention revenue. They actually brought like I was listening it was like John Charb I think on on Bank list with one of the guys from the EF and they all brought it up and all laughed about it and they all chatted about it like very quickly the Rev debate and Tomas didn't wouldn't didn't say anything. He's like I think he specifically wanted to stay away from it because of how the community might react. That's just me reading the tea leaves. Kind of a weird thing to do. Um guys, should we also shed on Solana a bit or focus on the rest? Let's Let's open it up. What What do we want to talk about? What What's interesting right now? Hyperl is a big one. What other like tokens, narratives, trends are we looking at? Maybe this is a little bit of a trench talk on Friday. What are we interested in chat? I think I think to go bear mode. I think he wants to that is not I'm not going bear mode. Want to say he's got something to get off his chest. I don't have anything to get off my chest. I am happy in the tokens that I own and that's it. I I did sell my Solana just FYI to people. Um that's the third time we've heard that this year. I just I just have to say it out. Never buys back in but always fully sells. I fully sold I fully sold not fully I sold it. I'm unhappy with with its performance. I've instead opted to buy other tokens that only go up as opposed to go down. Yeah. And what tokens like selling into weakness? Is that part of the strategy? Uh yes. In fact, anytime I get slightly emotional, I don't look at numbers, revenue, anything. I just look at as holy [ __ ] this might go down. I got to sell it. What's the quote? It was going down precipitously. I don't know who wouldn't sell. Exactly. Exactly what I do. Um I get really nervous about it and then I just holy [ __ ] I need to get the [ __ ] out of this. Sometimes I do TA James Kristoff really helps me out. He has this VWAP strategy that is unreal. He needs to explain it out. Um, but yeah, I mean that's I wanted to talk about Solana's weakness, but I guess we can't do that because Danny wants Did you sell just because price was down more than No, I s we can talk about Soul. I just want to talk about, you know, we talked about ETH. Let's talk about I'm just trying to dive in of like, okay, soul, why? Because it was going I just don't think that it's I think there are other L1s. I'm not going to show them. I think there are other L1s that might do better in the medium to long term and that have been doing better in the medium to long term. Um, and I think that the soul's returns may not be I don't I'm not bearish on it as an asset. I just think there might be better things to buy. Um, is my is my take. I'm very happy to be wrong. Um, because that would mean that you guys are winning, which is more important than me winning. You're so selfless. I am. I'm very very nice guy. But I I largely agree actually. I think Soul will likely underperform um newer chains. Um I think I mean I already said I think I have some question marks on Pump Fund's dominance and I just think like people want a new game to play and the Salon game to me feels like it it happened. it's super saturated and so like I think the likelihood that we see a new game elsewhere is like the highest it's been yet. So it's kind of a general thesis and no it's not like I'm looking at specific data and making that. It just feels like like if there were a new game that it would pop up somewhere else. I mean, isn't that So, okay. What do you think about this push back where um I I I just think that that's kind of like backward-looking like what's happening in crypto is very different from what's happened historically where like in crypto like you could argue like it was like a fixed capital environment. You had the same players moving assets around and chasing the same returns and trying to do that new game whereas now you have a new a new source of capital coming into these markets. um now that crypto is legal legal in the US and you have um regulatory clarity in both the US uh and Europe. So like like why we said earlier that you know a new game is always played. Um but I'm I'm particularly bullish on incumbents because these are network effects businesses and capital is going to go to where there's liquidity um especially professional capital. So to me there's like two different pools of capital. There's the professional capital and there's the DGEN capital. And to me, Pump Fund and a lot of like the Salana volume is the DGEN capital. And to me, yeah, like most of the new money entering the space is this like professional capital, which is that's what's bidding like the circle IPO. Um, and like the DJ capital to me is always looking to be early to the new thing and like is mixed in with like CT and K's of like sort of creating self-fulfilling prophecy of what the new thing is. And so to me, it's like are you really early to this Salana pump fun game? Is there really active liquidity because people know what the game is? To me, it's like the DJ Capital feels like it's going to go elsewhere. Yeah, I guess you could argue that like 70% of Salana activity is that yeah 50 to 70%. The counterargument here is that Solana is I think the user base that Solana's in attracting is actually very different to what we've had historically and it's like 18 to 19 year olds with a Phantom wallet and some Salana. It's always been, huh? Were you trading in 2021? That was literally the same thing. It was like 23 year olds who are buying these like third grade DeFi protocols on like your fifth L1. It's the same thing. It's a different game. Yeah, fair enough. Good point. That's just like something that's always in my mind is is there an extra group of people that I'm not indexing for that I'm not thinking about? I feel like that's the one that I'm not. Yeah. I think it's natural that like I mean the fun the silly fun games that's indexes lower on the age group. Like it's not surprising that a lot of the consumer experiences appeal to the 20-year-olds and the Gen Z's and the millennials and then like the idea of like you know just earning some yield on dollars is maybe you know maybe that percolates up the the age demographics a little more easily than like gambling on a random token ticker. But I I I think I agree with your point to an extent here, Westy, of like in my head, I do like the idea of trying to find a bet on if if the next maybe the next game is Pump One live streaming. Who knows? like it could be or if it's something else tang tangentially related to like the stuff that already you know we had meme coins and NFTts and just dexes and then now launchpads and like if there is like a slightly modified app that has a token and I can bet on that and like with Salana's market share and pump's market share and hyperlquid's market share where it is today like sure you can bet on growth but I mean I think you do have a point here it's like you know you can apply some some growth number to that and and look for those returns But there this space I what I think for me has always attracted me and what's always interesting is that there are just like constantly these like 0 to 100 opportunities where nobody's using something and then all of a sudden it's the hottest app and it's making $500 million a year and if you have the opportunity to get in on that thing um you know that's what I find exciting and so yeah I mean I wouldn't be surprised if if something else pops up that's not pump fun and is you know you see the headlines in a year or two years that are like this new app got to 100 mil ARR in three days and it's a crypto app. If you guys liken memecoin trading to like sports gambling as kind of like a crude analogy, how much bigger do you think the opportunity is to expand memecoin trading compared to like if I just very crit like the market caps of the of the top publicly traded um sports gambling and like you know online blackjack companies like how much larger is the TAM for for memecoin trading and like are we actually already saturated there? And one thing like I did mention this that I think is interesting, Wesy, I talked to you about this and put it in the um block works research subscriber chat like asking for a dashboard that looks at the median call it like peak market cap for an onchain call it runner for lack of better words and how that changes over time. And like obviously I think everyone would agree right now the market feels like super weak where something might run to five million bucks and then completely die whereas five months ago it could you know that could have ran to 100 million bucks on chain. Just curious what you guys think about that. Uh I think that there's a solid chance that the TAM for memecoin gambling is larger on an annual basis. It already does more volume than traditional gambling in the aggregate. Um, the only difference is the profitability of pun is of pump is lower than that of DraftKings. Uh, I don't exactly understand why, but I have to look into that. I guess the spread's larger on DraftKings. Um, I think that um the risk there is that the memecoin game is too opaque. So, the nice thing about sports gambling is that it's you you very clearly understand when you win or lose. You can bet on the game. You can bet on the overunder, you can bet on the next pitch, you can bet on individual points scored, rebounds, whatever. But on meme, a lot of on meme coins, it's the um it's a little harder to understand how you win. And perhaps that is a bare case for the TAM being larger. But I think just very simp simplistically um I think that meme coins increase fun and minimize the um barriers to multiples on capital like like sports gambling like I don't think comes close. So that would be my reasoning for why I think the TAM's bigger. Yeah. To to your point of like the opakeness of of memecoin trading and the difference of sports gambling like I I liken it to Right. I think we're probably at peak saturation for sports gambling in the United States, right? I don't think it's going to expand as a percentage of people that participated in it that much. Um, and yeah, you of course do have professional bers and sharps that are in the market. I think the difference between a sharp and sports gambling and just your average college kid who's betting on sports is very, very different than if we 10x the TAM of memecoin trading on Salana. you're going to have extremely extremely sophisticated participants, even more so than are in the market today that are going to come in. And I think convers like it's an inverse relationship. You're actually going to get a worse user experience for your average person who's punting on chain because they're going to get ripped off by actual, you know, guys at Jane Street that are now trading on Pump Fun because the TAM is 10 times larger. Like, I think your experience is actually going to get worse the bigger it gets. Yeah, I mean you have sports gambling is pretty professionalized too, right? Um I have talks on the board and he used to do it professionally dayto-day. I don't know. No, but but your your your win rate as a sharp is very different than your win rate professionally bundling coins on pump fun. That that's that's the point. Very very different. Yeah. And think about like who your counterparty is and how you win like a certain scenario. Like if you're gambling, your counterparty is these like the books basically, unless you're doing some like prediction market. Like you're gambling against these other people that are running statistical models. And so the idea is to like bake out like a small amount of edge that compounds over time. And the your counterparty with memes are like you're like dumb retail trader. And the way you win is you're just early. And so what that means is the game gets saturated when people realize you make the most money spitting out tokens and like causing them to go viral. And at the end of the day, like no one wants to be the exit liquidity for these like token farms. And so like the game itself is set up for people to lose way more like your average person. I I think that's fair, but I I I still think there's an opportunity for like, you know, Ryan did his net new assets right up. And I think like there is an opportunity for more of these like categories to unfold here where I mean, we've kind of seen bits and pieces there where like just the core launching memes, which a lot of it is either news type content or it's like who can come up with just the funniest thing in the moment based on a reaction to something. Um, and then maybe fight fight fight against the other 16 launches that are trying to do the exact same joke. Um, but you know, if you can the live streams is is one question mark, right? Can you tie a token to to content creators? Are people interested enough are like audiences interested enough to like bet on the mind share or like the growth or like the virality potential of a creator that they like? You know, internet capital markets is another one. like I is getting web two startup tokens onchain like something interesting enough and durable enough that that people want to like bid those up consistently. I think there's other opportunities for like these different sort of plays on the same idea where the game is can be different from how it is in the past where you know in in ICM there's not there can't be 10 tokens for the one business right because there's the one business and the one business launches the token and the same goes for you know the content creator right so you don't you get rid of some of those issues um and there's so there's different ways to kind of maybe play some of these categories categories that could unfold which might lead to you know some of that additional TAM expansion. But these are all I mean they're relatively unproven still, right? Like Believe had kind of a little bit of a blowoff moment. The streams they're they're not doing much today, but they're they're definitely leaning into it. They want to incentivize it. Um we'll see if other categories can like draw that attention. Get a haircut. I did. I did, but he kind of [ __ ] up the front. I look like 1010. If you guys know who that is. Like a kid. Do you guys think the uh I mean the trenches feel back to me like it's getting it's getting easier to make money. Why aren't you sharing these opportunities with me, Ryan? Yeah, I I don't know if I agree. I thought it felt good like a month or two ago. feels a little different today. There's there's always pockets where things Yeah. are fun and it feels like the the time windows have shrunk of these pockets. What do you think the catalyst for like the the trenches doing well is? Because I feel like it's always just like a runup in like soul the native asset or like some I don't know. Yeah, I'll leave it open. What do you guys think? I think it's days like yesterday where a viral social media moment happened and you can look at the numbers. You got a big spike in um memecoin launches and trading volume yesterday. Just looks kind of off the charts. Um which is why I think yesterday was so good. Everyone just wanted to find the next thing. Yeah, but even yesterday there were like tokens that I feel like before if this happened we would have like 15 to 20 runners in a week. Um, yeah, like we didn't even talk there was no Celkus token, no Peter Chef token, you know, there was just like one or two. There was a Crash Out token that didn't go up a lot. It's it was just a weird like it's not how it used to be if that makes sense where it was like there would be like 25 of them and then like the and also like before it would be like everything would hit 15 to this is just like very normal though know like it's it's overindustrialized now and it's be becoming more and more like there's a billion tokens out instead of a million tokens out which means that things don't go up as much and when things don't go up as much people are like they're wary they don't really want to buy it's the attention doesn't go up as much as it used too, which I think is fine because there pump fund still makes money. So for pump fund, it doesn't really [ __ ] matter because there's a billion tokens that are doing 10,000 volume each instead of a million tokens that are doing whatever the math is in that case volume each. So to them, it doesn't matter. But overall, something we can something news that we can [ __ ] on. Um Gemini filed for an IPO. So can we can we um discuss how low valuation they're going to get? I want to talk about box thing. So, first of all, it's actually not in Palm's best interest. Sorry, Chris. And the same. We'll get back to the Gemini. James, we're gonna get back to you. Westy is gonna [ __ ] on me and then we're gonna [ __ ] on Gemini and then we're going to end it. I'm sorry, James. Yeah. Yeah. Like that's just going to be like we're just Yeah, that's whatever. Um, yeah. It's like a casino, right? like people like casinos love when when people win big and promote that big win because then it it really draws people in and they win on the totality of like in the long run they're going to take their cut and so more the more people betting the better. It's the same for pump fun. It's like if there aren't runners that are going to crazy valuations then you have less people trading the tokens which means less people launching the tokens and it's like a whole reflexive loop. So I don't agree with that piece. Uh and like in terms of the original question to me it's like a a function of both liquidity and like exciting events or things happening. So yesterday was like the exciting things and events happening but there's not much liquidity to me in the trenches right now compared to like November December of last year. Like that to me was like all like the trenches were were booming then whereas like yesterday like box said it's like you had maybe a couple runners and they like they detracted so fast. So to me the trenches are not really that back. I I think that there's a curation problem very obviously like I think there needs to be some automate some automated mechanisms to just like filter out for like bad bubble maps. Um because now like like the axiom feeds pretty dog [ __ ] I think I think it's full of things that you know you might not want to like you need a you need you need you need an aggre an aggregator to curate the experience to um uh make discovery a more pleasant experience. Yeah, I I think I agree with this point, Ryan, and I and right today the model or the design is like you go to Axiom or Photon meme scope or wherever and it's like all the filters are available, right? You you could filter out all of the things that you want to filter out, right? Like anything that's got more than, you know, 20% supply held by one address or how much is bundled et you know, etc. You can you can ignore all that stuff, but the fact that you know it's it still plays into the same dynamics, right? Like if not everyone is doing that and there's still people buying those other tokens like it doesn't really like directly address the problem that you know you're still going to get all those bundled launch tokens that you know suck a little bit of the flow that would have maybe gone elsewhere if there was a little bit more of a curated experience. Um and it seemed like it at least in the short term was exciting enough for Believe. I don't know what the best way for Pump Fund to do that is though. Like at least with live streams, there's, you know, it's curated in the sense that like if Aiden Ross or Anom or whoever Gainzy has a stream token, it's like there's just that one token, right? It's if they show the live stream on the platform, there's the one token associated with it, right? Like that's straight up curation from like how many views their stream gets or what have you. And there's nothing else really to do there. But yeah, with the with the news type content, it's I mean that's it's harder. Can we talk about believe like super specifically just for like five minutes? Westy, is that okay? Yeah. He doesn't want to talk about Gemini now. I want to talk about Believe. Is that signed off? Yeah. Yeah. Go ahead. So, do you do you would you guys agree or disagree that it's done at this point? Like he missed his window of opportunity and like the entire thing is cooked. I said, "Sorry, Ryan. I don't agree." I don't agree either. I don't agree. Boach, did you agree? I I think he'll pastor Knack mode is very much a thing, but I think for the time being it's like he needs to come out with a V2 product and that needs to be good. My only thing is that in crypto if a chart it's it's more difficult to come back because your kind your product is kind of reliant on your chart he could come back but I think it might make more sense for a competitor to launch that is a V2 that is much better like I said this on the pod and Ryan called me an idiot because he was like that's very obvious but the V2 is always better than the V1 like the shift is so dramatic and I feel the V2 era of um god forbid. He did this crazy take that the next gen of products are always better than the previous gen. Update two is better than update. Right? Like I feel like that's a decent take. It's like a good head. Have you seen the chart? No. Is the chart good? It doesn't look that bad. That's fine. But but I just think his like his window of opportunity, he just refused to realize like it's crypto. You need to ship stuff within like two days. There's no like, hey, we're going back to the drawing boards and we'll be back in two and a half weeks with an update. Like he had some like serious serious momentum, right? Like when when Launchcoin was big for that first like five days or so, like that mind share was [ __ ] crazy, right? Like that's all I was thinking about. I know a lot of you guys were super in like super involved in looking at those coins too. And like he just lost that within like two days by being way too slow. And to your point, Boach, of like V2, yeah, V2 is better than V1. He could have just launched like a shittier version of V2 and like it would have been fine. But like if he just did something like even if it was an incremental game, it would have been something versus him just like randomly replying to tweets and being like, "Yeah, we're going to think about this and take it into consideration." Like he just wasn't playing to his audience. Yeah, I agree. You do have to ship. I mean, you have to ship really really fast when you have the attention on you. That's I I would definitely agree with that take, but I don't think he's done forever here. Like the interesting part of what Believe was trying to be is still interesting. Um, but maybe that takes more time and he needs to go back to the lab and, you know, have a better like consistent onboarding flow of like startups who are willing to launch tokens on this thing. Um, because I think that's if you if you can achieve the unlock, then I'd say there's a chance, right? like if the next Uber launched a token like rather than doing like an equity raise or something on chain then like that's very interesting and people are going to want to buy that. I think it's interesting because he has um a opinionated go to market on the supply side of specific token issuers um that are um it's just like it's just a really interesting niche. Um, I also think given that go to market, it doesn't really matter that he's not capitalizing on momentum today. Like I think most crypto apps like they need to own the moment or else they die. And because the supply side is so unique, I don't know how much it matters because if you win an interesting token issue where all of a sudden your app is rele your your app is relevant. Again, the downside is there's people have seen this, you know, it's twice now, right? ICM moment one earlier in the year, ICM moment two, and um you know, will there be more competition for ICM moment three? I think that's the question. Wait, did we already have moment two? Believe is moment two. Moment one was like January, February when we had Jelly Jellycoin or what have you. God, that was the dark. That was the original. That was the first popup there. This one's so much more serious though, I think, because of what Believe is doing. Like the first one was inherently scammy. It was just like, hey, buy like buying coin to support like the Vine like whatever the Vine team did historically, which like makes no sense. But this kind of like we're kind of like nearing Phantom equity and integration um of the token within the product. Um there's like a very sophisticated effort around helping founders understand how to manage these communities with like I think it's called like the belief playbook. Um, it's just much more professionalized uh than the first go around. Yeah, as the great philosopher once said, V2 is better than V1. It's a hot pick, but I think it's correct, but V3 will be will be better, Ryan. And maybe it's not past V3 is going to be even better than V2. That's the thing. That's what you think. Not necessarily. I'll dive into it on our late next spot, but it's not necessarily true. So just keep that in mind. So he's already making improvements to the model like understanding getting feedback. Okay, this isn't working like with the snipers and stuff. He's trying and incorporating stuff to stop snipers. He's again trying to figure out the curation thing. he's going to iterate over time and as long as there isn't some competitor that's figured it out and hits the market, they're really the only one focused on ICM token launches and all it takes is one or two like really really solid projects to to launch their token on believe and this thing uh like rips uh because then you get the reflexive cycle of you know web two builders see the successful builders launching on believe raising a bunch of money they then launch their tokens and it starts like a really cool reflexive cycle. All right, I love it. Let's uh let's crash out on Gemini then. James, you wanted to talk about it. IPL for Gemini. Yeah, I mean I it's probably the worst run exchange and like one of the worst run crypto companies that I've ever ever had the mispleasure of of experiencing and working with. Um yeah, it's shocking to me that they're still around. Uh, does anyone have anything good to say about Gemini? Did they do something to you? No, it's just terrible. It's just a horrible experience. It's just it's just like they're just a company that will not go away and they're just it's just terrible. It's terrible. Do you know, James, you're muted. The do they have a bit license? Uh, that I have no idea. No, but in all seriousness, I I really I got like a a really a sour taste in my mouth after um Genesis and their whole program is just it was it just it just stunk and it was just a very bad they didn't resolve it well with customers. Um and they've just been super slow and everything and they've just never bothered to really expand, right? Like their institutional offering doesn't exist unless you guys know differently than me. Um and I I don't know. I don't know why anyone would buy their IPO. Where would Gemini rank? Like, so if you're gonna make a list? Yeah. Do you mean like volume-wise or just like um you know the James Kristoff version? Yeah. Yeah. Met metrics wise. Sorry. Not like because they murdered his dog. So yeahise book. Yeah. Sorry. Go ahead. I was just going to say they do 10% of Coinbase's volume. the majority of their volume is both in like you know the BTC and ETH pairs and then their alt liquidity and their alt alt coin volume is like pretty dismal and I imagine that's where you make a lot of your money given a lot of these exchanges have like you know uh tiered fees and a lot of these people who are probably trading these two majors are probably just arbing across multiple venues. Yeah, like their 24 their 24-hour volume on BTC is not even hundred million dollars. What? That seems ridiculous. Surely that's fake. You're lying to me, James. I'm on the I'm on exchange. 24hour 24-hour volume is 97.6 million bucks on BTC. I was going to say we have a nice centralized exchange dashboard now, but we did not include Gemini. I'm guessing maybe because they were not large enough. So maybe maybe soon. I mean, yeah, it sucks that they were caught up in that uh the Genesis thing. Like maybe things would have been different. Um it's been hard in the exchange space. I think Coinbase was a early first mover and they really benefited from regulatory arbitrage and I think it was hard to compete. Um and perhaps the the Wlvoss twins are um already rich. I know that they are a large Bitco Bitcoin holder so perhaps it's not a huge priority. I feel the same way about Coinbase, James. So, we can talk about that as well. I hate Coinbase. And I was right. And multiple people were wrong. Everybody thought that Coinbase was going to do really really well because they have legal um whatever regulation on their side in the US and consistently I've been proven that they're just dog [ __ ] and are not doing well. Have you ever um been wrong on anything in the matter of cryptocurrency, Buck, or is it just like No, this is just I don't like their energy. Ryan, they they hurt Ryan once and I really I'm one of those employees that like really has to stick up for their superiors. And I think that's what really got me going. Ryan, do you want to talk about how Brian personally wronged you? No. Okay. Then what I Bo bo you were right, you know, as coin went from like $30 to to like $300. And that's why it I knew there was going to be a vindicated. I knew there was going to be a dip back down to whatever it is at now. That's why I didn't buy the move. I was right. You're right. What What if it were Kraken IPOing? I actually really like Kraken. I think Kraken's a really good experience. So, I've had I've had really good customer service experiences with Kraken. Like I actually once sent like some this is years ago like some stupid Osmos Osmosis token to the wrong chain and within like 24 hours their customer service actually sent it back to me. Like they're they're actually quite good. Um I I I really enjoy them. I I can't say good enough things about them. Sponsored post. I mean they're definitely next. Yeah, absolutely. I think just judging from things I've seen on Arkham, a lot of the older wallets also prefer to use Kraken, it seems, over Coinbase, which is a bit interesting. And volume-wise, they do about half of Coinbase's 24-hour volume. That's not bad. And the the it's Ian, the point that you make on old wallets is interesting. Um, I've heard that the Kraken team is like more crypto OG than the Coinbase team. They're like more aligned with the ethos. Um, but they're also acting more flexible today like around the Salana stuff I think is pretty interesting. There seems to be like some pragmatism coming out of there which which is always good to see. Yeah, I think you feel it in the product experience like as a user there seems to be a lot of flexibility around you know how many different addresses you can generate and like where you can withdraw to or what you can do with certain types of assets. Um, their stance on self-custody and different things like that. I think they've really they've I think they've kind of had that maybe captured that OG user for some of those reasons being you know maybe more crypto ethos align to some extent at least in their product choices. Um I agree with you as well Ryan like there being uh some maybe somewhat early to the uh trading equities on chain idea. We we'll see when that launches. I think it's interesting like I would have expected somebody like Coinbase to be running down that avenue more quickly. So it's interesting to see Kraken maybe iterating iterating a little more quickly than than Coinbase is. Yeah, I like Kraken. Think they're good. You can always trust them. Well, now they're going to go under because they said that. But I trust it. Few months where you weren't supposed to talk about centralized exchanges at all and anytime anybody brought up like a sex, people were like, "Holy [ __ ] it's going on there. That's why people brought it up." Not your keys, not your cryptobach. Yeah, they might explode next week. That's true. Knock on wood. Um, Danny, do you want to wrap it up? Ryan's clearly gotten bored and left. Yeah, we're not uh intellectually interesting enough for Ryan Connor to continue. No, this has been good. I think the Ethereum the Ethereum stream over on Bank list. If he if he was camera off listening to Banklist, I think I might end it all right now. You'd have to ship me a rope. Um all right, let's call it there. We've been going for a while. I think it was good two and a half hours today. Thanks for coming on today. Let's before we close out, actually, we did this last time, too. Buck, real quick. Permission list is coming up I think in two and a half weeks. I want to say June 24th through the 26th. You guys know the code at 0x10 for 10% off tickets to permissionless 4 in Brooklyn, New York. I'm only laughing because James, how much do they cost now? James is a loyal fan and he paid a lot when we first began and then we did a flash 50 and then James sent me 15 messages in a row calling me an idiot. like I make the decisions for the for the tickets. We don't get to choose the ticket prices, but we do have 0x10 the code for 10% off if you want to come out to promotion list. We are going to have a dunk tank. A bunch of folks on this stream will be getting in the dunk tank. For all you Lions out there, Ryan Connor, Ryan Connor will get in the dunk tank. We will will it into existence. He doesn't think so. All right. Awesome. Thanks for coming on today, guys. James, Ian, and all the Block Works folks, Boach, Ryan, Westy. Appreciate you guys coming on for the second live stream. ZeroX Research live stream. We will be back again next week, of course. And the normal pods will roll as per usual. Until next time, we will see you then. Thanks, Danny. I don't know why it's showing that. Great work, Picachio. We're still live, bud. Yeah. No, I wanted people [Music] [Music] [Music]

========================================

--- Video 2 ---
Video ID: gd_NPTYDMjA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gd_NPTYDMjA
Title: Institutional Capital Is Pouring Into Crypto | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-06-05 08:00:47 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we discuss our outlooks on the market, Strategy clones, and the need for dark pools in crypto. We also dive into JitoSOL, and the possibility of it being included in a SOL ETF. Finally, we end the episode by taking a look at activity on the BNB chain.Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

BNB Chain Data: ⁠https://app.blockworksresearch.com/analytics/bnb⁠
--
Accelerate your app development on Algorand with AlgoKit 3.0—now with native TypeScript and Python support, visual debugging, and seamless testing. Build, test, and deploy smarter with tools designed for speed and simplicity.

Start building with AlgoKit today: https://algorand.co/algokit?utm_source=blockworkspodcast&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=algokit3&utm_id=algokit3&utm_term=algokit3
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Marinade is the premier staking delegation platform on Solana, bringing billions in liquidity and security to the Solana network, and connecting SOL holders to the best staking rates. 

Since launching in 2021, Marinade has expanded their suite of products to provide solutions for both DeFi users and TradFi, including liquid and native staking, as well as direct enterprise integrations. 

To learn more about Marinade, follow the link below: https://marinade.finance/?utm_source=blockworks&utm_medium=partnerships&utm_campaign=podcast 
--
Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/⁠

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:45 Market Outlook & Strategy Clones
12:00 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
12:46 Do We Need Dark Pools?
16:32 Looking For Bullish Catalysts
27:20 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
28:29 JitoSOL Named In A SOL ETF Prospectus
36:11 Marinade Ad
36:43 Activity on the BNB Chain
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 3 ---
Video ID: kSDItF7TsZE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kSDItF7TsZE
Title: The Race to Replace Mainnet | Ian Unsworth, Kairos Research
Published: 2025-06-02 08:01:00 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Ian Unsworth from Kairos Research to discuss the return of PumpFun’s livestreams, and the impact of Alpenglow. We also dive into what apps we currently like, Solana Mobile’s Seeker, and other crypto focussed devices. Finally, we end the episode with discussion on how Ethereum Mainnet can be dethroned.Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Pumpfun’s Dominance Under Siege: ⁠https://app.blockworksresearch.com/research/the-launchpad-wars_pump.fun's-dominance-under-siege⁠

The Launchpad Wars (Thread): ⁠https://x.com/defi_kay_/status/1927800042955624770⁠

Anza Introduces Alpenglow: ⁠https://x.com/anza_xyz/status/1924491939040133515⁠
--
Ekiden is a decentralized, orderbook-based hybrid exchange delivering execution speeds as low as 5-15ms, deep liquidity and transparent price discovery—all while maintaining the security and trustlessness of DeFi with zero maker fees.

To learn more about Ekiden, follow the link below: https://ekiden.fi/
--
Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Kairos Research: https://x.com/Kairos_Res
Follow Ian: https://x.com/Ian_Unsworth
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/⁠

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:26 PumpFun's Livestreams Are Back
16:42 Ekiden Ad
16:59 Thoughts on Alpenglow
24:13 What Apps Do We Like?
34:32 Ekiden Ad
35:04 Crypto Devices and Consumer Apps
48:18 Dethroning Ethereum Mainnet
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 4 ---
Video ID: A8y77rfGHxU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A8y77rfGHxU
Title: 0xResearch | Friday, May 30th
Published: 2025-05-31 04:43:17 UTC
Description:
🎙️ New to streaming or looking to level up? Check out StreamYard and get $10 discount! 😍 https://streamyard.com/pal/d/6623771411349504

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
[Music] Dip back. [Music] [Music] This song is called Feeding the Ducks. [Music] [Music] [Music] All right, welcome to our inaugural Zerox Research live stream. We've got some of the goats here. Picacio, the music is still going. I like I like the music. We should just keep it on low volume the whole stream. Funny. Yeah. Feeding the ducks vibing out 70s porno music, I guess. Um the chat loved it. I don't know if that's I don't know if that type of language is appropriate, but we'll run with it. Uh we got Boach, Mark Arjun, Dan Smith on. Uh excited to get into it today, guys. Let's, you know, start out light-hearted. How are we feeling about the markets? How are we feeling today? Bako lied, people died, but they uh the prices look not so bueno. Um honestly, I don't know. I've been head I've been head down heads down this week, so I don't have any great commentary here. Bako, what's what's the hype price at, man? Um, it is it hit 30 yesterday. I was going to puke. Um, it is now at 32. I think I It's good. The hype price is good. I I don't have any additional comment. It's because everybody's been talking about hype the past two weeks now. Um, and it's got increasingly more popular talk about it. I I don't want to jinx anything. I still think that it is one of the most attractive assets um in the market right now. Like especially if you're looking to allocate into something that is not like not based on speculation that is actually generating meaningful cash. So my my gambling platform is the best gambling platform. It's true. No, like at this point it is the best. Well, you have to admit you have to admit it's the best perpetualist platform in Devi that we've ever seen. That's I don't I don't think I don't know what would be the contender there for for arguing otherwise. But yeah, I agree. It was funny. I tweeted out so Hype EVM uh is picking up in terms of at least rev or dollars spent to transact. Came in seventh uh on the trailing 7day as of yesterday. I should check see how today's numbers changed but um like it was above avalanche polygon and arbitum and then just behind base. It's a pretty interesting mix for strictly the EVM. So ignoring any of the trading activity I was really just trying to zoom in on how hype EVM is kind of picking up. It's interesting. It's doing about 4TPS but uh some transactions like a swap can cost between like 10 and 50 cents. Uh but uh in good HL Maxi fan somebody responded REV more like HEV hyperlid economic value. I I mean I got to say the the community strong and they're an entertaining bunch. So I mean I'm feeling good. I mean I I feel like I always say this once every three months. Um this is the bearish I think people have been with Bitcoin price being this high. And then hype is also doing well. Like if like you zoom out from the price and you just look at hype's market share in terms of revenue fees like steadily growing every month. So it seems like it's good in the bare market and it's good in the bull market. So I mean that's what I call fundamentals. Yeah, it's I mean they buy back like a mill a day, 0.001 yards a day. Um, it's it's pretty. No, because we've now like I already talked about Sunapod. I will bring it up again. It's one of my few talking points that I can bring up is like we're clearly seeing some assets get some form of price insensitive flow. Um, in the case of I'm going to respond to Z. I'm going to get very upset with him in a second, but um like in the case of BTC, there's obviously the ETFs. Same with E. With soul, there's going to be ETFs, but we're also seeing like a bunch of definitely not risky um new ventures pop up where like buying soul and staking it or just like building a strategy around it. And on on the hype side, there's the assistance fund. So, we're going to see I guess more and more of these forms of um flows start happening going forward if these if the big boys like decide on doing it. Um, and without the big boys, the Hyperlquid Assistance Fund decided to do it. And we'll see if they'll have an ETF. I don't think I feel like it's way too young to have that, right? Mark, you're way more. You would know this way more. It's way too young. I know we have to wait a few years, but regardless of that, it is doing the same. Like, I think it might have more flows in than the ETF net inflows. Do not me on that. How do you feel about the Hyper EVM? I'm gonna pull up Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z8's comment like this seems to be the the one contention point here is like why is it so not scaled, not optimized? Like what are they doing there? So I'm going to talk about somebody else brought this up the other day and I had to talk to them about it. Um the team is very clearly working I have to explain this to Ian from Chyros. They're like if so there's two channels where you can get hyperlquid updates. is like the API channel and the announcements channel. Previously, both of these were primarily dominated by the hyper porn news. So it's like we're adding listings or like we're changing oracles whatever like specifically things that related to the purp. Now more recently it's been like we've put whatever EVM update on the test net which will go live later and this has been happening for the past two three months and that's it seems that the team's main focus is the EVM and from what I understand first of all this is the one horrible thing about hype is that they are very like their coms are not great but it must be by design I assume um I think what so they only have 10 people So I, you know, yeah, that's true. Um, I think they're just going to go slowly increase it and we've seen that we've seen that um teams can do this like base. Um, Dan, you can like speak more on this, but they've it's like one gig of gas was their goal, right, for 2025? Uh, not qu that's like their long-term goal. Uh, I thought it was 125. I honestly I think it might be 150. It's somewhere between like one and 200 uh m gas so millions units of gas. Okay. So, and they're they're moving along nicely. I think they're I mean Bass is making a very concerted effort. The one thing that on the hype side, I don't know. I haven't done any like digging here, but my assumption as to why the hype EVM is not very performant is one, it's not a priority, if you hear how Jeff talks about it, you know, he's like it's adds a a bit more functionality to the core service offering. so that you can really see where the priority lies and I think that's logical and makes sense but two um it's the same nodes running two chains and I'm not like a systems engineer here but you have if you have the same box running two chains you have to divert the resources between both of those two chains uh and so a more performant EVM means a less performant trading uh system or hyper core system without expanding the resources of the box uh so that was kind that's that's been my historic assumption as to why it is the way it is I don't think that's how it works works. I think it's like think of two roads as opposed to just one road with more cars if that makes sense. They're two separate chains, right? But run by the same validator, which is the same machine presumably. I don't know. The code's not open source. I can chat to people about this, but I assume I'm curious. I don't know. the increase the the machine size because al well maybe not yet actually because the hypervium still so it doesn't have a lot of like it's not very demanding at this point but I imagine they thought about that like the worst thing for hyperlid would be that the L1 gets the hyper core gets worse um I don't think that's what they would want to do but yeah I mean I can share a screen um base has been doing a pretty great job pumping the gas. So the the y- axis here is units of m gas, right? So they want this at about 100 at year end. They're about 35 now. Um so marching nicely. Uh it wasn't that long ago where this number was much lower, right? Like here's where they really started hiking it back in uh March or so of last year and it's been a pretty vertical line upwards at this point. So I I mean people are laying the bricks for them to scale DVM if it does become a priority which I think is is great for them. Yeah, I love it. Any more thoughts on hype box or do we I wanna I wanted to pull something up. I pinged Max B. He has some data on the hyperlquid um test net. I'm not sure if it's the EVM or the core, but I wanted to see if you could send that over. So, because I'll just share it. I think this might be um I think this might be for the hyper core though and not for the other ones. So, I'm not sure. I'm just going to let you guys continue and then if it happens, it happens. Okay, we'll we'll move on from the hyperlquid stuff. The um I guess I kind of want to talk about some maybe current events that are interesting to say the least. Like there are some talks like on our last on our last round table we talked about like is a bubble forming some things along those lines. Bitcoin conference activities um you know companies copy copying the strategy playbook um raising raising debt and then buying crypto assets. Um there's some interesting things popping up on the timeline. So, I don't know if everyone has seen already, but like Netflix wanting to do a show about SPF and FTX. Um, I'm going to pull this up just because I I've seen a funny result of this one, but um here, let me pull this up. I'm curious anyone's thoughts. Like fundamentally I I would imagine most people are a little like disappointed that there would be like a major show about this. Um I don't know. Does anyone have any just like broad thoughts on it? Like stupid bad on the SPF. The fact that there's a show about SPF and FTX sells so much. I wonder how much that Michael Lewis book sold. Like I don't think that's a signal to be fair. I think that's just Netflix trying to make a billion dollars, which is fine. Yeah, I agree with that. I mean, it's definitely an interesting story, too. The question is like, how do they tell it? Uh, it's called I think the title is like the altruist or something of that nature, which makes me pretty nervous that they'll tell it from the the light of the fact that these people are criminals. Uh, and more so from the light of like, well, look what they tried to do. Um, I don't know. Is James Win really Caroline Ellison? people are asking. I think they just I mean obviously they're just doing it for the views but then that that conversation is it good? Is it bad? It kind of gets into all the other kind of things Netflix does like the Tindler Swindler. I don't know if you all heard of that one on Netflix. This dude just used to like trick women go around and then after after Netflix aired all the morally questionable things that he did he just got more popular from it. And then there was things like Baby Reindeer as well. Uh, it's just like inevitably people are going to learn something new, but it's going to also, I think, inspire a certain type of of of people as well. So, it's mixed. Yeah. Yeah. I think that's fair. I I wanted to draw this takeaway. They posted some of the projected actors for the series. Um, they're putting me in. Kobe Kobe responded, "Is that a picture of Julia of Caroline? Can't tell." But, uh, maybe the the funnier takeaway I saw was that everyone's looking at it the wrong way. The actors are flip-flopped actually for Caroline and Sam. Uh, pretty funny AI rendering here. Uh, either way, I think I agree with some of the takeaways. Mark, I think you have maybe one of the the something that resonates. Like there have been a lot of like true crime shows and like going into like past serial killers and it's weird but like some small subset of people like develop a weirder obsession with that than they should and maybe that leads to bad things but you know I feel like it's just another one of those things where you know there there's always there's always weird people in the world and you can't really like prevent them from doing what they're going to do sometimes. But yeah, I think the more top signaly thing that I felt in the last couple days is is obviously these public uh holding companies or these strategyesque companies like uh yeah, I get it. They're they're using debt converts for most of this. Um it's like not an immediate risk. It's more of a five-year risk, but like man, it feels very strange. I think a bit tensor or a towel one launched today. Uh so it's like every asset is getting its own strategy built around it. Um, I don't know, man. I was look, this inspired me to go back and look at Michael Sailor's uh just his numbers that like he's put out some crazy stats. Last year, he bought about $25 billion of Bitcoin and about 20 of that came in Q4 alone. Like, that is mind-numbingly insane. Uh, and so to think that there's going to be like smaller clones of these going on and doing the same thing for other assets is interesting, but like man, it's pretty impossible not to look at this and be like, "Oo, uh, I think we need like it's just it's just so it's almost so obvious and so many people are calling it out that it kind of like almost works in reverse psychological impact like okay, this is like too clear. This can't be the actual problem." I think at one point Michael Sailor was buying more Bitcoin and was being emitted every day for like 6 months or something on average. And I think maybe with these smaller assets that becomes a problem because if they have like a high inflation rate then it just becomes nearly impossible to keep track of. But if you say it's a fiveyear problem, right? Then if price goes up in five years, then is there really a problem? Yeah, he mogged you there, Daniel. I'm not gonna lie. He I don't know. I mean, I I agree. I think it's it's super interesting. And the uh like maybe it makes sense for Bitcoin. Like, okay, if the US government is talking about it as a strategic reserve, that's one of the two most important economies in the world. Like, fine. Like, that's that's this elite money like status that no other asset has at the moment. But then if the everything else is like, okay, that's a bit crazy. Like you know, Tao, for example, is a very niche crypto asset uh that is trying to do something pretty different in my view than what Bitcoin is trying to do. Maybe some TA people would disagree with me, but uh I don't know. It's like I feel like we're just taking it way too far. Um and it'll be interesting. I don't know. I kind of want to build out a dashboard that just tracks the risk metrics here for all of these things. Uh NAV, premium to nav. I'd love to know how much leverage each of these vehicles are taking. I think you can do some interesting work. So maybe we'll set down set off down that course uh and add that to our public dashboard similar to how we track like ETFs. Yeah, I mean it I agree with your point, Mark. It's just like you're hinging a lot of it on, you know, well, if it goes up, then it's fine, but um well, what if it's you, you know, lower uh in five years? Well, I was I was thinking Bitcoin, not Tao. No offense to No, but okay. So, James Kristoff, shout out Zerx Research Telegram chat. If you're not in there, get in there. Uh, we talk [ __ ] every Wait, can we not show that everywhere? Because I want kind of an exclusive vibe to it. Yeah, you have to. Yeah, join the Xerox Research Foundation Telegram. Get in there. But look, look, James's point is it doesn't matter if he gets l if he's stop it's not about the problem being in five years of like what is the price at relative to NAV. It's that if he stops spying uh which is fair again 40 or sorry$20 billion dollars of Q4 of last year. I I'm going to pull up the numbers and do some quick math see what the Q1 uh numbers are even what we're trending in Q2. But like yeah it is a fair question. What if this dude stops buying? Well that's the question we don't really want to answer Daniel. Like there's two it's like there's three four questions you don't want to answer. One is like what if Bitcoin stops going up? Don't want the answer. What if sailor stops buying? Don't want the answer. What is the assistance fund going to be used for eventually? Don't want the answer. You know, just let's ignore these. These are things we shouldn't waste our time. Let's focus on the positive. Lots of flow. Smart capital coming into strategy type plays for towel. Bit tensor dynamic towel is launching. Let's look forward to that. Let's not. All right, I was I was gonna say we can skip over the hard questions. Uh maybe do you want to pull up some charts, Boach? Let's look at some assets. Look at BTC. The last time I pulled up a chart, the last time I pulled up this chart specifically, it started going down. No, I think I'd I would love to to go deeper on the uh the micro strategy and the other strategies uh when we get some folks on we'll get some folks on on another another episode and really dig into it. I'm sure James Kristoff would love to go deep on this. Get James and Jamie arguing on this one, but uh eight and a half million in Q1 if like All right, let me this is my favorite chart in crypto. I show this to Ryan Garner at least once a week. I'm pretty sure he's on fire yet. Can we I still don't know how to do these things. Oh, I got it. There we go. Look at this. Anybody else like the chart? Yeah, I think it goes sideways from here. I think that's probably my base. He's coping. Look at that, man. Clean. Clean. Oh, if I had to open thousandx long or short right here on the one second, what's the dude? Are we going up or down? You can't make this up. Look at this one day. Pico top, pico bottom. Come on. Let's um We have to talk about soul underperformance a bit though. Like this is relative to Bitcoin, bud. Look at this. Yeah, pull it up. I am. It's up. All right. 8 and a half billion in Q1 from Sailor and already in Q2. I mean already we're twothirds of the way through it. Uh but four and a 4.8 billion and I'm just using 100K uh price just for sake of ease. But uh that's it's remarkable stuff. The man's cooking. Still on pace for his 20 uh maybe a little bit behind pace for his 2024 numbers. I mean there's four billion of buy pressure in Bitcoin in the last three weeks from ETFs alone. They had their first outflows yesterday. Well, in weeks yesterday, did you see it's like 350 mil USD of alphet outflows from the ETFs? Yeah. No chance. He doesn't keep up. Wow. Mark people, since we have 1,000 viewers here, a lot of people are like, "Wow, Bach is retarded." I'm not. No. Yeah, you're right. 350 mil outflow yesterday. I'm not. I keep up with stuff all the time. Look at that. Wow. The lion does not concern himself with wrong data. That was crazy. The The other thing that I think that's interesting is like, yeah, there's the BTC treasury companies, but like we're getting into the silly assets now, right? like various other I mean there were already soul strategy companies there were there we're seeing ETH strategy companies we're seeing XRP strategy companies like it's getting further down that list uh I mean that that can't end well who like who's going to do the SHIB strategy company and then it retraces 80% and they look like an absolute idiot. I saw this this this ETH company skip gamer I can't remember the name of it some gaming thing turn and just bought it went up like 600%. But then what do we think about like when GameStop buys it and then that stock price is down 10%. Right. Like is that more sustainable people using it as treasury assets? Is is that a better game? Is the is the is that the one that consensus was involved with? Yes. Yes. Okay. Yeah. Um I don't know. I don't have super strong opinions on these to be honest. Like I think I'm middle mid-curving it just by being like look this is stupid and it's going to end poorly. But I I don't know. And then also if it's with these strategies if the first wave is the equity holders, right? like you're just they're going to print more shares to put it eloquently like and just dilute the shares in order to like backrop stop having them to sell their actual Bitcoin or tower soul or whatever it is they bought because you know if they can't pay their debts they have to sell and then the entire business model is dead. So I feel like it's the equity holders who get hit first and not really the underlying assets, right? Which makes you ask the question, you know, who wants exposure through these vehicles rather than the underlying assets themselves. Like in a let's say the ETFs did not exist, then okay, that makes sense. Like that's how I could get, you know, my good proxy exposure. Maybe I acknowledge there's some leverage here, but I'm okay with that. Um, and I don't have to leave my brokerage account. Uh, and I or if I'm like a larger desk, then it's just already compliance approved. it's just a stock like okay that world that I I really see that story um and then you know when you zoom out beyond Bitcoin and Ethereum like okay perfect like now I can get that same exposure to these different assets but we still see them happening for Bitcoin and Ethereum and there are ETFs so I don't think that's true um so I'm just like scratching my head I'm like why get exposure this way as opposed to like traditional leverage vehicles or um yeah just if you wanted the leverage side or just like holding spot uh is still a little bit unclear in my head. Yeah, I to I mean personally I don't understand it either. I wouldn't touch these assets. If I wanted leverage on Bitcoin, there's other ways to do it directly, futures, options, and also I think that's a big part of why this market feels a little bit bifocated. It's just because everybody knew that there's correlations between these assets hugely. Well, let me say there's correlations with all these assets to Bitcoin generally speaking, right? maybe not day-to-day but you know zoomed out a little bit and if you wanted higher beta exposure then just leverage Bitcoin just use you know futures just use hyperlquid you know just like I feel like that's that's been a big part of the reason unspoken about why you know there's been this diversion yeah and I I can't speak to like the continued like ongoing purchases of these things but you know like some of the Salana strategy companies like Janer was one. I mean, I bought some shares and then tried to sell them 50% higher because you just look at the charts of all these things and they rip, you know, multiex off the announcement and then retrace the move. So, naturally, just like with meme coins, like that's going to attract some retail to get in there. Um maybe they hold it all the way back down. Okay, maybe they hold it back down. You end up with some bag holders and they're like, "No, I'm never going to exit this thing or whatever." But um yeah, it does leave me scratching my head a little bit of like like where is that continuous sustain bid for when you know you're already paying a premium outside of like the sort of announcement kind of hype cycle of it because once that like FOMO action already happens like you know there's been enough of these to know what the chart's going to look like right and to that point the same thing kind of has happened with mining stocks. mining stocks used to be seen as like a leverage play. They used to trade at crazy multiples to NAVA and then now if you look at like you know I don't know maybe the five to 10 biggest ones they're all like 1 point something XNAV right so they're all still slightly trading above their premium but I mean that's how they're trading now like there you like what how much leverage can your A6 get me how much leverage can your supply chain logistics get me through Bitcoin and so maybe you know after the initial hype that's how we see some of these strategy stocks end up looking Yeah, I think that's fair. And we'll see. I mean, we'll see them, you know, sailor, they've been cooking up all the different types of instruments that they can come up with in the wheelhouse to convince people that it's worth getting in there. So, I'm sure we'll see more uh cooking in the lab, I guess, if you want to call it that. Uh let's let's jump to something else, though. I think Dan, I'm curious for your takes here. Like, do we want to dive into some thoughts and some data on Ellipsus Labs? Like I think this has been an interesting topic that is not super like on the front of the timeline, but I mean they're cooking on a lot of different fronts and we have some great data. Uh I'd love for you to walk through it. Uh some of that data, but I guess the big thing I'll I'll lead in a little intro on Ellipsis. They built Phoenix Trade which was largely used for like stable swaps as like an order book on Salana uh Phoenix exchange. I don't I don't know the exact terminology. It was it was a failed product. No, Daniel, let's let's I'm Ellips is a great team, but Phoenix did not work out as it should have worked out, which I think is why they went to Soulfi, which makes a lot more sense. Yeah, I was getting there. I wasn't saying it was great, but they started with Phoenix and then they built Soulfi and they're working on Atlas and now Gavl. So, uh I'll leave it to you, Dan, if you want if you want to run us through it. Yeah, for sure. So, uh, big fan big fan of this team, just to be clear. Uh, and I think, um, they did a lot. Yeah, their origin story is super cool, right? Set out to build on Salana. It was, you know, the where you were supposed to come build an order book. That was really what was getting pushed as a narrative. And they went out and said, "Fuck it. Let's do it." uh and they built a great exchange at Crankslist order uh order book decks and realized that getting market makers to on board and provide tight spreads here was quite a challenge and and it was a challenge largely out of their control because landing transactions on Salana at the time was a total impossible task and uh there's no prioritization of cancels right so market makers were getting picked off and they were taking more risk is effectively the net net there and because of that they had to quote their spreads wider And that means worse pricing, less flow, and it does that doesn't really work as smoothly as you may hope. Um, and so because of that, they said, uh, you know, they're also building an L2 called Atlas. Um, or another chain called Atlas. Uh, construction's still largely under wraps, and we don't really know exactly what it's going to look like, but, uh, it does seem to be an L2. Uh, and they have also continued building on Salana during this time, which is super interesting. Uh, Salana obviously has a ton of activity on it. So when you're building financial products, it's a really interesting place to go build it. Um, so they basically took their lessons from, okay, if we are struggling with prioritizing uh market makers to uh cancel their quotes or move their move their bids, um, why don't we reshape what this AMM actually looks like? And so now they're using a liquidity priced uh sorry an oracle priced AMM where basically all of the liquidity in the pool responds to a single change in an oracle price uh instead of having to have a transaction come through and push the price. Right? So you think of just like a basic UNIV v2 UNIV2 pool. The price only moves when trades move through the liquidity. Right? And this like basically opens the door to toxic flow being a thing. Um, right. So, you can imagine if there's a discrepancy between the price onchain and the price on a centralized exchange, uh, arbitrageers will come in and pull those two prices together. So, the chain kind of benefits because you get like the real price, if you will, in the pool. Uh, but the LPs suffer because they paid the price of that price moving. Um, and so with an oracle b an oracle price AMM like soulfi that they they built, uh, you can basically avoid the toxic flow because you don't need a trade to come through the pool in order to update the price. uh which is really cool in in terms of like LP profitability uh and so they're doing a pretty great job of this and you can see that transition right so this uh let's call this orange the orange line here or the orange bar represents Phoenix and you can see once SFI launched that's like where a lot of the liquid liquidity went where a lot of the attention went um in terms of the development team and and pushing market maker liquidity there and now you're seeing that really drive a lot of volumes and we start unpacking what these volumes look like they're largely driven by majors Uh so SoulUSD and stable coin swaps are sort of the the large pieces here. And if we scroll down here, we have a table of the largest pools uh on both of these two exchanges. And you'll notice soul stable coin uh so there are three wraps USD pools uh and then USDC USDT drive a pretty meaningful majority of the volume. And the only time you really see memes come through, meme memecoins as liquidity pairs, is when they've sort of like graduated into this like upper echelon of memecoin status, right? Like Farcoin, massive massive name, tons of liquidity, listed on centralized exchanges. Same thing with Trump, Popcat, uh, and some other assets as well. And so, it's been really cool to basically say, all right, we set out to build this product. We took in a bunch of data about why this thing didn't work, and we took that data and built a V2 that looks like that's a different product. Um, super cool to see that happening in real time. And then we can get into Gavl as well, but I'll pause there. Just like I like everything you just said, Dan. What I want to see now is the Salana Dex activity chart. Let's I want to see them in the context of other dexes. And then the question that I have and I want to ask is like now that they're like eating up market share of stuff. Are is like your Orca is your, you know, Radium, is your LFinity, are some of these guys like are they screwed? like soulfi is coming to eat up all of these markets. Yeah, super interesting question. So, um are they screwed? It depends. So, are you screwed for major assets? Probably, right? Like LP liquidity is going to move into these AMM style P uh gosh the oracle price AMM style pools because LPS have better profitability. Volume is a really interesting metric for just a quick highle scan, right? It's like a revenue of a business, right? Just boom, like give me one quick number. What does it look like? Awesome. And can you do this in percent? I can't I can't understand a thing like this, bud. Yeah. Yeah. I I'll get into it. Um but uh volume's not like a perfect measure, right? Because you need not all volume is good volume, right? Toxic flow generates huge amounts of volume, but the LPS are losing money and eventually you'll lose the LPS. Uh so we see obviously the meteoric rise in salana activity, trading activity over the last two years. Uh but zooming into which dexes have driven that uh and then so Picachio can really see this, we'll flip it to a percentage view here. Uh you can see that Sulfi basically appeared in October of last year. Let's call that six or so months ago. Um and now it's doing a very meaningful amount of total volume right up to 13 14%. And what's really interesting about this in my mind is if you zoom this out on even a broader time horizon, oops, let's go four years and look at the monthly here. You can see how the uh as of like the last six or so months largely with the rise of pump fund becoming a huge uh driver of activity and then soulfi being this like next innovation of dex technology you see this shift away from uh a very concentrated market to actually a pretty diverse market where market share is actually you're having more players in the space take market share which is sort of u an goes against the grain of what most people would think a lot of these markets turn out to be right everything we talk we basically call every market in this industry, winner take all. Um, and yeah, we're seeing like real-time counter examples of that. We're also missing Oric on this chart. We need to index that and pull it in. It's a [ __ ] ton of data, but we're working on it. Uh, they do a ton of stable coin, stable coin volume, and uh, the same style as a Sulfi AMM here. I like that. One thing I'll point out as well is like it's interesting. I think Meteora is that that red bar as well. And like they've kind of just been like quietly there. I wrote about this recently when talking about launchpads and like you know Meteora was there for the Trump launch the Millennia token launch like they snagged some of those partnerships they're powering believe app yeah I mean snag whatever you want to call it but you know landed those partnerships and same with believe and there is another one recently that the name is not coming to me but um they've been like snatching up some of these like you would have expected maybe a different platform like a radium launch lab or like pump on pre-existing like to have been the one on top of the ball here to grab like new launchpad oriented products and it's just been like the meteor guys shipping. Yeah. So totally agree and we can see that their market share has risen over the you know last two or so years from let's call it 1% to about 12% as of last month which is yeah I think a testament to what you say and I think it's really interesting to see how dexes are moving closer to the users right so there's basically two users if you're a DEX you need issuers and you need traders um and if you think about something like soulfi there isn't even a front end right it is strictly just the only thing it wants to do is serve the best price uh and so it has very strong integration with uh Dex aggregators, right? Because that's where the users actually have the relationship. Um so if you're a DEX aggregator, you really want to own the the actual front end that the user touches, right? This is where Jupiter is sort of the king of the town, but we're seeing a ton of diversification in this space as well. Commino has a Dex aggregator. Titan has a DEX aggregator. The Titan team is really intelligent. Uh and I'm pretty excited about the product they're building. Uh launch builder Titan. Uh different Titan. Different Titan. That's still very smart. Yeah. So, it's pretty cool to see that way happening. And then this kind of gets into Ellipsus' most recent product, Gavl, is their way of getting closer to the issuer. So, Gavl is pretty cool. The idea is to have like a, you know, everyone talks about like uh internet capital markets on Salon, right? Like that's the idea of trying to get real tokens to launch on the chain, but it's really hard if you were like, let's say I was gonna launch a token for some business I was operating. uh doing that through like pump fund today isn't really a great way to do it. Like I can't like raise capital and then actually like get that capital. You can do some like weird things with trading fees and that's sort of like what Believe app is doing and it kind of works but it's also a little weird and not really as direct as like actually raising capital in in exchange for the token. So uh they the team built out this this you know sort of like this suite of products called Gavl where you do a pre-sale. It can have various various mechanisms, right? You can say I'm trying to raise x amount of dollars. Here's the flat rate, first come, first serve. Uh you could do a Dutch auction or you could just say, you know what, just deposit into this for a 24-h hour period and you know, we'll divide out the tokens and that'll determine the price. Basically, any type of pre-sale you wanted. That removes the uh rush to be first, which is often in the token launch world referred to as sniping. Has some negative externalities, of course. Uh, and then you take that pre-sale price and you launch it into an AMM and have the the ending pre-sale price be the starting AMM price, right? So there's no like rush to be first into the AMM because you could have just deposited immediately when the um immediately when the pre-sale closed and then they also using a sandwich resistant AMM. So they built this awesome technology around making that come to reality which is cool to see. Uh, and so the core idea here is that AMMs are not efficient. Hence why they built this or these traditional AMMs are not efficient. So why don't we use that as the launching point get the token produced and and onto the market and then they have this like basically deprecating period where the liquidity is withdrawn from uh the AMM and the intent is like to effectively graduate into a more uh efficient AMM such as Sulfi. So as you really start to see their products all come together where tight integrations with aggregators to uh get that flow because their decks they believe will obviously have the best price. Um and then on the issuer side you create a system to bring like really strong assets into the ecosystem and that's what soulfi can list. Um so yeah super cool to see their product suite come together like this. Yeah, I think maybe just to close that off a little bit or if anyone else has thoughts, but like the big the next big question there I think is you've built out that infra for that flow is who's going to launch a meaningful token on there, right? They did their time. Yeah, they did their test token. So like now it's you know get get a meaningful launch there and like let's let's I think we kind of need to see what happens, right? A lot of people are playing in this space. um them you know radium has launch lab and then their AMM as well and pump fun etc etc right so let's let's see a big an interesting launch and then kind of see how it goes but yeah I agree Dan it's like it's exciting and I think it's really interesting to just see them like quietly ship stuff and just like eat a bunch of market share and nobody was really aware of it cool well Bach pulled in Tulks uh he really wants to talk about infoi which is all over the timeline today it's all over ka metrics today um loud loudio baby loudio, whatever you want to call it. Um, it's all over the feed. We love incentivizing slop content for airdrops and rewards and whatnot. Uh, let's dive into it. I do think I'm going to pull up just some tweets from M team. I think he just had some like funny topical points here and then we can dive in and I'd love to get your takes to we can go deep in it. Um, just going to pull this on screen real quick. But there, if you've seen anything about Loud or Ldio, it's been all over the timeline. Um there's been screenshots of it like eating 70 80% of the like mind share. Um according to Kao on on CT uh MT made kind of like a little bit of a funny here about you know Infinex took a strategic bet here on incentivizing mind share and it really paid off. 6 million in rewards and they're like a little blip on this screen relative wise. Uh and then his other one was introducing Sencio. So just a complete counter to the the Laudio idea. uh give money to people, bribe people to uh to get loud people to shut the hell up. So yeah, um I think a lot of people are like annoyed about this, upset about it. Toes, we got you on to talk about this. I want I want your thoughts to kick us off. What is up with InfoI? Oh man, where do I start? First of all, good to see you fellas. Thanks for having me on. Um, no. I mean, even like that that Kato measure you have there. Like I it's funny seeing that going around and like you look at the other top protocols and it's like loud. Okay. Yeah, they're incentivizing essentially to talk about them, but look at the other protocols on there. like is that anything worth like it just goes to my entire like I've been tweeting about a lot recently and I'm more so upset about like just kind of the state of CT and like how we're just I mean bots and AI and slop is already a big enough problem on social media and then instead of you know trying to solve that problem we're just leaning directly into it and more protocols are like oh yeah we'll just give away some more of our float in our tokens to incentivize people to tweet about our product project and then you look at the top the top yappers the top people on Loud IO like look at their average followers like look at what they're doing to get to the top of the leaderboards like it's it's like quasi like paid group ref link shilling like hey comment on this like boost this I'll give you 25% of my allocation like this is it's the furthest thing from solving any problem and it's actually making everything worse um but just back to to the point of like the KO mind share the top gainers like okay loud openc sahara aai nansen layer edge mirror I'm not even sure what that is novas I'm not even sure what that is bitcoin osmo and party icons do any of you guys have any constructive comments on what any of those are other than openc and loud obviously nson too non does some good data work too but like that is just to me like the point of this entire meta whatever it is like okay I get it you have a chance of turning point 2 soul into optimistic scenarios you know 10k plus like okay but what is the longevity of this like the mind share that it has is just it's just incredibly frustrating to me in the sense that there's so much behind the scenes like you know stablecoin infrastructure bills like there's you know there's good teams working on awesome stuff and like this just dominates the conversation and it's just incredibly frustrating to me. Preach. You know what's the funniest thing about this thing too? I have zero idea what Lou does. All I know is that they're paying people to talk about it. And so it's like they're talking about people to talk about it. Yeah. So they can launch a token, right? And so it's like, okay, if I'm like a project really trying to uh and like build a build a real thing and have people and and pay a marketing budget, that's reasonable. Um, but me sitting on the other end of this is like let's say Ldio is exactly that. I I don't know what it does. You're like, it didn't accomplish the goal, which I think is the the odd part. And I could obviously go look it up, but like I think it's just kind of ironic that Yeah, we're at where we're at and I have literally no idea. Yeah. Um like Infinex, what M team brought up is that Infinex paid them six mil in USD or they're like distributing six mil USD in rewards and they have 6% mind share. Wait, before we move on, what do they do? Can I know? Can somebody tell me? They So when you got to put your hands up as a box to determine to describe what it's about to do, that should be the first red flag. So you can tweet and if you include loud and loudio it you earn points on it and then they're going to have an public offering for the token and then if you're in the top 1,00 you can put 0.2 soul and potentially see that number go up way high. It's crazy. So that's like the problem they're trying to solve is that the founder did not have enough dollars in his bank account and he realized this is a problem that we have to solve this year and they fully pivoted towards sol to be fair like that ultra guy that is launching it he had some pretty cool stuff that he built for me. Um, yeah. I I would also say that like he's he seems like a sharp guy and like I get it. It's like an experiment, but like and there's, you know, trading trading volume fees that are generated each week like go to the top. Like that's what's supposed to be the flywheel of it, but like I don't know. You you see how this goes. Like it's just Yeah. Yeah. It's a raw incentive. They're directly I was just going to say he like they're directly playing on the gamification of what Kaido mind share is and just saying like okay we're going to directly use Mind share from Kaido to do the pre-sale like allocations for this ICO of a token and so naturally it's like I mean you you get exactly what you expected. I want to pull up a chart from uh a couple of weeks ago that I think is basically the same idea in a slightly different lens was boop.f fun. Um, where the whole idea was like get big creators to launch a coin on the platform to draw in eyes and that was the only way they could claim their airdrop. It's like the exact same mechanism from like a mind share and like drawing uh eyeballs in um just the slightly different way that they went about it with like having a launchpad and making people launch tokens. But I I would imagine that the chart of like whatever Laudio is going to look like it probably ends up looking like this too. Yeah. more of don't hate the player, hate the game. No, no, definitely. I I hate the players in the games. Like, and again, part of it is like, you know, like everything you guys do like I mean kind of do it like independently. Like I appreciate the, you know, the research, the data that like goes into legit things and like looking behind the scenes like all it and then like something like this comes out and it's just like come on. But then the other aspect too is like I don't think people understand enough like how I said about just like a quas like reflank paid group thing. Like look at the followers and the content they have on the top yapper leaderboard and the loud eye leaderboard. Like it's not like some like democratizing money thing like benefiting the small guys. Like it's it's all of the kind of the people that you would expect and people that have the largest followings. It's just like what what could possibly be the benefit of anything here? And like that's what I constantly come back to. And like I do think there is like like if you squint like you could see KO's initial like they were the start of all this. And like I think when they launched the idea behind them like it it was pretty novel. It was pretty good. But I just constantly in the past few days like been thinking of like Goodart's law like when a measure becomes a target it ceases to be a good measure. Like now you're just measuring mind share. Like it's just everything about it is just toast because it becomes gamified. And then you see articles on like you know on X and just threads about like how best to farm 100K on Kato, how best to do this, how best to optimize your audience. Like and it's just like what are we actually doing here? Like none of this [ __ ] is it could have started out as like somewhat relevant and like a good thing to like build towards, but now it's just like you're just gamifying everything and incentivizing slop in an era where slop is already [ __ ] everywhere. Like we don't need to incentivize it. I promise you there's enough slop out there. One other thing is that like two two things. One is Twitter has already gone to [ __ ] Like everybody I know is just in private chats talking to each other. No, I feel like nobody meaningfully uses Twitter the way that they used to anymore. Um, the second thing is I can't imagine that this is good for Kaido because as you mentioned, it's like very clearly deviated from the original purpose and the purpose was to have like help with marketing or identify social thought leaders which is already a bad thing but like and reward them. And now it's just something completely different, which I I I can't imagine that like a team will look at that and say, "Holy [ __ ] like this is a fantastic opportunity for us. We're going to put 15 million." In your guys opinion, it's going to get worse, right? Because there's other apps building on top of Kao. I mean, look at noise, right? The whole idea is to start a trade and, you know, bet on what's going to be the most, the trending stuff. And now you add that other financial layer on top of it, too. like it it's it's only going to get worse. Well, in your guys' opinion, it's only going to get worse. Yeah. Yeah, definitely. I mean, the most frustrating part is like like Infinex like their initial like whatever like marketing budget, whatever you want to call it, marketing push, whatever on there, like it it was a pretty good idea. Like, you know, it maybe benefited them pretty marginally, but like I'm still it I'm still skeptical about how much it created long-term users. And it reminds me a little bit of like the daily active addresses that like people would cite for forever. Like these are when you incentivize people to talk about things like they're just in my mind like metrics that that don't matter. Like you it's the same thing with like a points program like and the only difference with a points program is that like you at least had to put up capital and take smart contract risk and there would be some like linear distributions where like the small guys would end up close to like the big guys in a sense. like there was disproportional rewards in a good way and this is just the entire opposite. Um, so yeah. And I mean what you said Mark about like just the entire like it's only going to get worse. Like it just reminds me of every other meta we've had. Like it reminds me of the AI meta, you know, like initially like GOAT and AI6Z and yeah um whatever else. Like I said this in the Xerox Research chat the other day like it's just to me like any other shitcoin meta and that's going to weigh on KO because the more slop that uses it like the less valuable it becomes. Yep. I I agree. I so I and I actually think the AI agent cycle is actually very comparable here because there was a day where that simply ended, right? And it was not a very long period of time. And I think everybody is looking at this through the same lens that we're discussing right now. Um yeah, you're muddying the public pool. Like our water cooler kind of sucks now because Twitter's largely unusable. If I get tagged in another like top like you just there just 10 names of people that are on a some random Yap leaderboard, it's like the most frustrating thing in the world. I block everybody instantly. I cannot stand it. And I it's a it's useless to block these people, but I do it anyways because it's my it's my way of fighting back against the establishment. It's so tiresome. Some tweets this week without [ __ ] on it. And there were literally just replies like, "Hey man, I need one more smart follower for the KO level two." And I was just like, are you kidding me? Yeah. I saw uh Osprey, a good friend of mine, Xerox Osprey, he like had responded to somebody who did that. She's like, you're the reason why this app sucks. And then they deleted the tweet. I'm like, maybe that's the right approach. Uh, so I don't know. I I And I think if you're a CMO, right, at one of these protocols, dude, you have got to be looking at it. Like, yeah, sure, you got the big green box on Kaido, but everybody knows exactly what's happening. Like, what is this actually doing for you? Not super convinced that uh it's it's doing a lot. And I So, I think that'll be the the fixing function here. Well, before we talks, before we have to let you go, can you give a thought on your mark? Can you give your thoughts on the market right now? I feel like we really brushed over that at the very beginning and you are actually relatively in tune with everything. Um, yeah, I'm I'm a little more cautious right here. Um, I mean, you see the 2020 fractals out there and I think that's a bit hyperbolic. Um, but I do think, you know, we're we're breaching new all-time highs, right at new all-time highs, and every possible bullish announcement in the world, every treasury company, the president's company announces a treasury, the um, and what happens, you know, we go down 3%. Like, I don't know. I'm I'm a little more I should say there I haven't sold any spot yet. Um, I considered it last night. um you don't want to take one day as um you know some signal and maybe I should have but uh yeah I'm just I'm just very cautious like all these treasury companies like it it honestly like there are similarities between it and what we were just talking about with KO and all the slop [ __ ] like it can only go so far before the meta ends and there's bills that come due. Same thing with the AI agent meta. Like it's it's every shitcoin meta that we've ever seen in the trenches. Like there's Micro Strategy like that was, you know, the market leader and then all of these derivatives start coming up. They start pulling mind share for Micro Strategy. Micro Strategy starts suffering as a result. And then the derivatives go to zero as they should. And then the leader that was the leader that was fine um ends up, you know, going down 25, 35, 45, 50%. Like I'm not saying Micro Strategy would do that. Um but to me there's just a ton of similarities between what we see in the trenches and every meta that appears to what is happening with the Treasury companies now. Um and so I'm I'm a I'm a smidge worried about that. That's more of a you know like three six month like year thing like um that aspect. But um outside of that like you know I mean the the hype rally has been good. Buck don't smile at that. Um, I do think I do think the soul hype chart and soul underperformance recently is a little bit interesting. Um, I've been a pretty vocal soul bull since, you know, like 23 when it was sub $15, but I do think it is kind of interesting, especially with soul strategies like being very public about what they've announced and how they're acquiring soul and it's still kind of weak. Um and then I think ETHBTC like rallying in recent weeks is kind of significant in the sense that if we are towards the top which I don't want to necessarily like saying in fact like that is kind of the cycle that happens is BTC runs up all these treasury companies announce price doesn't move any further then ETH BTC goes up each show strength alts go up and then what happens it's not good um so just I'm a little I'm a little cautious right now. Um I think you know in the area that we're at like we're not that far below all-time highs. Like you can just kind of relax and chill and if we reclaim them and go up then like yeah fullback risk on but until then like there's no reason to be forcing anything. Um and so yeah that's kind of how I'm looking at things right now. Love it. Thanks for hopping on folks. no reason to go full James Max win on the charts, which he was definitely forcing it a little too much and it didn't work out for him. So, I think that's probably good advice. Anything final you want to say to the listeners before I abyss I put you into the abyss? No, no, not really. Uh, attention fight zero. Uh, I don't know. I'm looking I'm looking to short KO eventually. Um, and that's about all. That's very good talks. I appreciate you, fellas. Yeah, appreciate you. Thanks for coming on. Yeah, take care. Byebye. Okay, Tulsy, my favorite legit, you know, he comes on the pod every once in a while. He's supposed to come on more, but I think he's sold the top and he just won't answer my messages. Hey, I come on the podcast like I can't. He has too many figs for fig, man. He doesn't really The lion doesn't really need to listen to the small dog. Definitely does. But he's one of those like I don't think I see him on Twitter anymore. And that's why I always bring up like people don't really go on Twitter like people who actively trade the market which I think Tulks does. Um they don't really they're not really on Twitter anymore which is partly because of Kaido. Let's not put all the blame on them but like it's always also been like that. Like Twitter's always been a hellscape where it's like this is how you can grow your portfolio from a thousand dollar to 100. I was gonna say the same thing at one point. Like it's always had a little bit of that that just feels way more pronounced now. Like uh there's those consistent bot replies where it's like this is the smartest guy I've ever seen in my life and then it tags some random account. I'm like okay I cannot take this anymore. Yeah. Yeah, I will say the AI stuff like on the timeline has been a crazy change up to how things used to be. There's always been some amount of bots, but I think like obviously we had the AI meta and that like contributed to it. Lots of people made accounts to specifically do that. I mean AIXBT is still a decent sized account. Um, and they they definitely are like way more of a presence than they have ever been. It would be great to have a a Kaido metric of like percent of mind share that's bots because that I'm sure it's high. Um Mark, did you want to talk about virtual since we're still mentioning AI or were you meing because I'd love some virtual stakes. I was kind of meing. Um Dan was saying that AI is basically, you know, it had its moment in the sun and now it's kind of dead and I just commented well except for virtuals. It just had this resurgence recently and I think it's just because they changed it did something with the tokconomics VE virtuals and like if you look at revenue or who's pulling it up? Somebody's pulling it up. If you look at revenue versus price in recent weeks, it's just a total mismatch. But again, it's just it's speculation because I think if you if you stake it and I will admit I did stake mine for like a week just to just to see what's up. Wait, before Mark, one sec. He's just testing. Don, can we start adding price charts onto these because I just realized it would make so much sense if we just added a price chart. Yeah, it's probably a good good idea. Anything. Great idea. Sorry, Mark. Your point though, like I I love looking at historic revenue chart and it's like, oh, that's what it used to look like. And then you zoom way, you're like, okay. It's like 2K a day on pace for a little under a million a year. But like this is why I'm still interested, right? They have 14 15 million dollars of of Bitcoin chilling on. Should we talk? It's almost like we're getting back to treasury strategies. So it's how many billion and it has how many million? So what's the virtuals? Am I buying it or not? I don't I I haven't I've never bought this coin. I'm not going to lie. When AI stuff was happening, I was exclusively buying stuff on Salana. Let me look. Oh, it looks pretty good, dude. I'm not going to lie. This crazy up 4x off the lows right now. That's pretty insane. Holy. No, man. The only I'm not super versed here, but the only thing I saw was that their their new lot of red tokconomics stuff is like, you know, lock and max stake your stuff for four years to then be eligible for airdrops. But then you have to like that's that's the ideal way of can I say something? If you're if you're a protocol that's launching like a lock and stake mechanism, you want to make it like that because idiots will lock it. Like including me, people will lock it for four years. like, oh, at four years you get a 30x bonus. Fantastic. I'm going to lock it. Slide the lever up. So, if you are that type of person, you could. It's the ultimate retail trap, which is why it tends to work pretty frequently. But I think the downside is when they lose their mo their mojo. Like, you have a very awful following couple of years ahead of you. Yeah. I mean, for the for the retail, it's horrible. Um, for the project that's fantastic because you for the unlockers it's great for the you know supply that's vesting. Yeah. Um, I see things like VE Pendle. You lock your Pendle but then they have like liquid versions of it to get around it anyway. And so I just wonder why doesn't that become more popular and then what's the point of locking anything anymore? You take the liquidity risk, right? Like you still take a cut for doing it. I think you're like you're trading to the liquid version and you're probably taking some some shaving off the the Am I able to add Ryan to this, Danny? Just cuz he's in the stage. I'm worried he's getting more and more upset that we're not adding him. Yeah. Why is he Put your camera on, Ryan? Ryan, can I see your face? Thank you for adding me. I was getting more and more upset as I sat in backstage. Very good. I should What's going on? Good. We're talking about tokens. Any buys from you these days? Wait, mine's great for the deck. We were just talking about AI, Ryan. AI crypto. What What are your thoughts right now? Like virtuals is up off the bottom, but like their numbers don't look great. What are what's your feeling on the category? And yes, you sound lovely. Yeah, we um when we did our analyst hours um maybe it was two analyst hours ago um I I did the AI section and we talked about how AI was going to go viral in both the enterprise and for the consumer like for the first time really like kind of bigger than the chat G GBT moment and I think that that's happening. So like as a consequence of that, we thought like kind of the second order impacts would be like yeah um I beta crypto stuff is going to do well. Like I'm sure Zerbro is doing well right now, right? I'm sure it's multiples off the lows um because like so many people are short these things or just not exposed. But I think one of the only one of the few fundamental plays that exists in the market that like actually has some fundamental floor in crypto AI is grass which has done really really well uh lately and I don't know I wish Dan should but he's um he's kind of our expert on the fundies there and it's it's not trading at a unreasonable valuation. So I like grass. I also like grass just I love that something I want to add on AI and I I shared this internally but um for the live streams actually playing around with getting some like little animations for the intro outros and I just messed around with Google Gemini's V3 model and it is surprisingly robust and quick. Um so let me pull this up. I'll just show some examples that I was playing around with, but I was asking it to come up with like some simple loopable animations for this live stream and I gave it some like basic concepts and like a graphic to work off of and it did a really good job like little scrolling monitor through a social feed starting soon. One with like some static and then another one just the starting soon. Oh, that noise is awful, though. Yeah, it's pretty insane to see how far these have come along in such a short period of time. Uh, and like I don't know about you guys, but my crypto friends obviously super in tune with what's happening in AI. Uh, my non-crypto friends all working like, you know, intelligent people doing just different things adjacent to like finance or, you know, literally any other regular person, any other wage cook job. Uh but uh why the [ __ ] I couldn't help it. That kid in the little car doing his little uh Tik Tok is just burned into my head. It's terrible. I know. 9 to5 9 to5 9 to5 9 to5 95 wagi. Exactly. No, I'm kidding. They're my good friends doing great things in the world. Um super unaware of like what's happening in in AI on a relative basis. Like yeah, that chat GPT thing like should I be like using that? I'm like, you're going to get out competed real quick by the rest of the world. It's insane. Can I say something true? Like I'm I Sorry, I'm seeing like I mean Chad Tribute with 450 million weeklys and I think Meta AI with a billion. Uh Sam even like I think he let it slip um in an interview that GBT might actually have a billion monthlies. Like kind of everyone I know is using this thing now. like you know my wife listens to like like I don't know like like like very like uh female ccentric podcasting and they're all referring to it and they all call it chat like chat's becoming a verb like ask chat. Um so it seems to be having a consumer moment to me. So I don't know I I feel like the opposite is happening for me with my um with my for my wage cook friends. You can't spell my friends dumb. That's all I I think it's ubiquitous, but I don't know if I would agree entirely with the take, Ryan. Like, I would almost question the user numbers like we question them in crypto. Like, are those actual front-end users or is that like API use from an app that gets businesses to click on it 50,000 times a day? Um, so I don't know what the front end user profile looks like, but I will say like at least for me out in the real world, like I hear plenty of people who are like, "No, I like my work is asking me to use chat GBT now and I don't want to." Like there are I think there are people with like an ideological, you know, stance against it. Like that's what I've been seeing is people who are like, "Holy [ __ ] this is like ruining the world. It's destroying our water sources. It's killing the beavers." Like there's a whole class of people who are completely against chat GPT and AI in general more than anything else. It's like they had crypto first and then they were like [ __ ] NFDs and then now it's like holy [ __ ] AI is going to kill your baby, stop using it. Like that whole class has become more and more pronounced. Although that might be because I'm very online and I'm just seeing a lot more of that. oftentimes if I just talk to regular people, they're like, "Yeah, I'll like I I ask it questions if Google can't find it." And I feel like that's probably the the most like regular user now, but nobody's running the Daniel Smith deep research into the claw to figure out a prompt and then run through the APIs. Well, I think people in tech are right. Like if you're in tech, it's come to a point where like companies are expecting this like the output required or just like you're doing it because it saves you so much time. Um, but yeah, like I don't know. I don't know if like your everyday McDonald's employee or like your office worker is is doing that quite yet. Just look in the app store. Chad Chai Chubt is the I believe it's the number one app in the app store today. Um, or actually perhaps it's number three. I think Tik Tok's number one, Instagram's number two, and then Chai Chubt is number three. Um, and that that's that's consumer right there, right? So I in terms of download. So it's pretty impressive. AL also how you use it too. Sam Alman gave an interview I think maybe a couple of weeks ago talking about I'm paraphrasing here. He said that um boomers use it as Google, millennials use it for life advice and then Gen Z's use it as an operating system. Yeah. And and I think it you get more and more usage as you go down the line. And then I mean this the thing people I don't I'm I've never been I used to I think I watched a CGP Gray YouTube video about 11 years ago and I started to worry about AI and it never came and maybe I was too much into the weeds in it and then this fear about AI replacing jobs has been going on for the better part of a decade at least in my circles and I feel like AI doesn't replace jobs. People who use AI replace people who don't use AI. Yeah. I mean, yeah, I I do think that there's definitely going to be some it's turned into an AI pod now, and I'm definitely not qualified to talk about demographic shifts. But in my mind, what would make sense is that the junior that we have right now, it gets limit like the junior entry level jobs, it gets limited from whatever, like we're hiring 100, it goes down to 50 because you still need to hire some to grow them. Um, but I think it'll end up opening up different jobs in different fields. So, it'll be fine. It'll just be like whatever the internet did. Um, minimum wage is known for the white collar jobs. Yeah, it's over. It's over for the wage hooks as Daniel Smith would love to say, the nineto-fs, man. Yeah, I I just totally agree with Mark's point about how you use the how you use it is like just night and day, right? you just like replace Google for give me a recipe for chicken parm or whatever like okay that's fine but you didn't like change anything versus you can if you're like on the complete other end of the spectrum building your own agents on NAN like okay yeah you're gonna be able to do crazy things that you wouldn't have been able to do before and by consequence be a better like a more productive participant in society yeah bringing up Google's a great a great point like I I think we saw data Um, we we shared it in one of the groups where Google searches are down like 40. Yeah. Year-over-year. Like that is a that is a chat GBT llm phenomenon. That's not um that's not organic. Like that that's just that's not data, right? That's that's market share right there. I made every time my friends say they're going to Google something, I've made fun of them enough calling them a boomer that now they just use AI. Yeah. Be the change you want in the world. It's it's integrated now. like you don't even need to think about it because I most like it's they've got the AI companion thing right there. You don't even have to like bother with going to the right front end. Yeah. I will say one thing the Google AI on the like if you Google something the AI that Google gives you is horrible. I don't think it's like the top model Gemini or something because it's just bad. It always gives you the wrong answer. Um for speed, right? There's like a difference when in the models for what their utility is. And if I search something on Google, I I mentally have do not have the patience for an 03 style or Gemini 2.5 style load time there. Like that's not what I'm doing. Um I only use for every question. Like burn down. You're the one burning down the trees and actually every time you click run on an 03, it actually produces a plastic straw and drops it into the ocean. No, he's burning $10,000 a day on his queries. Yeah. How to make chicken parm 03 deep research. Let's [ __ ] figure it out. I don't want anything not good. What What I think is crazy is like it I said this the other day too about the video models, but like what I find wild too is like I think it's going to we're getting near to the point where you can say, "How do I make chicken parm?" And like it's not going to give you the the list anymore. Like you're going to get the video model and it's going to make you the how-to video like on the fly that like you would have previously had to go to YouTube to find that some guy who like knows about a piece of equipment is like, "Okay, you open this thing and then you flip these switches and then there you go." Like a model is going to be able to just do that for you, which is a crazy crazy thought. Yeah. the um the other kind of like second and third order consequences there is like on demand content. Um and um I I hate that one. I know exactly what you're going to say. I hate that one. Before you say it, I'm just going to say it right now. I hate this one. Please continue. Say more. No, because I know what you're going to say. You're going to say on demand slop. And I just like it it puts the fear of God in me that my children might have to be like show me funny. Like even Coco Malone I think is a step too far. No, he's what he's going to say is revealed versus stated preference and then he's going to mo you in three years. Revealed versus stated preference. Box an idiot. It's all going to come down to But the thing is that that's the only thing that I'm like consistently worried about is people's brain functions going down and down and down. That's it. I'm terrified to be asking this, but what is Coco Malone? Dude, you have a kid. Yeah, I don't know what that is. Coco Coco Melon is a kids show. It's a kids show. It's like it's pure. There's a meme here. Here's the thing. There's a meme. If you literally look it up on TikTok and it's like people play this intro song and then their kid like runs across the room and they're like, "Oh my god, it's Coco Melon time." Like it's a a well-known thing. That's full of Daniel Smith's. No, Daniel. Go back to the Coco Malone. All right. All right. All right. Ryan, I'm so sorry I cut you off. So, please. No, it's fine. I mean, this is um the only other point that I wanted to to make was um like you already kind of get on on demand slop. Like that's what Tik Tok is. And what what I think is really interesting is that they bought they they had a $2 billion order for GPUs from Nvidia. Uh perhaps it was 18 months ago. That's probably fully filled by this point. Um, like you could see the creator kind of get disintermediated, right? Where like these, you know, Tik Tok, YouTube, uh, uh, and Meta all have massive creator funds at this point, hundreds of millions or even in the billions of dollars. Um, they don't want to pay that money. So to kind of disintermediate some of the creators and kind of generate their own content as they do with like generating their own ads like they've completely um they've completely, you know, automated the marketing stack where you don't even need a marketing team. You can just go straight to Meta. They'll run the ads and they'll do the optimizations for you and guarantee you an ROI. They're probably going to do the same thing with the content on the platforms and and verties that content stack. So, um, and just a lot of really interesting changes in the market that I think are make me they get me really excited, even more excited about the mega caps going forward. With Ryan talking just now on Coco Malone video playing, I felt like I was watching one of those Tik Tok subway sofa videos. Yes, mission accomplished. We We're going to have to clip that and add it to the slop feed. Um, it's inevitable. That's where all content's going. Yeah, I I will admit that I am being the lite here and kind of like the angry man yelling at the cloud. I am just I am just a man though. So if watching this and judging me, just know that I'm just a man who has fears as well. I think you make a good point though, Bach. like um actually Westy recommended me a book recently called Accelerando or Accelerando whatever you want to call it and it's the early chapters of this book go into a future where AI technology becomes very pervasive and people basically literally offload their brain power to agents that go and search and like think of things and then come back to them with answers. Um so like some maybe hyper accelerated version of what we're doing already. Um, and it just like goes further and further along that path to where like the body, like the human bodies become meaningless because it's all just like offloaded to computing and people end up becoming like should I just upload my consciousness into a computer and just be a robot? Um, so you know there there's some future here where it's like if people are offloading literally everything about their lives and their thought patterns to uh something else then yeah I mean there's like a tangible concern there about you know what the hell are we doing? I like it's very easy to be dystopian. I could point to most technological revolutions uh and they are and they're like very um very clearly net positive for society. Um you know even like with the um you know the you know the depression and teens or whatever that you're seeing today which is arguably due to either mobile or social or some combination of the two. um the benefits of uh the internet on on productivity, pro productivity and um and health and human human wellness and just like human connection I think far outweigh that. Um like because at the end of the day like humans want to like just live better lives and that's just kind of their their optimization function. So like I'm like it's very easy to be dystopian but I I think everyone like for the last people very dystopian about the future have been just you know been very wrong. I'm not I'm not willing to bet against that trend like like what you're essentially talking about is the singularity and like you know you know fusing human brains with computer interface and like that is allowing people like like neural links like solving blindness and um allowing parapollegics to like control computers with their mind and and hopefully like solving uh neurological disabilities like that's that's pretty optimistic to me. Yeah, I agree with you, Ryan. I'm uh I'm not a uh an anti- AI person by any means, but I think to your point, I mean, you brought up some of the negatives of like social media and the internet. Um, you know, I'm I think maybe we're I mean, Bach can speak for himself, but I think he's just coming from the like, you know, you get plenty of people who are just like, "Yep, AI, it's all 100% 10,000% good." Like, there's no problems. There never will be. Um I think he he's are he pushing back against that idea a little bit like you know there's going to be downsides. I think it's it's reasonable to expect there some downsides. I think with in general with any new form I mean this is definitely not something that I should be speaking on just like my personal opinion could be very wrong but in general I think with any new technology or like new upgrade um what ends up happening is that there's a there's people who can't necessarily control themselves um either due to financial reasons or due to other reasons and they get like very ingrained and reliant on a certain piece of technology and it's you're essentially labbotomizing like a population, a certain percent of the population every time because you're like removing this skill that they have. Um, think of how many people can't do basic math in their head and rely on calculators. Like it's I know it doesn't seem particularly important and it probably won't be like in the end if we have the singularity like Ryan said and everybody can just do whatever they want in their head. That's a completely different thing. If you're Have you guys read over that article that's like high schoolers um no senior English English majors in college can't read anymore for longer than like 30 pages. That kind of stuff is like because they're reliant on the internet or on chat GPT or everything and it's like you're losing basic functions that you don't want to allow people to lose if that makes sense. It's a stupid fear and it definitely shouldn't hold anybody back from saying like AI is fantastic because it is. It's just like I think you have to think about people um in general as well and say, "Hey, maybe we shouldn't let everybody have access to this all the time." I think you're seeing this as well. They're not letting in like computers and exams anymore. I saw this thing about like pen and paper back in school. I think that's like pretty good way to fix that. Like you're forcing people to do things. Um, does that make sense? I'm not I think you're pointing out I think you're I think you're pointing out a reality that um human like humans have a you know a corrective nature, right? It doesn't just like descend into pure negativity like it like there there's like it for lack of Yeah. Humans have a corrective nature where like if something's going wrong they'll eventually try to fix it. Um, so like just like education, like in the examples that you that you um cited, like education is changing to adapt and like I think you're seeing it right now with people tracking screen time and applications um targeted at minimizing screen time and um individuals who have experienced the downsides of social and mobile that they're they're now making concerted efforts to, you know, take some time away from these devices that may be hurting their attention. And perhaps it's taken a little too long than others would hope, but I think you're seeing it happen in real time. You can even look at the the time spent on mobile actually. Um, and I didn't think that this was going to happen, but it actually peaked in 2023. So, people are actually like taking um, you know, the the necessary measures to to write these wrongs or the downsides of technology. And I think humans are pretty pretty good at saving themselves. That's shocking. I would have never guessed that. I I brought this counter. Sorry. I was I was gonna Yeah, I was gonna prop up Ryan just to say like there's been like a counter trend of like uh limited devices like no screen or just like one button on it or like it only runs one app type thing. Not that it's big, but I think it plays into what he's saying. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly nothing phone but but on the count end of it like in the UK they're starting schools with what they call AI enabled teaching where they want to have teacherless courses and I'm you know so in on the other end it seems like students might some students at least might be getting more of the screen time and we'll see how that goes. Well, I I I think that's what you want, right? Like there there's there's plenty of reproducible evidence across across countries and continents that shows that um one-on-one learning is is it can move test scores by like two standard deviations, which is huge, right? That that takes you that you know that that makes an average student become a well above average student. Um, so you could really see um like large shifts in um learning patterns because children will finally get to have one-on-one tutoring, which is only which is really only possible for like the wealthiest people on the planet, right? Like I never experienced one-on-one tutoring and I think, you know, I I personally would have been much better off if I if I had a chance there. You're perfectly where you are, Ryan. That's what I was about to say. You're perfect, man. Don't worry. Um, no, but Ryan, I brought this up a few months ago and you gave me the revealed versus state of preference thing, but there is clearly a shift away. Like in my circles at least six months ago, eight months ago, there were people saying, "I've completely quit." Um, social media, I'm putting my phone down. I'm trying to leave XY Z. Um, I think we'll just see more and more of this. Um, even our very own Jack Kubernet, he loves flexing it, but he goes around with his little flip phone. Hey guys, I have my flip phone. And he just pulls it up. I think he gave up social media a few years ago. So, it's definitely getting there. Corrective. Yes. Um, it's taking the issue there is like clearly companies want people to keep using their phone or their product or their app or whatever. So, they're going to want to push for it. This is I think the only place where I might be like we need a bit of regulation. Please don't kill me, Ryan. We we need a we need a crypto app that um you deposit crypto into. You earn yield so long as you're not on your phone and you get slashed if you, you know, break whatever time function you put on it and then the rewards go to the people who stayed off their phone. I'll just use my second phone. Yeah, I've got to work on the cryptoeconomic game theory of it all. I might need some ZKTLS and uh some FHE and perhaps some game theory, but um but I think the idea is sound. You have to scan your eye, get your orb, get your orb scan done and then you can participate. Yeah, I scan. they need like your your uh I IP address like got to verify that that's like the only device you're on. It I think it would be a little involved, but I like the idea because there's people playing around with like the similar idea with like fitness apps, right? Like put some pull some money together and if you like do your workouts, you get the payouts. Yeah, I perhaps you can um integrate some um yeah there it's interesting what you'll be able to do with fitness devices and and tokens I think because that's kind kind of like a proof of humanity right like a fitness device will be able to tell whether or not you're connected or not and yeah I don't know perhaps there's something there love it then um if nobody has any other big thoughts I think we can we can call it on AI. That was a pretty good I think first successful live stream for Xerox Research. Glad you guys all made it on. Bach, you're going to say something. Yeah, let's do a permission list really quick because I know people are going to log off the moment that we said that. Guys, permission list is in Brooklyn June 24th to June 26th. Please come. I work on a commission basis and anybody who uses code 0x10, I get at least three to five soul per sign up. So, please use code 0x10 to come to Brooklyn permissionless June 24th to 26. I don't get commission. So, if you hate me, you can still buy the ticket. Um, come to permissionless 0x10 June 24th to 26. I I don't know if we're Can we Danny, can we pull up the Can we pull up the What? The link, man. The link. They're gonna write books about that and and how to how to market yourself right there. That was a beautiful Bacio. I'm uh code dunk code dunk. Wow. Code dunk tank. Maybe not because I couldn't say it. No, we don't have that. Yeah. Now people are going to be confused. They're going to press dunk tank. Comments. Every other letter is lowercase, too. There we go. Code is at the bottom. Blockworks.coeventionless dash. That's four in Roman. Ivy, come. It's going to be fantastic. I'm going to wrestle Daniel Smith. Um, on the main olive oil, it's going to be good. Oiled up. All right. They'll get on the mechanical bowl. We'll drop him in the dunk tank afterwards. It'll be a wild and wacky event. Yep. Definitely come out, see us there. We want to see you guys all there. Uh, thanks for coming on today, guys. Anything exciting before we close up? Anything wacky going on this weekend or no? Just going to be quiet, disconnect from devices like we all just said we are trying to do now. Probably be glued to the screens trading 100x leverage on Hyperlid. Yep. Hyperlid. Also, Hyperlid doesn't offer 100x leverage. That's how I know you're not. That's how you know it's not true. That's how I know you're not a true believer. Um, they actually have to bring down leverage, just FYI, from 45x to 40x. Light work. Um, okay, awesome. Thanks for coming on, guys. Good up. We will uh try to do this again soon. Hopefully next week. We'll see. Make it a regular thing. I had We're We're working on it. I think it's going to be regular. Maybe Fridays, maybe not. Working it out. I think this was a good run and uh yeah, we'll definitely make it. This is going to be a more regular thing and maybe even more cadence and more time. We'll see. All right. Awesome. Let's uh we'll call it there. Pull up end screen and uh we'll close out. Cheers. Can you play the music again though? Yeah, I'll do that. I'll do the music. No, you need the ducks, baby. Oh, [Music] Danny. Dude, more people are coming in now with the music. Yeah, it's over, guys. Thanks for watching. We need to get I'm working on the updated graphics for this that are going to say thanks for watching soon. CTM, guys. Please start leaving so we can leave. I'm just I want that the show's over. I want that number to hit 130 0 and I like the song. It's good. [Music] Are these tunes AI generated? I have no idea. It's an absolute eater, though. It's a a mega banger. All right, we're going to call it there. Thanks for watching, guys. We'll see you all next time. [Music]

========================================

--- Video 5 ---
Video ID: f8JLX5Dne_o
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f8JLX5Dne_o
Title: The Market is Hyped For Solana Seeker  | Round Table Clip
Published: 2025-05-29 16:37:53 UTC
Description:
In this clip, we discuss the buzz around Solana’s new mobile device, Seeker, and its potential to grow in a stagnating mobile device market. Enjoy!

Full episode live on all the major streaming platforms:

Apple🔊: https://apple.co/4kht6aY
YouTube📺: https://youtu.be/NDQnkA8ITmg
Spotify🔊: https://spoti.fi/3Ssy8oX

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
On the consumer front, were there any was any enthusiasm around the Salana mobile, the Seeker phone coming out? Yeah, totally. It was buzzing. The um Seeker had a um a section uh they had a large um booth, right, for uh for like Seeker activation. Um I think you could sign up there and they also had models. I was surprised at how smooth it was and it was pretty limited. I you couldn't click around too much, but where where you could click around the apps that they did have, they're they're much smoother. And, you know, from the V1 Solana phone, it obviously, you know, the build is fantastic, most durable phone I've ever had. Um, the app experience, the UX is, you know, left a lot to be desired. So, I think they really focused on that this time around. And it's a good-look device, too. Um, I'm an iPhone guy. Um, but you know that that phone looks good and it felt good and yeah, I'm excited for excited for it to come out. I think it's coming out August 8th. Um, so that should be that should be exciting. Yeah, I think they start shipping early August. I've ordered mine pre-ordered mine since last year, so I've been waiting quite some time for it, but I'm I'm excited. Yeah, and they they revamped the app store, too. Like, they're taking it seriously. They added like new branding and everything. Like I I think it's I think it's interesting, right? Like we're actually approaching this time in the in the device market where people think it's up for grabs. Like there's there's not a platform shift, but there's definitely a feature uh set shift where you need to integrate AI and now perhaps it'll be less in demand than AI, but you might want some cryptonnative features. Um, I think Apple's the weakest that it's been in my life or since I started paying attention to technology markets or 20 years ago or something. It's definitely the weakest it's been. It has disappointed investors. It's been late on product announcements. It's promised features that has never shipped like for the first time. It's leaving a lot of people disappointed. So like there's a gap in the market. You see chat GBT or sorry O open AAI purchasing Johnny Ives company IO and going to market with some mystery device uh that's TBD um you're seeing the contrast in AI features between Android and um iPhone today you see Apple failing on Siri like I'm not saying that I think that Salana Seeker will be the next big platform but you could see since it's since it's an open- source thing you could see some Android OEM grabbing some cryptonnative features and putting them in the phone if you know cryptonnative payments in some EM country are are taking off and they want to ship to that region like that that doesn't seem um it seems plausible that there's an opening here. [Music]

========================================

--- Video 6 ---
Video ID: NDQnkA8ITmg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NDQnkA8ITmg
Title: Is Euphoria Seeping Into the Market? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-05-29 08:00:33 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we cover emerging market euphoria, Bitcoin inflows, Circle’s IPO ambitions, and Plasma’s token sale. Carlos and Ryan also give us their takeaways from Solana's Accelerate conference, and the buzz around Solana Mobile’s new phone, Seeker. Finally, we dive into U.S. regulatory shifts around perps trading, and the rapidly developing MegaETH ecosystem.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Plasma Token Sale Announcement: ⁠https://www.plasma.to/insights/announcing-the-xpl-public-sale-using-sonar-by-echo⁠
--
Accelerate your app development on Algorand with AlgoKit 3.0—now with native TypeScript and Python support, visual debugging, and seamless testing. Build, test, and deploy smarter with tools designed for speed and simplicity.

Start building with AlgoKit today: https://algorand.co/algokit?utm_source=blockworkspodcast&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=algokit3&utm_id=algokit3&utm_term=algokit3
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Marinade is the premier staking delegation platform on Solana, bringing billions in liquidity and security to the Solana network, and connecting SOL holders to the best staking rates. 

Since launching in 2021, Marinade has expanded their suite of products to provide solutions for both DeFi users and TradFi, including liquid and native staking, as well as direct enterprise integrations. 

To learn more about Marinade, follow the link below: https://marinade.finance/?utm_source=blockworks&utm_medium=partnerships&utm_campaign=podcast 
--
Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Carlos: https://x.com/0xcarlosg
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/⁠

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:47 Is Euphoria Seeping Into the Market?
4:53 Circle's IPO and Plasma's Token Sale
13:53 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
14:01 Takeaways From Solana's Accelerate Conference
23:00 Regulation For US Based Perps
30:53 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
32:02 Solana's New Phone
44:41 Marinade Ad
45:13 The MegaETH Ecosystem
1:00:58 Dunking on People at Permissionless
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 7 ---
Video ID: PWQFYACtzQA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PWQFYACtzQA
Title: The Next Era of Stablecoins | Dmitriy Berenzon
Published: 2025-05-28 19:20:25 UTC
Description:
In this clip, Dmitriy Berenzon, a Partner at Archetype, gives his thoughts on Web2 incumbents entering the stablecoin sector, and where he sees the sector heading over the next few years. Enjoy!

Full episode live on all the major streaming platforms:

Apple🔊: https://apple.co/4jr5Whk
YouTube📺: https://youtu.be/teHWZ3lfUBA
Spotify🔊: https://spoti.fi/4kE3Hs2

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 8 ---
Video ID: aSNlanopS1k
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aSNlanopS1k
Title: Believe’s Go-to-Market Strategy | Round Table Clip
Published: 2025-05-28 19:10:00 UTC
Description:
In this clip, we discuss Believe’s GTM strategy, competition with Echo and Legion, and founder ideology in crypto Enjoy!

Full episode live on all the major streaming platforms:

Apple🔊: https://apple.co/44Rxwkg
YouTube📺: https://youtu.be/61O5345QUgU
Spotify🔊: https://spoti.fi/3FlIwfh

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
Let's talk about that. Like that's what I'm pretty interested in here. Um I think that the go to market is very interesting on the supply side. Um where you're kind of targeting these web two founders where like a quarter million dollar equity outcome would be a fantastic outcome. I do think that there's a really good story where it's an underserved niche in capital markets and ex, you know, and the reason it's underscerved is because venture market structure just isn't there. like you're not going to be impactful impactful to a portfolio at that size. Um so who should fund that? Arguably it's retail and arguably they cannot because of current regulations. So like believe like really like I think steps in like has an interesting wedge to and like could be very success successful on that thesis. Um but I don't know do you guys see problems with that? Um because at the end of the day like there are a lot of indie devs out there and none of them make money. So are there are there going to be enough interesting new web 2 indie devs coming to market that you could keep people interested? I think that's a big open question. Bach, you're you're dying. You're itching. You're raising your hands both of them over and over. I think I think on the retail side it makes more sense for them to like use something like Echo or Legion to invest. Like I think your returns are I think being able to invest on the retail side like on a smaller ticket size it makes more sense to invest in like I guess more established or like legitimate founders. Although I don't know what it's going to look like in six months. Like the the indie devs that might become might be amazing and choose instead race through other platforms. Um on the supply side that's the difficult bit like the thing is that crypto has historically pulled um and Ryan you know when you say like we don't need ideal ideologues like people who are like maximally decentralized. The thing is that crypto appeals to that niche and it's very difficult for us to pull in devs who don't appeal to that niche who are also like going to stick in it for the long term. I think we're just getting there now because people still haven't recognized how much money there is in crypto. Like like you said, retail should fund it and they can like in crypto historically retail just doesn't mind spending money on dog Um but we just haven't gotten that like flow in yet from from founders and devs. And the flow that we have gotten is from like ideologues who have very like clear opinions on decentralization and who are like very privacy oriented maybe um who don't like the way that the governments operate etc etc. And those people like the top class of those people if they have the ideology that like they want to pursue decentralization they'll come into crypto. But apart from that, we usually just get like mid mid developers um or like lower tier developers because the better ones will I don't know they'll they'll they'll get funding in like the traditional world or they'll take a 800k TC at Meta and not do any work or something like that if that makes sense. I I think that there are but again I think that that's backward-looking. I think that things are changing. I I would say over the past, you know, greater than 18 months, especially on Salana, you're seeing web 2 people come poke around. And like I think the market's coming to this realization that like you don't really need to make your app on the blockchain. You probably just need to issue the token or like perhaps if there's if you want like US USDC deposited into your app, then you use the blockchain. But like perhaps you should just put a token on the chain and let people trade it and either collect trading fees or raise capital or whatever. like and I think the Salana folks are embracing that reality um which is a much which is I think a more sellable and realistic um framework around why to use a crypto thing than the decentralization thing because clearly that didn't work for many many years and still isn't really working today. Well, I'd say the best product that we got this year happened because it's some guy who could have made a lot more money doing what he used to do, but instead was like, I want to build a decentralized alternative. Oh, what was that? Hyperlquid. That's it. Like Jeff went on multiple podcasts and said, I just wanted to build something decentralized on chain as an alternative to centralized exchanges. And that like I feel like that's the guy you now that this is a very but he didn't need funding. So, I don't it doesn't really feel like it fits the bill here. I don't think he made something decentralized either. I think it was more like a regulatory ARB thing. Who's to say? Who is to say? I I just feel like it's outside the argument because he they didn't need the funding, right? That was that was self fun and then they launched a token. I'm specifically discussing the profile of the guy who's coming in like what he is as a person which is like somebody who has some form of ideology that relates to decentralization and has to build on the blockchain. Um and Ryan I agree with you like eventually I think the ideal goal is that just assets are issued on chain. You don't need to make everything um on chain. Um ideally you do like yes trustlessness is good um permissionlessness is good but like if we can also just get people issuing assets on chain like people issuing their equity on chain I think that's already it and we're seeing more and more of this like settlement is now the thing as opposed to decentralization like you said so I think eventually it'll just turn more and more into that to that point like believe feels like a necessary step in that direction not not that it had to be this app or this founder or this thing, but they're they're making that bridge of, you know, Nikita Beer is pulling up his web two, you know, tech founder contacts list and saying, "Hey, come la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la launch token on Salana from from a bunch of guys who probably never would have done it previously." So, they're kind of doing their part to try to make that a reality. It doesn't I would I would agree with you like it's not just going to happen all at once like we won't just get this wave of like now every company launches a token on chain but you don't get there by not doing anything. So I think this is kind of like the necessary one of one of the necessary pieces of of going like one step further. I do think the longer term question of like do these always have to stay meme coins or like do regulations need to change and like these can have you know future upside via conversion to the equity or something like that. That's been a big question as well. It's like these are just meme coins so it's like you know that's that's the common criticism, right? It's stupid because these are just meme coins again. Well, it's like that's kind of the point initially, right? Like just bet on the reality of the idea or whatever. Um and people in the trenches just want to hit 100x so they don't really care. But on a longer term basis, then it definitely matters. Yeah. I just wonder if it's going to become instead of doing something like this, we're going to get more loose regulation on Echo and Legion style products and we just instead focus more on that to fund like these indie developers. We'll see. I think it's easier for the founder if it's the just launch a token way, but I think it's better for retail if it's to just use like something that resembles a traditional structure but onchain such as Echo or Legion. One thing I will say is that they also kind of brought up that whole memecoin thing on themselves because they they wrote that this doesn't represent equity which I don't know why they did that. I feel like they could have just avoided that language altogether if it's like a legal thing. But I'm not smart enough to be a lawyer. So not good. [Music]

========================================

--- Video 9 ---
Video ID: teHWZ3lfUBA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=teHWZ3lfUBA
Title: Has AI Revived the DePIN Sector? | Dmitriy Berenzon
Published: 2025-05-26 08:00:59 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Dmitriy Berenzon, a Partner at Archetype, to discuss investing in DePIN, the payments and stablecoins sector today, and consumer crypto. We cover decentralized compute networks, stablecoin fragmentation, payments infrastructure, the UX gap between TradFi and crypto, crypto neobanks, and how AI agents may reshape onchain activity and financial rails.Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Ekiden is a decentralized, orderbook-based hybrid exchange delivering execution speeds as low as 5-15ms, deep liquidity and transparent price discovery—all while maintaining the security and trustlessness of DeFi with zero maker fees.

To learn more about Ekiden, follow the link below: ⁠https://ekiden.fi/⁠
--
Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Archetype: https://x.com/archetypevc
Follow Dmitriy: ⁠https://x.com/dberenzon⁠
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/⁠

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:21 Why Hasn't DePIN Succeeded?
13:41 Ekiden Ad
14:00 Investing in DePIN
17:51 Decentralized Compute Marketplaces
24:10 Ekiden Ad
24:46 Payments & Stablecoins
41:47 Where Should Teams Build?
44:49 Consumer Crypto Today
51:16 Utilizing AI
53:39 Why Wouldn't AI Agents Use TradFi Rails?
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 10 ---
Video ID: 61O5345QUgU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=61O5345QUgU
Title: The Rise of Internet Capital Markets | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-05-22 08:00:12 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we discuss Bitcoin’s return to all-time highs, and increasing institutional interest in crypto. We also dive into the rise of the Believe app and internet capital markets, trends in Solana’s trading bot market, and the evolution of crypto mobile apps. We close the episode with a critique of Ethereum’s value narrative and cultural direction.Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Consumer Crypto & Net New Assets: ⁠https://app.blockworksresearch.com/research/consumer-crypto-and-net-new-assets⁠

Thread Version: ⁠https://x.com/_ryanrconnor/status/1924876335777734950⁠

Trading Bot Market Share: ⁠https://x.com/defi_kay_/status/1920154686642139474⁠
--
Accelerate your app development on Algorand with AlgoKit 3.0—now with native TypeScript and Python support, visual debugging, and seamless testing. Build, test, and deploy smarter with tools designed for speed and simplicity.

Start building with AlgoKit today: https://algorand.co/algokit?utm_source=blockworkspodcast&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=algokit3&utm_id=algokit3&utm_term=algokit3
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on ⁠https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00⁠.
--
Marinade is the premier staking delegation platform on Solana, bringing billions in liquidity and security to the Solana network, and connecting SOL holders to the best staking rates. 

Since launching in 2021, Marinade has expanded their suite of products to provide solutions for both DeFi users and TradFi, including liquid and native staking, as well as direct enterprise integrations. 

To learn more about Marinade, follow the link below: https://marinade.finance/?utm_source=blockworks&utm_medium=partnerships&utm_campaign=podcast 
--
Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/⁠

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
5:46 Bitcoin Testing All-Time Highs
11:54 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
12:40 The Believe App & Internet Captial Markets
24:18 Believe's GTM Strategy
32:16 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
33:25 The Trading App Landscape
46:42 Marinade Ad
47:14 How Should We Value Blockchains?
52:56 Ethereum's Focus Today
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 11 ---
Video ID: E3bsUB5oBK0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E3bsUB5oBK0
Title: The Bandwidth Bottleneck Holding Blockchains Back | Mateo Ward & Austin Federa
Published: 2025-05-19 08:00:13 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Austin Federa and Mateo Ward to dive into DoubleZero! They explain why bandwidth—not compute—is the real blockchain bottleneck, and how DoubleZero addresses it. We also cover validator economics, token incentives, critiques on DePIN, performance benchmarks, and plans for Solana and beyond.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow DoubleZero: https://x.com/doublezero
Follow Mateo: https://x.com/mateoward
Follow Austin: https://x.com/Austin_Federa
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/⁠

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:24 What is DoubleZero and Why Do We Need It?
12:40 DoubleZero Stakeholders
18:40 DoubleZero Tokenomics and the Problem with DePIN
23:44 Solving the Cold Start Problem
27:54 Performance Improvments Using DoubleZero
39:29 Expanding to Other Chains
43:57 Thoughts on Multicast
47:46 The DePIN Label
51:29 Reflecting and Closing Comments
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 12 ---
Video ID: O8x2y5D4s70
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O8x2y5D4s70
Title: TradFi Capital Is Powering Defi’s Evolution | Round Table
Published: 2025-05-15 12:42:10 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Ian and Teddy from Kairos Research to discuss the market rebound, validator economics, and Solana’s maturing infrastructure. We also cover structural Solana flows, ETF demand dynamics, and growing institutional interest in crypto assets. Finally, we dive into recent crypto M&A, Robinhood’s blockchain ambitions, and Hyperliquid’s potential as the next breakout ecosystem.Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Accelerate your app development on Algorand with AlgoKit 3.0—now with native TypeScript and Python support, visual debugging, and seamless testing. Build, test, and deploy smarter with tools designed for speed and simplicity.

Start building with AlgoKit today: https://algorand.co/algokit?utm_source=blockworkspodcast&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=algokit3&utm_id=algokit3&utm_term=algokit3
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Teddy: https://x.com/TedDeFi
Follow Ian: https://x.com/Ian_Unsworth
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/⁠

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:36 Market Outlook
10:11 Overview of Kairos Research
12:38 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
13:18 What Doesn't the Market Realize About Solana?
23:06 ETF Flows
29:32 DoubleZero's Impact
33:38 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
34:42 Crypto M&A and Payments
56:34 Will There Be Another DeFi Season?
1:03:24 Hyperliquid's Ecosystem
1:15:06 L1 Valuations
1:20:17 Closing Comments
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 13 ---
Video ID: fxpOOw6S3sU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fxpOOw6S3sU
Title: Can DePIN Bounce Back? | Carl Vogel & Mike Dudas
Published: 2025-05-13 19:15:37 UTC
Description:
In this clip, Carl Vogel and Mike Dudas from 6th Man Ventures give us their thoughts on the current state of the DePIN sector, and where they see it heading in the future.

Full episode live on all major streaming platforms:

Apple🔊: https://apple.co/4ddQx29
YouTube📺: https://youtu.be/kfzbQ9v-1NU
Spotify🔊: https://spoti.fi/4j0N6gS

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 14 ---
Video ID: kfzbQ9v-1NU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kfzbQ9v-1NU
Title: Apps Are Taking Over Crypto | 6th Man Ventures
Published: 2025-05-12 08:00:51 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Mike Dudas and Carl Vogel of 6th Man Ventures to discuss infrastructure vs application-layer investments, the oversupply of general-purpose L1s, the viability of new chains like Monad, and the monetization strategies of crypto apps. We also dive into the evolving launchpad market, the future of DePIN networks, revenue-sharing models,and VC benchmarking.Thanks for tuning in!
As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!

Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: https://x.com/dYdX
--
Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Carl: https://x.com/carlkvogel
Follow Mike: https://x.com/mdudas
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to the 0xResearch Newsletter: ⁠⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch⁠

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Timestamps:
(0:00) Introduction
(0:47) Investing in Apps vs Infrastructure
(5:44) Will the L1 Premium Ever Go Away?
(7:17) Where Should Apps Launch?
(10:10) Determining Monad's Success
(12:42) Generating Revenue
(16:40) Crypto's Monetization Model
(19:13) The Launch Pad Market
(25:24) Streaming vs Text-based Social
(28:11) Launchpad Model Network Effects
(31:09) dYdX Snippet
(37:43) Defining Consumer Crypto
(40:32) Thoughts on the DePIN Sector
(54:33) Should VCs Benchmark Against Bitcoin?
(58:07) Liquid vs Private Investing
(1:04:20) What's Wrong With the Buyback and Burn Model?
(1:10:04) The Lack of DPI in the VC Space
(1:14:18) Are Valuations Too High?
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch⁠
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 15 ---
Video ID: piz9bPBjukA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=piz9bPBjukA
Title: The State Of Solana DeFi | Round Table
Published: 2025-05-08 12:01:26 UTC
Description:
Gm, this week we discuss the state of Solana DeFi. We deep dive into why is everyone so bearish, Ethereum's big pivot, Solana perps market share, app revenue, bringing Bitcoin onchain & more. Enjoy!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Accelerate your app development on Algorand with AlgoKit 3.0—now with native TypeScript and Python support, visual debugging, and seamless testing. Build, test, and deploy smarter with tools designed for speed and simplicity. 

Start building with AlgoKit today: https://algorand.co/algokit?utm_source=blockworkspodcast&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=algokit3&utm_id=algokit3&utm_term=algokit3
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Carlos: https://x.com/0xcarlosg
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to the 0xResearch Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:07 Why Is Everyone So Bearish?
6:58 The State Of Solana DeFi
19:17 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
19:57 Solana vs Ethereum Lending
30:13 The Launchpad Wars
35:36 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
36:39 Solana Perps
43:30 App Revenue
46:21 Bringing Bitcoin Onchain
55:20 RWAs
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 16 ---
Video ID: 0wUZMCkCBpc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0wUZMCkCBpc
Title: The Ongoing Battle For Memecoin Market Share | Danny & Westie Power Hour
Published: 2025-05-05 08:00:01 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Danny and Westie discuss their current market outlook, Bitcoin’s relative strength, and stagnation in crypto. They also unpack Ethereum’s strategic shift toward L1 scaling, the evolving meme coin launchpad landscape, and a wave of new L1 blockchain raises.Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!

Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: https://x.com/dYdX
--
Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Westie: https://x.com/WestieCapital
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to the 0xResearch Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
7:25 Thoughts on Ethereum's Direction
34:27 dYdX Snippet
41:26 How Can LaunchLab Gain Market Share?
55:36 Boop's Airdrop
1:03:12 New Raises From L1s
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 17 ---
Video ID: F6BsNclvbsM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F6BsNclvbsM
Title: The Bull Case For Ethena’s Ecosystem and the Helium Network | Round Table
Published: 2025-05-01 08:00:16 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we discuss our current crypto market outlooks, Helium’s efforts to decentralize telecom infrastructure, and Ethena’s evolution into an institutional DeFi chain. We also discuss the state of decentralized AI, US regulatory impacts on DeFi, and macro influences shaping crypto markets heading into summer.Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Helium: Decentralizing Telecom with Web3 Incentives: ⁠https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1912936629297397960⁠

Ethena: Evolving into an Institutional DeFi Chain: ⁠https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1915088301083803936⁠
--
Accelerate your app development on Algorand with AlgoKit 3.0—now with native TypeScript and Python support, visual debugging, and seamless testing. Build, test, and deploy smarter with tools designed for speed and simplicity. 

Start building with AlgoKit today: https://algorand.co/algokit?utm_source=blockworkspodcast&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=algokit3&utm_id=algokit3&utm_term=algokit3
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Daniel: https://x.com/_dshap
Follow Nick: https://x.com/0xMetaLight
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to the 0xResearch Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:43 Market Outlook
9:48 Decentralizing Telecom With Helium
22:57 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
23:37 Do DePIN Tokens Make Sense as Investments?
29:37 Ethena's Evolution
45:56 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
46:59 Regulatory Impact on DeFi
54:36 Thoughts on the Current State of DeAI
1:12:11 Crypto's Outlook Heading Into Summer
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
like any deep pin thing to be successful like there needs to be like a latent resource that people have that um they effectively have a zero opportunity cost um dynamic to contribute that resource to make money right it's like if you live in the middle of New York you can't build a cell tower there but you can put up this router and start making money like you buy this thing and it starts printing for you right like why wouldn't you do that it needs to be easy quick shout out to today's sponsor Algarand we'll hear more about their algo Go kit 3.0 and how it's built to supercharge your app development on Algarand later on in the episode. Nothing said on Zerox research is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is forformational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Pokio Ryan and our guests may hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed. Hey guys, welcome back to another episode of ZeroX Research. Today we are joined by Nick Carponito, first time on the pod, and Daniel Shapiro. How you guys doing today? Doing well. Doing well. Yeah, everything good here. Awesome. Great to have you both on. I think before we jump into things, as always, we have to give a quick shill and shout out for Permissionless. It's coming up end of June, June 24th through the 26th. Um, as always, use code 0x10 if you want 10% off tickets. A bunch of the research team, a bunch of the Blockworks team is going to be there. um people from around the industry as always will be at permissionless. So if you want to come out, meet some folks, chat it up, see some great um great talks and hopefully maybe some fun games and side events and other things that we're cooking up um we will see you out there and it should be a ton of fun. So hope to see you there. Xerx10 link in the description. Um let's dive into it for today. Uh the I think the big sort of talk in the markets lately um it's sort of the same thing but it's the continued like US admins you know talking up and down of the markets. Um I think it seems people are really just like unsure of what's happening right now. Though I've noticed there's a bit more of like macro doomer takes on the timeline. Um whatever that means. Maybe they're right, maybe they're wrong. I think it's really to me it seems like it's very hard to say just given that like the market kind of sneezes depending on what Trump wants to say or tweet for the day. Um and that's kind of been how things have been feeling. But I'm curious Shapiro if you have any big takeaways like how are you feeling about the next like maybe couple weeks or months? Um how do you feel about the market? Yeah. Um in terms of couple months um I'd say that's probably where I'm most uncertain. Um longterm still feeling very bullish. Um short term I think is in terms of like next couple weeks that's probably where I'm most uncertain. Um I I still think that there is some um tariff uncertainty out there. I think uh the market could be getting a little ahead of itself in terms of uh thinking that like a deal could come with China. I think tariffs might be stickier than people realize. Um, so, you know, that would have me leaning towards somewhat of a bearish bias, you know, especially considering we have, you know, we've rebounded up to, you know, mid mid 90s now, um, you know, quite aggressively. But then at the same time if you look at a lot of the order flow data um you know things like funding rates um open interest premium um you know Binance basis you know or even like CME basis like those are all very low still which indicates that um you know typically after a move like this you'd see a lot of people piling in um but that doesn't occur or that doesn't look like uh it is the case. So, um, to me it looks like there might be a little left in this rally and, um, that's kind of outweighing, I guess, like the tariff thing. So, I'm I'm actually pretty I'm feeling pretty neutral right now. Um, I don't feel like there's any strong um, riskreward um, setup either way. I think if you have longs from the bottom, just kind of holding them, but yeah, just letting things kind of unfold and um, I think is just being patient is where I'm sitting right now. Yeah, that it does seem to be a common takeaway or theme that I'm seeing. And even in some of the newer token launches, it's kind of like one way or the other. Like Zora was kind of hyped up and then I don't know, people saw that the token was like not going to acrew any revenues or anything from the protocol and it was just kind of like a meme coin and then it went down following launch. Um, and then Inisha I think was kind of the opposite. is like sort of not really talked about sort of um and maybe an under the radar a little bit. Not that they're necessarily were actually under the radar, but just maybe under discussed or undertalked about at least on the timeline. And um I think it performed fairly well in the early maybe few days or week. Um, we'll see where they where they go from here, but you know, if we were still in like max bear mode, I would think that uh we would we would see all tokens just absolutely plummeting um at their, you know, fairly high launch valuations. So, um, there does seem to at least be some like, you know, some people are maybe a little bullish, some people a little bearish, maybe maybe a lot of neutrality or just uncertainty. Again, it it it feels a little bit similar to maybe a few weeks ago or maybe a month ago where it's like, you know, it wasn't max bearish quite yet when the when we ticked way down in the markets, but people were like, "Yeah, I don't know what to do." Like, we don't have any clear answer on what what's going to happen with tariffs. Trump's like a time bomb. No idea. So, I'm just going to like sit on my hands. And that seems like what maybe what's happening again. We'll we'll see how it plays out. I think uh we have to maybe wait for the next like now is a good time to buy or not now is a good time to sell from Trump himself to to see how the maybe broader markets can react. I know I you know something that that you've brought up that I really really like is looking at um looking at like yeah like new token launches and then also like the top meme coins as as kind of like a metric for for risk. And so you see like you saw Fartcoin um you know kind of front running uh you know the the last week of price action maybe over the prior month. Um you see these new launches doing doing well. And I think this goes back to a theme that you know I talked about you know anytime I come on this podcast like let's say back in Q1 um we were talking about like the idea of like you know are we still having these four year cycles? Are those over? Um, I think moving forward kind of treating this like, you know, I I think we all kind of took the stance that we think that the market structure changed and there aren't these four-year cycles anymore. And I think under that context, I don't think you should ever get, you know, too scared and kind of, you know, buy into the macro dumerism too much. I think there's always going to be opportunities and, um, yeah, when prices are depressed, that's that that, you know, that could be times to buy. Um, but yeah, right now it feels like we're, you know, with the bounce, we're kind of now back kind of in neutral and waiting to see what the what's the next catalyst. What's what's the next thing that that Trump does. Yeah, I've seen and we've talked about this a lot over the past months even because the like Bitcoin decoupling from equities or risk has like continued to be a topic. And I I'd say that it will continually be like hard to pinpoint whether that's true or becoming true or not until like very much after the fact where that becomes clear. Um if it is happening there won't be it won't be you know short-term data is not going to give you like a clear indication of like that is happening or not. Um I will say though I've been been listening to a lot of macro guys and they are starting to take notice. If you look at Bitcoin um since the day after since November 4th since Trump got elected, I think it's you know it's up I think double digit percentages um the Q QQQ is down like 8%. Right? So and then if you measure it year to date um Bitcoin's up year to date Q's are down year to date. So I think that there's early signs of a uh of that divergence actually occurring. Um, I think that there's now, you know, stat like solid statistical evidence. Um, and then you compound that with the fact that, um, Bitcoin typically lags gold by like 90 days. And obviously gold stopped, but gold's been ripping. So, I think that there's there's a couple things on our side that would support the, uh, the decoupling thesis. Yeah, I think that we're going to have to kind of continue to see how things evolve. Um, it is, you know, how much is the is the current admin playing into that changing of price and and potential here? Like was was pumping up Bitcoin following the election just did it get pumped so heavily and you know the sailors and the whoever else is piled in enough that we're still like outperforming the cues or is it something sustainable? I think we we'll have to see. Um, and maybe more broadly on like, you know, whether people think four-year cycles are based on like Bitcoin itself or if that's, you know, I sometimes I question whether that's something more like human psychology based of like when everything was based on, you know, a lack of fundamentals and we were just pumping things to stupid valuations with, you know, no real revenues or cash flows or anything like that. It's like you know maybe there is some semblance or like basis for some human psychology based you know cyclicality to the markets which you do kind of see in the broader markets as well where there are periods of um you know overvaluations and undervaluations every you know whatever whatever the cycles are of like you know 7 to 10 years or so we kind of tend to see those things play out. Um, maybe that's something that's more concentrated here. Maybe not. Maybe it's just the early stages of a of an industry that's growing. But either way, we'll we'll save that conversation for a later a later debate. Um, I want to bring Nick into the fold here. He is not the newest analyst on the team actually anymore, but one of the newer analysts on the team. Um, our so-called deepin guy. Um, I think we've wanted to do more deepin specific content for a long time and just sort of struggled to have enough, you know, resources and sort of, you know, strict focus and expertise. But, um, Nick is very much that guy coming in to to fill that need for us. Um, and recently did some some deep dive into Helium and kind of laid out um, his thoughts and the thesis around the project and everything that's going on over there. So, um, I kind of want to open it up for you a little bit, Nick. I think most people are aware of Helium, what they're doing, Helium mobile, um, etc. There's a lot going on in that play, but, uh, if you can kind of run us through and maybe just sort of start from the beginning and like what Helium is and where they're going, uh, would love to to dive in. Yeah, thanks Danny. I uh yeah, like you said, I think a lot of people are familiar with Helium or at least were at one point or another, whether it was during kind of the conversion to Salana or during the rapid expansion of the IoT network. But a lot of Helium's focus has shifted over to the mobile network side over the last 18 or so months, I would say. Um, an important caveat here is there's the Helium mobile network, which is like the the subdow under Helium's governance and reward structure that rewards for mobile offload, cell phones, laptops, any kind of Wi-Fi, things like that. And then you've got Helium Mobile, the MVNO, with the same name but operated by a parent company, Nova Labs, who originally started the Helium blockchain and is the carrier that you see and like if you go to Helium Mobile Twitter account today, that's what you're going to see is like the the MVNO side of it. Um that said, Helium mobile has gone through quite a few changes and maybe the broader Helium network as well has gone through quite a few changes over the last sixish months. Most notably, I think and and maybe the one that people are most familiar with would be the return to H&T as they dubbed it. um as they look to expand the mobile network into the a as the mobile network ex was added to the helium network more broadly the token structure was divied up so that there was a subdow for the IoT network and a subdow for the mobile network each with their own respective token mobile and IoT which you may have seen trading on Salana um through the return to H&T T all rewards, all governance has shifted back to the H&T token and the IoT and mobile tokens are redeemable via the treasuries with the ultimate goal of having all of those tokens eventually get redeemed and the underlying H&T be issued back at the broader market. Um, from the mobile side, some interesting developments. I think probably the most notable in my mind is Inversion Capital and Santiago Santos proposing the ability to become the second service provider with Helium mobile, the MVNO being the first service provider on the network. uh Inversion is looking to acquire Latin American MVNOs's and then convert them to Helium mobile from a cost optimization standpoint as well as a building a broader network coverage and improving legacy system standpoint. Um and so they have not made their first acquisition yet but are looking to in the coming months and that's something that I'm definitely tracking at this point. Helium mobile. The MVNO has also partnered with Moviear to help offload data to hotspots. Uh Movie Star is one of the largest uh telecom operators in Mexico. And so Helium Mobile's mobile network is effectively um open for deployment all over Mexico. and the 2.9 million subscribers of Movie Star are going to begin roaming onto Helium hotspots which should increase fees generated but also the number of people connecting on a daily basis. roll out has been pretty slow so far. I think primarily because very little of the community was based down in Mexico, but some enterprise deployers are spinning up operations and um have been rolling out coverage in the highest density areas that they can in the region. Another interesting one that uh kind of happened after my report is AT&T partnered with Helium mobile the network to offload data to Helium mobile or to offload Helium mobile coverage to the subscribers of AT&T on I think all of AT&T's current plans. So prepaid and um contract plans. This is interesting because I think it it really marks the first time that a a big four or big three MVNO in the US or M in the US has been willing to publicly state that they're working with a decentralized wireless project. We also saw XNET and Carrier 1, which are two other North Americanbased wireless networks building in the DY space, announced similar partnerships around the same time. And so you're really seeing like a I guess a coming out party for team or for AT&T as they begin to recognize the the benefits of community-owned infrastructure and the cost efficiency as opposed to them building their own um Wi-Fi offload networks. Alongside that, another interesting development is brownfield hotspots on the Helium network. Up until about October of 2024, the Helium mobile network was entirely composed of uh I guess proprietary would be the right word, hotspots. And yeah, I would love to pull up that chart. Um with that purple line representing hotspots produced by Nova Labs, the company the parent company of the MVNO. Uh but brownfield hotspots have come on the scene and begun onboarding significantly over the past uh 6 to 8 months or so. Brownfield hotspots are basically any existing Wi-Fi gateway that's compatible can flash a firmware upgrade. Now, it serves whatever the original use case was, whether that's enterprise Wi-Fi or some sort of private Wi-Fi network or carrier roaming, but also have a packet on there that installs everything you need to be a Helium mobile hotspot. And so, while they don't earn the proof of coverage rewards, they are rewarded for data. And we've seen that eclipse the number of standard hotspots deployed. I think both from a cost efficiency in the ability to install them or maybe they're already installed and you can just kind of click a button and have everything come online, but also the fact that they are typically a higher powered unit and I think larger operators prefer to be able to have a little bit more granular control over their hardware. Nick Nick, do you know I'm just curious looking at the brownfield data. I don't know if that's just due to a lack of like data points or polling or did like several larger sort of like groups or operators turn on like a significant number of devices at one time here. Yeah. So those big spikes up are from single or maybe a few operators at a given point in time onboarding a bunch of hotspots. I think part of that is driven by kind of the slow roll out of firmwares like it only certain manufacturers are supported over a period of time and so once new manufacturers come on people have an incentive to onboard them but yeah I do know that the majority of brownfield hotspots are have been onboarded and are being operated by a pretty small number of uh enterprise suppliers. Do um what what's like your expectation for um like I guess like the mix between standard and and brownfield. Do you think it's just people are going to go with the you know what they have or is there some is there like an economic advantage to to one or the other? I think your your enthusiast, your home deployer, if you will, will continue to buy a standard hotspot because like I said, there's that component of the proof of coverage, which is essentially in Helium's ecosystem the universal basic income as long as it's plugged in and it's it's you're not gaming, you're you're verified, you're going to have uh a consistent reward, but as and and wellperforming hotspots should earn multiples above what that proof of coverage reward is in their data rewards. So I think your enthusiast will continue to deploy standard hotspots unless they decide the as a network that standard hotspots may not need to be produced anymore with the compatibility with brownfield conversions. But I think anyone that's deploying Helium hotspots more as a business model and less as a a hobby or an interested party would probably lean towards brownfield hotspots. And I would say I I would expect it to be 10 times higher than the current figure a year from now. Um in terms of a path forward, I think for Helium, it's it's really interesting to see a their ability to either onboard or offload data to existing carriers um internationally as well as domestically. I think they've they've proven their ability to do that in the last two months or so pretty effectively. Uh that said, I'm excited to see what happens in terms of international expansion. I think that's that's probably on the horizon. Europe is probably a prime target for this right now. Um and have heard some rumors that there may be some testing going on in certain regions in Europe. But I think probably the the most compelling thing about the the project right now and maybe the biggest catalyst going forward is going to be more MVNOs's not necessarily MOS's and like full-fledged carriers but MVNO networks that are looking to save on costs uh adopting Helium's technology and offloading to Helium hopefully domestically but definitely I think within the next few years that should be a a global trend. And yeah, I think this this chart paints a a really compelling picture as well. It's on a logarithmic scale, so it's it's hard to see the the stark difference here, but your gray line here represents Verizon's cost of user acquisition at a given number of users. And then your your purple line represents those same figures for Helium where up until that 100 million users point, uh, Helium maintains roughly a 10x lower um or I guess like a 90% reduction in terms of the cost of user acquisition. Do you do you think those lines are going to cross at at some point or do you think that they kind of both as like approach same like asmtoic value? I think there's there's definitely a point where they cross. The the caveat here is that like the the figure for Verizon to acquire its first user and and really almost all of its users is primarily constrained and and so high because the Verizon had to go and build out cell phone towers, right? Like it it took them decades to get this done. They have to continually maintain them. They have to continually put up new ones in regions where they may not have enough coverage. Whereas Helium is obviously not deploying cell phone towers, but is akin to a cell phone tower in that you're deploying a hotspot that can serve coverage to a much smaller region, but also at a much smaller cost and offloading the responsibility of deployment, maintenance, and ultimately the rewards to a community member or an interested party. Um, we've seen companies build out business models around being a Helium deployer. I'd say there's 10 to 15 that are out there today that have have built full-fledged businesses around the model. Um, and we're seeing that take off, especially in regions where building new cell phone towers may be limited by either some sort of government regulation or uh is just not feasible given the landscape. Whether you're building D5 protocols, enterprise solutions, or next-gen DAPs, Algoit has all the tools you'll need to build faster, safer, and smarter on Algorand, Algoit 3.0 now offers native TypeScript and Python support, visual debugging, and seamless testing. Build, test, and deploy with tools designed for speed and simplicity. Start building with Algo Kit today by following the link in today's show notes. This episode is brought to you by Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security. Celebrating 10 years of innovation, Ledger remains the most secure hardware wallet for your crypto and login. Trusted by 7 million users and securing 20% of the world's digital assets. Follow the link in today's show notes to grab your Ledger now. Yeah, I think it's really interesting the the the forward-looking question I have, and I think you kind of addressed it as like if they can break into maybe some of these international markets. Like I guess we'll sort of have to see how that how Inversion Cap kind of goes about their operations here, like who they're planning to acquire and if they can scale that. Um and and I guess I'm just wondering like you know you me you mentioned early on like the change from the sort of multi-token model all to like back to H&T which I think was probably just a ton of confusion in reality for you know someone maybe considering like an investment in H&T for example. Um it it does make you wonder in my mind at least for a lot of the deepen projects is like does does the token really make sense as an investment or does it make more sense like as an enthusiast to simply run a node or is it some you know maybe some combination of things. I think that's kind of what I'm always wondering because just due to how the incentives have to be played out in that you know node runners have to be incentivized in some fashion like you know as just an owner of the token you may be kind of you'll be missing out on maybe some of the value of like the network and why it was built. I'm curious your thoughts there generally Nick like how do you feel about Helium and like H&T and how that interaction plays with with operators? Yeah, I think something that I I probably missed here is the caveat around data credits. If you can pull up that chart. Um, but the data credits are really like the the API credits, if you will, of the Helium ecosystem. Um, anyone who wants to use the Helium network, whether that's the IoT network or the mobile network, pays in data credits, which are fixed to a price that's pegged to a dollar. It's it's a very small fraction of a dollar, but they're they're fixed in price to the dollar. And Helium has a burn to mint equilibrium where when you burn data credits, Helium is minted for that data transfer and then rewarded to the hotspot that made that happen. Um, Helium's price I think is reflective right now of the amount of data burn that we're seeing, but the catalyst I outlined could dramatically increase this. And so there's a high likelihood that we see some H&T price price appreciation over the next 12 months. That is unprecedented and also much more stable than any Helium price appreciation we've seen in the past which was largely based on speculation and that'd be based on like the expansions and potential increase of of users from some of these networks that are going to offload to to Helium. Yeah, I think if you if you look at the the chart here like this is about a year of data. the the past year of data burns or data credit burns. But that said, this represents maybe 1 to 200,000 users using the network on a consistent basis. Um, including all the IoT stuff, which is obviously priced far lower than Helium's uh mobile network is in terms of gigabyte usage. But that said, this if like the the movie star expansion is a great example, I think um 2.9 million subscribers onboarded but very little supply side, very little coverage deployed in Mexico. And of those 2.9 million subscribers, very few of them have opted in. Currently, it's an it's an opt-in edition. It's not a a paid edition per se, but it's something they have to manually enable. Once that becomes automatic and installed on every new phone, every carrier in Mexico, we should see this dramatically increase. And then I think uh this data is a little bit old, but there's definitely been a surge up in data credit use or at least will be a surge up in data credit use through uh AT&T allowing all of their subscribers in the US to connect to Helium mobile whenever it's available without knowing about it. So, I guess long-term price appreciation, I think, or I I hope and think that it should be slow and steady as we move on. I don't necessarily think that it's going to be another rocket ship the way that the H&T token has performed in the past, but I'm generally pretty optimistic on the network right now. And I think that the token is a compelling investment if you believe that Helium mobile will ultimately be able to eclipse some of the web 2 incumbents like Boingo who deploy similar Wi-Fi networks at a much higher uh opex. Awesome. Yeah, it definitely seems like I mean partnering with AT&T Movie Star as well like the the growth side of the picture is seems fairly clear and we'll just we'll be looking to kind of see that play out right where you expect to see more offload more usage and more of these burns like you mentioned. Absolutely. Yeah, I think it it comes back to partnerships, partnerships, partnerships and both through acquisitions in the inversion cap case, but also Noval Labs is very likely has some some deals cooking in the in the back rooms right now. And I think we should expect those to see those come to fruition with um maybe a little bit of an accelerated pace post AT&T coming out of the closet. Awesome. Love it. I think uh this is probably a deep dive into helium and I know your full report it's available on the research site for the subs um that you know some I know some of our audience has probably been asking for for a while that we have not been able to provide them. So glad that you were able to do so. Um we're going to do kind of a complete 180 pivot in another direction. Um we've got Shapiro on to talk a completely different topic but um Athena has also been um a hot topic lately. They've got talks of their converge chain. Um, everyone is super excited about stable coins right now. Um, and you know, tokenizing different funds and other things on chain. Um, and like there's some implications of Athena kind of being in this realm and ballpark. So, um, Shapiro, I want you to kind of take it away like what's the what's hot with Athena and what should people be thinking about um that that maybe they aren't already? Yeah, absolutely. So, I I feel like um coming out of D this year um the the team was very like I guess was very constructive on stable coins, right? Um, in terms of like the the the one theme that I really heard from everyone is is people think that stable coins are are going to grow a lot, right? And there's there's regulatory reasons for that and we'll get into that. Um, but just thinking about like you know what what is a way to express that view um you know given the liquid tokens that we can invest in right now and um at least personally I felt like Athena um was the first thing that came to mind for me. Um and obviously like you know we've we've written about them once before um you know just like diving into SUSD and the mechanics behind it but this time um it was much more about right like they're they're completely they're really going through an evolution right now right they're going from a single synthetic dollar issuer to now um an entire like KYC um you know tradi enabled um fullon defi chain right so they're they They're evolving. They're growing their product suite. Um they're attacking new markets and I guess like the one common theme is that um you know they're they're kind of stable coin oriented. But I think that right we're starting to see them um move into like all of DeFi and specifically um permission DeFi. So you know I felt like it was a great opportunity to dive into them. like they've grown so much in a year and now they're they're in the process of changing so much like um I think that uh it they're you know they're they're worthy of of um further analysis and so um first thing we'll focus on right is their growing product suite. Um obviously USD that's their flagship product and in just a year um it sits you know around like five billion in TVL which um you know it's one of the fastest growing DeFi apps ever. like there's clearly demand um for this yield and obviously it's cryptonative yield. So um ba you know from the uh from delta hedged uh funding rate um basis arbitrage and that actually tends to be um inversely correlated to feds uh to fed fund rates. So I think that um you know I mean basis arbs there's there's probably I think over you know I I did this analysis around maybe um 1 trillion 1.2 2 trillion AUM in basis ARB funds. Most of that is like um you know treasuries but still a significant amount hundreds of billions in equities, commodities, um precious metals. So um you know this is a very common trade and the ability to tokenize it um you know where not only you can capture the yield but also um you now hold the token that's composable, you can put it into a DeFi product, you can take a loan out against it, right? like this is such a great product and it's um you know I I truly think it's it's superior to the to the Trady alternative right because it's tokenized and you gain those composability um benefits and I think right like Tradfi is always searching for yield and so um you know the fact that this does you know does bring diversification benefits to a traditional portfolio uh makes it even more um exciting to them right and So to bring it to them, um the first product that they're that they're in the still in the process of making is IUSD. So I USD is effectively just a uh e uh US but with a uh KYC KYB um compliance wrapper around it. Um essentially they're just trying to make uh USD and the stakeable version SUSD accessible by Trapi. So, um, my guess, and you know, no information here, but I'm guessing that they're going to be releasing this sometime around, uh, the time when they release Converge, um, which is slated for Q2 of 2025. Um, so obviously this quarter. We'll see if that happens. Um, but, you know, supposedly they're on track. Um, the next product, uh, the next new product that they're, um, actually have already released is USDTB. So USDTB is their treasurybacked stable coin um which uh in the case of this this is generating yield um through its its uh reserves right which are effectively backed by treasury specifically with uh USDTB um Athena purchased around um I think a significant portion of the black rocks bidd upwards of 50 60% if I believe or if I recall correctly um and bidd reserve reserves, right, which those are backed directly by treasuries, um, account for 90% of USDTB's backing. The remaining 10% is a mix of stable coins. So, I think USDT and, uh, or yeah, USDT and USDC um, and they have some of those stable coins um, for the uh, just to allow people to uh, mint and redeem smoother um because it's just easier to mint and redeem with those stables than it is with Biddly. So um I think USDT is is really interesting because um or really I think it's interesting for a few reasons. So the first kind of clear and obvious reason is it's it's synergistic with um USD right? So um USD only generates yield or you know a significant amount of yield excess yield um when funding rates are high. So um if funding if you know if people are speculating on crypto funding rates move up um you know USD yield can can get anywhere from like you know 10 to 30% right I'd say even higher than 10% maybe 15 to 30% on average um kind of during bullish times in the market during bearish times it can compress all the way down to like sub 4% so below treasuries and then in some scenarios um you know even negative Right. And so we have seen USD yields go negative which um the stakers incur that loss directly. Um what Athena is actually doing is during uh bearish times they'll actually change the the mix of USD's reserves um to kind of soften that I guess like persistent negative funding rates. And obviously they're they're highly mean reverting. So you know negative funding rates aren't going to last for more than like a day or two max. usually even less than a day. Um it to to the tune of it actually directly impacting USD staking yields. Um but what Athena can do with USDTB is they can actually um as funding rates drop they can increase the amount of USD reserves um as or by adding USDTB um and that kind of provides a floor to the funding rate right so if USDTB is yielding effectively you know whatever like you know the typical 10-year Treasury is let's say around like 4% or you know short-term T bill let's say it's around like 3.94% um that effectively provides a floor on USD. So that that derrisks um USD right it it by adding that floor um and I guess it just you know gives it a more consistent yield and now Athena can do that with its own product right so I think that they're very complimentary um which which you know I think that's that's part of the part of the reason why they're trying to make converge is um I think that they're going to be able to create some really cool products by like mixing and matching um you know these different stable coin instruments you know you you put a purpose platform on there you know Ethereum you put an options platform on there derive and I think that there'll be some really cool products that come out that are a mix of all these um one of the biggest risks right now to converge is actually the um is the reg is the stable coin regulation that's coming out and um I mean now might be a good a good time to talk about it um you have the stable act and the genius act. The Genius Act is mostly bullish. That's going to enable uh I guess fully legalized stable coins um and make it so that they're not seen as securities. Um the stable act though is a little more bearish in its current form. Um and like Coinbase has pushed back on this and and the motion's been denied, but in its current form it would disallow yieldbearing stable coins. So um I think that would make sus a security but you know something like USDTB um obviously you know users won't be able to collect uh yield on it but um I think that USDTB by adding this to the product suite um which is effectively right like circle or tethers model um it just gives them another product that um is a that makes them a little more resilient to you if one of those stable coin acts comes out and um potentially has negative ramifications for USD. Um so that's USDTB. Um I think very bullish development currently sits around 1.5 bill TVL. Um and finally like the big thing that they're doing right is they're creating their own um chain um converge which they saying is going to come out in Q2 of this year. um converge. I think uh I think what's what's going to make it interesting obviously the the architecture is a little interesting. They're using a custom arbitrum sequencer and Celestia for data data availability. Um they believe that this combination is going to give them like really good scalability benefits and you know they're in an ongoing partnership with Arbitum to help kind of uh to customize this chain to to do exactly what they need. So, um, that's pretty interesting. But I I think the the thing that actually might make this different, right, than your just like, you know, your next typical run-of-the-mill L1 launch, um, or L2 launches, um, they're going to tie together both permission permissionless and permission apps together and make them all accessible from the same chain. And so, um, this is really important because to me, the largest user of DeFi is going to be Tradfi. And the only way that DeFi grows 10x is if Tradfi starts using it, right? Like there's only there's only so much retail in the world. Um, the vast majority of capital sits inside these massive banks, you know, asset managers, CSDs, FMIs, you know, etc., Right. And ultimately they're only going to be able to use these products if um if users can you know prove or verify that you know they are a you know actual person right like um as much as yeah as much as we want like you know fully permissionless capital markets and there will be an environment for that. um for a lot of the you know I at the end of the day governments are the ones that sets the rules and I I think that um I think that you know permission chains will be a thing right so um what they aim to do with converge and obviously they're partnered with secure ties um with this um they're going to move all of their products onto converge at launch so um they'll be around 10 10 billion in TVL right away you know between uh USD um USDTB and then um securitizes Apollo diversified credit fund ACRED. Um you combine all that and you know probably a couple more securitized products, you get 10 bill. So that's fantastic. Um but the the thing that I think is really interesting about Converge is that I think that um if they are able to kind of launch the compliance rappers on their stable coins so that TRDFI can start you know purchasing or um you know they could expand into other venues. I think that this could be a a massive growth factor and um the reason why is because um the vast majority of revenue that that Athena generates with with USDE um is effectively limited by the total open interest of uh crypto centralized exchanges, right? Uh perpetual futures exchanges um with the launch of the Bitcoin ETFs and obviously we have um CME futures as well. those have been around for quite a bit longer going back to um 2020 in uh bitcoins in in the case of bitcoin options um 2021 for bitcoin futures um actually the majority of bitcoin oi um and ethoi actually sits off centralized exchanges right um it's sitting in CME and uh and bitcoin um ETFs and you know options on the bitcoin ETFs so um CME futures um between you know Bitcoin futures options, ETH futures options which both are um coins that Athena delta hedges with um currently around you know just under 20 billion in open interest there um currently around 14.4 4 billion in open interest across all the uh Bitcoin ETFs that have options. So like IBIT, FB, FBTC, which is Fidelity's um ARCB which is uh ARC 21 shares um BitB which is Bitweises and BTC Grayscales Bitcoin mini trust um 14.4 billi. So um you combine those two together and it actually uh slightly eclipses the the total oi across all the um the exchanges that um Athena Delta Edge is on. So that's Binance, OKX, Bybit and Derbit. And so you know let's say they launch Converge and they have IUSD right and this now satisfies or you know let's say like back just back up. So the goal here would be right to drastically increase their revenue. They need more OI. There's all this OI sitting in CME and options. If they can start delta hedging there, then they could safely mint a bunch more USD um and significantly increase the TVL and revenue. Um in order though to delta hedge on those exchanges, right, they're going to need to be compliant with US regulations. So um you know my guess is that that's the that's the reason why they're making converge right if they can have if they can you know have IUSD which is backed by you know CME um and the opt and the ETF options and then you have SUSD which is backed by the crypto side of things you know it's effectively the same product um but the other ones are regulatory compliant and that's that's a massive market now that they go after. Um, so yeah, I think that this is all part of the plan for Athena. Um, and yeah, makes me makes me very uh makes me very bullish on them. Algoit 3.0 includes all the tools and open source resources you need to unleash the power and performance of the Algrand blockchain. Access a resilient network with instant finality, consistently high throughput and low fees, and layer 1 features like atomic swaps and native assets. No smart contracts required. Whether you're building D5 protocols, enterprise solutions, or nextG dabs, Algo Kit has all the tools you'll need to build faster, safer, and smarter. Start building with Algo Kit today by following the link in today's show notes. Ledger is the global leader in digital asset security, trusted by 7 million users, and securing 20% of the world's digital assets. In recent years, Ledger has built a comprehensive ecosystem of products and services, making digital ownership more secure and accessible for everyone. Ledger's newest devices, Ledger Stacks and Ledger Flex, introduced the world's first secure touchcreens, making it easier and safer to manage your transactions and assets. Alongside Ledger Stacks and Ledger Flex, they have also launched the Ledger Security Key app, offering a safer alternative to traditional passwords and enhancing your digital security. Follow the link into today's show notes to get started with Ledger today. I did want to comment on one thing because I I I do see this like becoming more and more of um a bigger ticket item it seems for the larger projects and businesses in the space is like we're seeing the continued like stepping stones into like these permissioned apps and the permissions space even Coinbase like they're experimenting with permission liquidity via unis swap v4 on base and I'm sure like in that scenario you can imagine you know they they have maybe you you know, KYC or maybe even like accredited investors or others like on their platform that they want to be able to allow them to use products on chain that are compliant and this is probably a piece of that. I guess the big question is like the regulations maybe shake up a lot of this, right? You sort of you went over that that piece around, you know, if yield bearing stable coins are kind of a no no, then like, you know, maybe they're a security, maybe they need to step through some additional hoops. I guess the hope at this point is with the sort of like pro crypto admin today, you know, you would maybe expect that like following the stable coin and you know, some market structure bills, you would maybe see some additional things that offer more clarity around like if something is actually a security like how to register it versus the prior um sort of environment where it was like, you know, get sued or yeah, you know, go out of business. Um and and maybe that's the goal, but it it seems some of those pieces are unclear today. Yeah, I don't think it's Yeah, you're you're absolutely right. It's not the end of the world if you know there's something comes out and says like all right, if your stable coin returns yield, it's not it's a security, which like I mean that to to some sense like that in to some degree that makes sense, right? Like if you have a tokenized basis basis trade that is you know tethered to a dollar because of the nature of the trade like that you know to me that's not a stable coin right that that's a tokenized you know basis trade right that's that's an actual strategy you have to a hedge fund yeah like you have to invest in a hedge fund that is promising you know that's saying they're going to make you money to invest in that. So, but right, if there's new regulation that comes out that says like, "Oh, yeah, this is fine. Come register it. It's it's a security. It's this type of security. It's fine." Then, you know, that that clears it up. Um, you know, that might slow down the adoption rate. Um, but right like my confidence in that happening is high. Um now if that occurs right the other risk that gets introduced is competition which leads to yield compression right so like right now Athena right now Athena looks at um the you know these new avenues for like it new avenues for growth and I I think that they're going this approach because like they've effectively tapped out like all that they can grow in the crypto market right like if they start expanding beyond 20% of all open interest they actually could destabilize the market, right? So, you know, we're actually Blockworks advisories on the risk committee. Um, and they've been part of research that effectively determined, right? Like you don't want to go above that 20% limit. Um, and so it's just yeah, like there's only so many people in the world that are going to go make a Binance or Bybit account and start, you know, longing on purpose, right? Like I'm sure everyone here has had that experience. you go do that for a month or two and you're a lot poorer and then you stop and then you just you know then you get comfy in spot. Um, right. I think, you know, unless you're a very sophisticated uh trader, um, really the only other way people use Perks, which I think is smart, is is hedging, right? Or running this type of delta neutral trade yourself. Um, you know, or if you're like a protocol and like, you know, you're shorting your own token um, as a way to like or before unlocks, but that that's another story. Um, right. But really, it's it's, you know, it's that funding trade. So, um I think that um yeah, I I think that that will be derisked, but also right like everyone in their mother wants to do this and I guarantee you um Trad is looking at like, you know, Tether's um revenue and going, you know, why can't we do that? And then the next thing they're going to go look at is a tokenized basis trade. So, I do think that there'll be a lot of competition, but Athena is the first mover mover. They're cryptonative. They they know how to do this. And so, you know, they I think that they'll have a leg up on the competition. Yeah, I think that's I think that makes a ton of sense. The one thing that I I see as like sort of um a risk in sort of the DeFi adoption that we see today of products like USD is that they've become very prominent within lending markets. um obviously due to the nature of you know them being yield bearing and you know the PTS available on like pendal markets for example as well and like I don't know you just you they've become very intertwined with both pendal markets and then like a lot of you know morpho for example you see both USD and also the pts um from pendle being used quite a bit um as collateral or as devices to earn yield on the deposits being put on those platforms and so it does make me wonder like you know if if it were to become true that you cannot have a yieldbearing um stable coin or even like funded fund token um on chain, it could totally shake up those dynamics. But um I guess we I guess we just have to be hopeful that the people uh advising on this bill are um you know incentivized to make that not happen. But yeah, I mean I think that they do it in a smart way, right? by like having USD separate from SUSD, right? Like you you kind of insulate USD a little from um you know you can still use USD which is fully backed by reserves or delta hedge positions and only if you stake it right that's when you're now taking the risk to get that yield. Um if you don't stake it right you're not taking that that risk. Um there's obviously DPEG risk which exists which is amplified the more that it's used in all these different pools. Um that is I don't want to say impossible to model but close to impossible to model accurately. Um and so right that'll always be a risk but there is no you know systematic death spiral you know Luna risk here that that mechanism is just just not at play right. Um it's it's an entirely different type of algorithm or it's a it's a different class of algorithmic stable coin, right? Um I wouldn't call it an algorithmic stable coin, but yeah, I agree. I mean, I I asked the team and they thought that regulation, you know, I said, "What what do you think the biggest risk is?" And you know, they they said probably regulation could slow them down the most if it came in pretty bad. Yeah. And and maybe the outcome is that, you know, markets that are permissionless today have to become and transition to being permission markets for the products that maybe end up getting deemed, you know, securities or whatever they have to do like registered as some type of special asset. But um yeah, it it's in the future. We'll we'll see how that plays out. Otherwise, I think great deep dive. Um we'll call it there on Athena. I thought that was really great. You went in super detail. We went in pretty good detail on both Helium and Athena. Um, going to change up the plan. Let's jump into AI for today to before we close things out. I'm curious. I'd say you guys are probably the the two prominent folks on the team that are keeping up the most with AI adjacent tech in the marketplace. Um, and I'm curious like what we're looking at. There was, you know, a few months back a ton of excitement, right? New models were coming out like deep research and all these things were popping up. there was the AI sort of meme agent craze. Um, and it's kind of died down quite a bit, especially as the market has uh contracted since, you know, beginning of the year, end of last year. Um, where are we sitting today? Like, what are the most exciting things that maybe people are not quite looking at yet? What are you guys thinking about? Yeah, I think a couple of things that I've been thinking about more broadly on the AI sector as it sits within crypto and maybe even just within distributed systems in general. Um the the primary narrative that I think I've I've been paying attention to is that the centralized AI can work at scale. It probably will. And I think different market catalysts, especially tariffs, may cause this to happen on a little bit of a shorter time horizon than we were expecting. But the players in these markets are primarily going to be existing data centers that are serving some sort of web 2 use case already and are looking to monetize idle compute. I think that's that's probably the most compelling thing about decentralized AI today is that you can kind of pivot on and pivot off as you increase or decrease scale in a primary business model. Uh, but I think this whole narrative of like we can train models with a whole bunch of gaming PCs distributed at a thousand houses is dying and and will die very soon. Um, that said, I think I'm still bullish on the sector as a whole, but decentralized AI projects need to scale into some sort of semblance with the efficiency that we're seeing in the web 2 sector for training and inference specifically. Um there are some new technologies coming out of Nvidia in terms of being able to train on distributed clusters but none of the web 3 projects are supporting this today. And overall I think web 3 projects really they need to provide either some sort of benefit in terms of savings or in terms of performance or maybe reliability over the existing solutions that exist today and I'm not seeing that anywhere across the sector currently. I don't know, Dan, do you have any thoughts on that? Yeah, so I'd say sticking on um compute and training, training and inference right now. Um and I know I know we talked about this like I I completely agree. Um right, I think when you look at these GPU marketplaces and maybe you know say you're a little disappointed with the growth um something that doesn't go mentioned is is reliability. um at any point during during like pre-training if like a single GPU goes down in the cluster like the entire training um will will stop and and get screwed up right like so you need you need everything to be super reliable um and then obviously you know you need a bunch of GPUs to do pre-training um and typically right I know you you brought up distributed training like um you know Google's doing a little like colllocated um data data center distributed stuff but all those data centers are within um 50 millisecond latency from each other. Um, yeah, typically to do pre-training you need low latency interconnects, meaning like you actually need all the GPUs to be like hardwired together. Um, and to be, you know, which means that they need to be in very very close proximity, right? Um, noose just raised 50 million from Paradigm, which I thought was interesting. Um, I I I'm, you know, I'm I'm definitely uh I'm I'm a little bullish on news. Um, I mean obviously like the whole space in general I'm I'm a little lukewarm on but you know just as you are Nick but um I do think what they're doing with their DRO optimizer which um the technology is based on an algorithm um written by one of the co-founders of Noose and also one of the co-founders of OpenAI. So like I I do think it's legit. there's something there like they were able to train a 13 billion model um 13 billion parameter model um relatively efficiently um but then right like to support what you were saying Nick like they used a combination of like a bunch of like tier 2 you know GPU cloud services right like a like a lambda and like some other people so I think right similar to like like why is helium successful like for any deepin thing to be successful like there fundamentally needs to be like a latent resource that people have that um they effectively have a zero opportunity cost um dynamic to contribute that resource to make money, right? It's like if you live in the middle of New York, you you can't build a cell tower there, but you can put up this router and start making money. Like you buy this thing and it starts printing for you, right? Like why wouldn't you do that? It needs to be easy. So if you have all these data centers that are you know their chips go out of date within 5 years and now like the the life cycle of these chips is accelerating or or the the lifespan of these chips is decreasing in an accelerating way. Um so it's getting shorter and shorter. So people have excess chips, they have potentially spare capacity and then at all the open um all the hyperscalers right they have backlogs multiple years because you know AWS is backlogged from enthropic Google you know Gemini is just using Google and then Microsoft's data centers are backlogged from open AI so um the AI labs are getting priority access so I do think that you know like we'll see like If DeepSeek R2 is like 95% of 03, I think that's going to be massive because I think 03 is, you know, it effectively saturated the benchmarks. Um, and you know, it doesn't look like a big increase, but I do think that the leap from 01 to 03 was significant. Um, specifically with tool use, like it actually feels like pretty close to like a general purpose assistant that is smarter than you and everything. It's pretty much there. So, yeah, between the dropping costs, um, people needing, you know, wanting to access the, you know, compute, it's backlogged somewhere else. There's excess chips. These second tier labs can buy them and, you know, or or take decommissioned chips and offer just like spare, you know, spare compute that they wouldn't sell anyways. And then you can connect all these into a single, you know, single network. Like I do think I I guess like I'm becoming more um I'm become I'm becoming more bullish on on that being like a real thing. Um I still think that there's there's time between now and then and I'm going to need to see like, you know, how big of a performance and how cheap are these are these new models going to get. But um yeah, I I do think that it's it's something feasible that that could happen. So um we'll see though. Like I up until I'd say up until maybe 3 to 6 months ago, I was pretty I was pretty bearish on the compute deep pins, but um I guess I'm I'm kind of warming up to to these new ones um as of recently. I think there's also kind of an angle here with something like double zero, right? like it. They're targeting blockchains today, but in the future could target a pretty wide variety of use cases. And something like D0ero access to private fiber 10 to 100 gigabit per second speeds could really change the distributed training landscape both within crypto and outside of crypto. Um, if data centers are already participating in deepin plays like double zero and are uh equipped with double zero hardware or maybe even redundant double zero hardware, they may be able to effectively enable training at a much wider number of data centers. That said, I still think it needs to occur within a data center, but something a project like NAS could theoretically take 10 tier 2 data centers that are zero enabled and be able to have them support the training of their next model and and hopefully that is the case in the coming years. I think that's a great point about the pivot. feel like we've actually seen similar it it's somewhat different but from like Bitcoin mining focused companies that have in the past maybe been entirely focused on that mission and then saw the opportunity to transition into like HPC or other like AI based compute or offer that as like a separate offering just based on the the infrastructure that they had for supporting you know tons of devices ton of energy output um it was there was sort of a natural fit there So, um, like you're saying, Nick, maybe there's an opportunity to kind of play in this field for now and perhaps like a a sort of lateral move into another opportunity might present itself in the future that like kind of keeps the wheels turning for a lot of these things. Have uh have any of you been following the new like the OpenAI updated 40 and um its personality kind of changed a little and people push back like you know now OpenAI has persistent memory so it tracks you know it it remembers everything you've ever you've ever told it um and you know I've seen people start discussing how the model instead of optimizing for maximum utility it actually starts learning you and starts optimizing for maximum engagement. Um, you know, like a social media app. And so to me, that's that's incredibly bullish. I mean, maybe maybe Elon and Grock, you know, maybe it's bullish Elon because uh maybe he keeps things neutral, but I mean really it's it's bullish decentralized um models, right? models that are um pre-trained and you can you know you or I mean whatever you could even just you know use like deepseek v1 like or whatever take the best open source model distill it and then you know you do decentralized um post training reinforcement learning on it to whatever optimize it for whatever use case you want and you know like this is the model you're getting it's not changing to you know to to make you more addicted to using it or whatever, right? Like this is the model. It's optimized for this use case and I know for a fact that this is how it was trained and this is how it will be. And so um yeah I think um if you know the the centralized model models you know kind of start moving towards you know I guess like yeah the same path that like social media went right and just trying to make it addicting and maybe potentially less useful then maybe there will be a mark you know an actual fundamental reason other than just saying oh it was trained in a decentralized way like there you know the decentralized models might actually start to produce better outcomes or have more utility. for you. So, um, that's something else that did occur in the last week that I thought was interesting. Yeah, I actually have been following it and I I've seen some comments that like, you know, Alman saying it it's a little crazier than they thought it was like a little unhinged even and like acting a bit like an unexpected responses almost for some people based on their interactions with it, which I find a little bit funny. Um it I think you do make a good point though like you know while I think everyone sort of expects and is believing that at some point there's like a path to profitability. Um I mean this is a clear lever right like Tik Tok makes a ton of money because they keep people on the platform. they, you know, have ads and sponsors and other things that like as long as somebody's scrolling like they're or or like via the marketplace and other like, you know, auxiliary things that they that they get cash flows from their their users on, um, they found an effective way to monetize monetize that platform, you know, just with the scaling and and the amount of usage that they have today and their their upfront costs like, you know, I think these these large AI AI teams are still quite far away from that like picture of like operating profitability. Um, so it wouldn't be surprising to see that be like a lever. Um, get people addicted and then find ways to add little monetization schemes into the design, whether that's like pay for additional special interactions or like some odd marketplace combinations or other things that they can figure out how to bake in. It could be embedded into the model, right? Let's say, you know, just to pick an arbitrary example like um you know, like I asked it, you know, I asked it the other day, like find me a recipe for like the best butter chicken, right? I mean, what if you have a cooking company, you know, pay it, say, hey, if someone searches this, like, you know, nudge them my way, right? And you know maybe like things that are like opinion based could start to get skewed by advertisers and in the back end that actually gets pushed through the into the training stage where the model will you know actually think that whereas like let's say use like a neutral decentralized model it might give you a different answer because it's just looking at consumer reviews or whatever right so yeah I think there's a million ways that they could they could monetize this and um yeah we'll we'll see I mean they're they're collecting all of our data and thoughts. So I think uh early movers in like the the AI training SEO space like if you can if you can optimize your website or your content to be better ingested or more relevant during training, uh you're going to see that data be much more prevalent in the responses from the model. And so interested to see how that plays out. I know a lot of people are thinking about it, but I'm I'm not sure anyone's doing it effectively quite yet. Um, other than decentralized training and and inference, do are there any other um I guess you know people just throw around the word agents, but are there any other than maybe those are there any like other use cases in DAI that uh that interest you? I think trading is one that a lot of people are trying to tackle whether it be kind of an autopilot like assistant for your trading or fully autonomous trading. I've messed around with a couple of these platforms, thrown a few USDC in or whatever, and and found that they can't even like outperform the uh every time I've thrown money into a decentralized trading system or an autonomous trading system, it has lost money on every trade, which is is really interesting. Um, I think part of that is that current AI models don't seem to have the strongest understanding of like understanding, ingesting, and making reasonable insights from market data. Whereas I think they can they can explain your current position. They have a hard time forecasting what'll happen next. Um, but I think there there are definitely avenues for agents to come back into the spotlight, but I I don't think it's going to be the same wave that we saw late last year with virtuals and Zero Bro and all the the agents that were flooding Twitter. It it really needs to be more focused. It needs to be more valuable. And I think that we within the next year will probably see some very useful agents come on the scene. I like that. I was um I was following the sort of like DeFi narrative for a bit as well and you know they were essentially like glorified generalized trading bots um a few months back but with limited traction and you know not making any money. Um, I do wonder if we'll see a return to that, but so far it seems that just, you know, teams that can sort of, you know, find targeted ways to incorporate AI features or like just add meaningful features into their applications. Like multi-product DeFi is a thesis that we have. Um, you know, the most successful teams are kind of tacking down tacking on extra verticals and like leaning into different revenue streams. I think these like very simple generalized attempts at just like putting the same chatbot interface in front of people and saying like yeah just type anything DeFi related and it will like do the action for you. I don't know that like users really want that open world of possibilities. It's it it's probably more likely that like you give them a similar interface but if you can bake in some of that behind the scenes but still on the front end it's like you know I have my buttons to do this that and the other thing. Um, I think they'll have to be a bit more smart and and you know, pointed about how to build those things um to see them get any meaningful traction, but we'll see. Um, awesome. I think this was a great conversation, guys. Um, we were able to talk through a ton of stuff and glad, Nick, to have you on for your first step. um going over Helium, the sort of big uh big, you know, narrative contender for all of DPIN, uh I think most would say. Um before we hop off, I guess, do you guys have any big takeaways? If it's about the markets, if it's about AI, if it's about Deepin, your favorite project, um what are we feeling going into the summer? Um, I I think um unfortunately I still think um macro uncertainty might be in the driver's seat a little bit um in terms of price action, but um yeah, I mean there's there's there's green shoots popping up, right? Like I think what what we've seen over the last month is that um there's always a desire to bid something and if the market shows signs of life like um you know there there will be green shoots and so um you know these are three categories like you know helium is a deepin leader Athena is a DeFi leader and now kind of like an R you know a leader in kind of like the RWA sector and and you know um you know there's some raises in in the crypto AI space. I think just staying close to close to the metal um and researching now because um yeah if there is some form of um certainty with respect to all the tariff stuff and macro clears up like I think that the market would be in in a great position to rip right and I think now is the time to um figure out the things that that you want to buy and accumulate so that you're you know you're ready for for when that occurs. So, um, if I had to guess, probably a slow slower summer like last summer, but, um, yeah, opp there's still a bunch of opportunities and this is the best time to to kind of put your, um, head, you know, head in get down the weeds and and do that research. Yeah, I think I'm I'm really looking for catalysts that are going to bring new people into crypto, not new capital, like new individual users, I guess, is a better way to put it, whether that be an institution or just a retail participant. Converge, like we talked about, fills that gap. I think there are quite a few use cases that are going to fill a similar gap, but generally not feeling incredibly bullish about markets right now. I think that in the near time horizon, there's going to need to be some sort of bullish catalyst to push us up to maybe not price-wise, but sentiment-wise to closer to, I think, what people expected for 2025. That said, I the the sectors that I'm tracking namely are going to be institutional adoption as well as just deepen in general. And I I expect to see in the coming months some interesting adoption in both of those from either large corporations or institutions who are looking for alternative avenues, especially as traditional financial markets continue to chop and be very uncertain. Love it. And I'm going to take a cop out here and say I'm excited for Permissionless coming up end of June. Uh June 24th through the 26th, 10% off, 0x10. The link is in the description. Buy some tickets. Come out. See the crew here. We'll talk to you about Deepend. We'll talk to you about Athena. We'll talk to you about I'll talk to you about trading bots, consumer apps, memes, whatever you want to talk about. Um and join the Telegram. Join the Xerox Research Telegram. The link, I think, should also be in the description. Um we have a lot of fun in there. Uh the research crew is in there. Tons of people from around the space. All of our favorites that that like to chat are in there. So, um, thanks so much for coming on, guys. It was a great chat today and we will see you all again next time. [Music]

========================================

--- Video 18 ---
Video ID: Md4dyEX28H8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Md4dyEX28H8
Title: Should VCs Benchmark Against Bitcoin? | Jon Charbonneau
Published: 2025-04-29 18:10:11 UTC
Description:
This week, we were joined by the Co-founder of DBA, Jon Charbonneau, to discuss Bitcoin's macro status, Ethereum's culture shift, and Solana's long-term growth risk.

In this clip, Jon gives his thoughts on whether crypto investors should benchmark their performance against BTC.

Full episode live on all major streaming platforms:

Apple🔊: https://apple.co/3Sh5p6d
YouTube📺: https://youtu.be/dMSHYjk3b8U
Spotify🔊: https://spoti.fi/42L22cF

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
Don, you brought up a Gore tweet. I'm also going to bring up a Gore tweet. Um, specifically the one with Hib. I don't know if you guys um watched that pod. They did a two-part pod. Um, and one of the things that they chatted about was that VCs should not benchmark to Bitcoin. Um, and this spurred up a lot of discussion on Twitter. I think liquid investors think that it should be benchmarked against BTC. I do see the point of having like a decorrelated asset. Like it's a decorrelated market. It's completely different. you shouldn't focus on BTC returns. Um John, I'm curious what you think. So, uh for I mean just for context for me, um I like knew I heard that this was a clip that got like sounded from it. I listened to the first podcast of the two um where they fought more over like kind of value capture and how to think about tokens. I didn't uh listen to the second podcast. Um but but understand the premise of the question. Um yeah, I mean my my general view is that I I don't think a benchmark against BTC is a thing that makes sense. Um and and I think what people like rightfully call out against that is like oh like can you guys even beat Bitcoin on a riskadjusted basis you know blah blah blah like that like all the conversation that follows from there and I think it's like a totally valid point and which is why I and I believe that his said this in the interview like at least based on replies is like why he and why also same for me is like yeah we like we tell LPs like if you want Bitcoin exposure like you should go buy Bitcoin like like I I hold Bitcoin that that is the majority of the crypto that I hold in my PA is it's just Bitcoin. Um but these are just like fundamentally different markets at this point. Yeah. Like if you if you want exposure to digital gold, macro asset, like all of these things um and uncertainty going ahead in the year like you should buy Bitcoin. And I mean it may also be sensible to have a manager do that for you. Um I mean I mean as part of a broader strategy slash if they are you know providing meaningful value on the timing of those and how to size those positions and think about that that like could be value but by and large I mean like I I recommend to most people like yeah if you want Bitcoin exposure like you should buy Bitcoin. Um this is just exposure to a different market you know like Bitcoin can go do its own thing but if you want upside to what is stable coin like what what is what are stable coins going to do for the economy going forward? like like is this going to revolutionize the way that like tech startups work? That's just a completely different exposure to you than does Bitcoin work as digital gold like it's very easy to see one of those thesis playing out in full and the other one just completely going to zero and vice versa. Um they're just like different areas at this point. So yeah, I I generally saw on what I assume was Seam's point, which is what I kind of gathered from their replies of like they probably shouldn't be. Um, generally the benchmark it's probably something like some basket of alts, which is I like I think a reasonable benchmark of like are you beating a a weighted average benchmark of ETH and Soul and B&B and like whatever and all of these other tokens like that is what I think that you're actually trying to get exposure to with uh kind of the venture investments. Yeah, I think that makes sense.

========================================

--- Video 19 ---
Video ID: dMSHYjk3b8U
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dMSHYjk3b8U
Title: Bitcoin’s Macro Status, Ethereum’s Cultural Reset, and Solana’s Growth Risk | Jon Charbonneau
Published: 2025-04-28 20:02:22 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Co-founder of DBA, Jon Charbonneau, to discuss the current state of venture and liquid markets, Bitcoin’s evolving narrative, and whether crypto VCs should benchmark against BTC. We also cover Solana and Celestia’s long-term prospects, Ethereum’s scaling challenges, and broader changes in crypto culture.Thanks for tuning in!
As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!

Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: ⁠https://x.com/dYdX⁠
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Jon: https://x.com/jon_charb
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to the 0xResearch Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: ⁠https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh⁠
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:17 Thoughts on Venture and Liquid Markets
9:01 Should VCs Benchmark Against BTC?
11:47 Outlook on Celestia and Solana
21:48 Tokenizing Everything
24:23 SVM Chains & Firedancer
33:37 dYdX Snippet
37:24 Monad vs MegaETH
40:56 Does the L1 Premium Still Exist?
46:08 Scaling the Ethereum L1
54:45 Ethereum's Culture Shift
1:08:50 Closing Comments
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 20 ---
Video ID: KxYSASxlUng
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KxYSASxlUng
Title: Is Bitcoin Decoupling? | Round Table Clip
Published: 2025-04-22 16:53:01 UTC
Description:
This week, our Blockworks Research analysts sat down to discuss crypto's most pressing question: is Bitcoin decoupling?

Full episode live on all the major streaming platforms:
Apple🔊: https://apple.co/42m520i
YouTube📺: https://youtu.be/8UX-3lOSTRE
Spotify🔊: https://spoti.fi/3YaMxtj

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 21 ---
Video ID: 8UX-3lOSTRE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8UX-3lOSTRE
Title: Can Zora’s Model Work? | Round Table
Published: 2025-04-22 08:00:12 UTC
Description:
In this episode, the 0xResearch crew dives into Bitcoin’s potential decoupling from US equities, the rise of Zora’s controversial content coin model, and the implications of its “for-fun” token. They also explore app vs. chain revenue dynamics, and the evolving role of “fat apps” in capturing value across crypto ecosystems.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Accelerate your app development on Algorand with AlgoKit 3.0—now with native TypeScript and Python support, visual debugging, and seamless testing. Build, test, and deploy smarter with tools designed for speed and simplicity. 

Start building with AlgoKit today: https://algorand.co/algokit?utm_source=blockworkspodcast&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=algokit3&utm_id=algokit3&utm_term=algokit3
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Westie: https://x.com/WestieCapital
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to the 0xResearch Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:05 Is Bitcoin Decoupling?
7:33 Can Zora's Model Work?
18:39 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
19:19 Are People Going to Pay For Content?
34:23 Ads (Algorand & Ledger)
35:26 Zora Announces Their Token
46:43 App Revenue is Growing Faster Than REV
56:49 Closing Comments
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 22 ---
Video ID: 5092_Dd_R5U
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5092_Dd_R5U
Title: How Ethena is Redefining Digital Finance | Guy Young
Published: 2025-04-21 08:00:12 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Guy Young , Founder at Ethena Labs, to discuss the rapid growth of USDe, the design of their new products like USDtb, and the launch of Converge and Ethereal. He shares insights on stablecoin infrastructure, institutional adoption, risk management, and Ethena’s broader vision to bridge DeFi with TradFi.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Converge Technical Specification & Roadmap: https://x.com/convergeonchain/status/1912853619038461967
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!

Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: https://x.com/dYdX
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Converge: https://x.com/convergeonchain
Follow Ethereal: https://x.com/etherealdex
Follow Guy: https://x.com/gdog97_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to the 0xResearch Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:45 Recent Product Launches
5:33 Asset Issuance on Converge
11:20 Scaling Ethena
13:12 Considering New Assets For Staking Yield
15:25 Dealing With Risk
17:34 USDtb's Place in the Ethena Ecosystem
21:52 Overview of Ethereal
24:47 Converge DApps
28:47 Credit Expansion and Associated Risks
31:34 dYdX Snippet
39:12 Will Ethereal Harm Relationships With Exchanges?
41:17 Protocols Hardcoding USDe to 1$
44:25 USDe's Competition
46:10 The Biggest Risks to Ethena
48:14 The Fee Switch
52:18 Ethena's Focus Going Forward
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 23 ---
Video ID: vf8O_YWJUNg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vf8O_YWJUNg
Title: Crypto & TradFi Crossover Products | Round Table Clip
Published: 2025-04-17 17:34:28 UTC
Description:
This week, our Blockworks Research analysts sat down to discuss the rise in crossover products such as Kraken's rollout of US equity trading, and Nasdaq's plans for 24/5 trading. Enjoy!

Full episode live on all the major streaming platforms:
Apple🔊: https://apple.co/3Y3GdUq
YouTube📺: https://youtu.be/aLHjhLPRHzA
Spotify🔊: https://spoti.fi/42Nub3X

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
The other sort of thing that's kind of making its way through these different platforms now is Kraken announced their roll out of US equity trading. Um so we're kind of seeing the reverse now where you know I think there's a lot of expectation for you know trady institutions and brokerages to offer like crypto services. Now we're seeing the inverse where you know crypto focused um trading platforms are offering you know equities and like more brokerage-l like features which is interesting. I'm curious if you guys have any like big takeaways there. I know we've talked recently about this idea of like trading stocks on chain. I guess the big question is like does that matter if you know all of these crypto platforms are going to offer their own you know equities trading and and other market trading just on their platforms alongside the crypto. A quick take I think it's the same thing. We we talked about this before, but like to get access to equities, it's already relatively easy in the US. And then maybe you're trying to branch into like a wider market like with crypto, like young crypto holders who maybe don't own any equities. Um but at the end of the day it's you know onchain I mean Kraken and stuff is still going to be limited to certain markets for the US stocks whereas onchain I guess anybody around the world with a wallet can purchase these um like from packed or whatever can purchase these um chains. I think it's more like, you know, we and we a few weeks ago we also talked about um NASDAQ looking to go like 24/7 or 245 with their trading and I think just as as the demand for like 247 global access grows um you know it doesn't matter where you are you know you want like a seamless all-in-one trading app you know to have everything in one nice package. So I think you know for Kraken and probably some of the others it's um you know expanding into equities is like a natural step for them and but I think it you know more excitingly it but it like paves the way for tokenized assets on that platform. So even though it might seem like oh these you know centralized exchanges are coming to eat the lunch of onchain equities they can actually be the gateway that opens up more tokenized assets to the masses. Yeah that's that's also my thing. I think um whenever sexist start doing something then I imagine that more and more decks will focus on listing those assets on their I guess not listing because it's mostly permissionless but for purpes listing for regular dexes it might just be that more pe more people want to tokenize it. Um I think you probably want to focus on I know we mentioned Kroken and I've historically said that Coinbase is slow. I think you probably want to focus on Coinbase in this scenario though. Um because they have base, I imagine they're going to try and onboard as many equities as they can. And tech like on the technical side, it makes sense. Um they hold a lot of the USDC for Coinbase on base. So it should like they I assume they already have a process for accounting and um ensuring that this works out. So they it should be relatively um trivial for them to make this happen. If they actually do make it happen over the next year, we'll see. I like I said um they tend to take their time, but we'll see. For for me, the main takeaway is like the convergence between like fintech and crypto. Like there's been talk over the past year of Robin Hood competing with Coinbase and other crypto platforms. And I think these cements like this convergence where Robin Hood was like venturing into crypto more and more and now you see centralized exchanges venturing on the trady side with stocks and ETFs and stuff like that. So I think over time you will see both of these platforms kind of having the same offerings and competing on the same ground. Uh and my other takeaway is just what what what does this mean for platforms like backed finance who offer like tokenized stock like for instance backed offers tokenized coin on base like if coin bears if if Coinbase starts offering like tokenized coin like what does this mean for packed like do they still have a n do they become like um like are their services no longer needed?

========================================

--- Video 24 ---
Video ID: aLHjhLPRHzA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aLHjhLPRHzA
Title: Crypto Meets TradFi: The New Convergence | Round Table
Published: 2025-04-17 08:00:01 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts cover shifting macro conditions, the growth of tokenized gold, Solana’s rising institutional interest, and the evolving overlap between crypto and traditional finance. They also examine airdrop mechanics, critique Berachain’s approach, and debate what trends will define the next two years.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Berachain Dashboard: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/analytics/berachain?dashboard=bera-overview

Kaito Connect Post: https://x.com/KaitoAI/status/1912160810329112899
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Carlos: https://x.com/0xcarlosg
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to the 0xResearch Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:03 Macro Larping
11:28 Ledger Ad
11:44 Crypto and TradFi Crossover Products
20:15 Solana's Institutional Mindshare
30:18 Ledger Ad
30:51 Yapdrops & Airdrop Mechanisms
49:22 What's Going on With Berachain?
1:07:28 Predictions For the Next Two Years
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 25 ---
Video ID: zQU-vlFGEIc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zQU-vlFGEIc
Title: Why USDT is the Best Stablecoin | Paul & Zaheer
Published: 2025-04-15 15:49:27 UTC
Description:
This week, we were joined by Paul Faecks and SplitCapital to discuss all things Plasma! 

Full episode is live on all the major streaming platforms:
Apple🔊: https://apple.co/4ib9hjP
YouTube📺: https://youtu.be/8Zd_MTSFojQ
Spotify🔊: https://spoti.fi/44lZ8gT

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 26 ---
Video ID: 8Zd_MTSFojQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Zd_MTSFojQ
Title: Building the Future of Global Payments | Paul & Zaheer
Published: 2025-04-14 08:00:18 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Paul Faecks, the Founder of Plasma, and Zaheer of Split Capital, to discuss Plasma, a blockchain focused solely on providing stablecoin infrastructure. We dive into why general-purpose chains aren’t optimized for stablecoin settlement, Plasma’s architecture and how they will mitigate spam, and the broader implications for global payments, regulation, and the stablecoin economy’s future as trillions move onchain.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!

Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: https://x.com/dYdX
--
Follow Plasma: https://x.com/PlasmaFdn
Follow Paul: https://x.com/pauliepunt
Follow Zaheer: https://x.com/SplitCapital
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to the 0xResearch Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:34 Why Build Plasma?
10:24 The PMF For Stablecoins
14:53 Plasma's Architecture
21:50 HotStuff-Inspired Consensus
25:17 dYdX Snippet
31:40 Zero Fees and Handling Spam
39:55 Competing With Tron
46:06 Variations of Stablecoins
50:59 Why Build on Bitcoin?
52:13 The Stablecoin Space Going Forward
1:04:52 Closing Comments
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 27 ---
Video ID: ksLf0zIKNO8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ksLf0zIKNO8
Title: Diving Into the PumpFun Data | Round Table Clip
Published: 2025-04-10 15:25:08 UTC
Description:
This week, our Blockworks Research analysts sat down to take a look at PumpFuns activity after the launch of PumpSwap, and their ongoing competition with Raydium. Enjoy!

Full episode live on all the major streaming platforms:
Apple🔊: https://apple.co/3XPA3qQ
YouTube📺: https://youtu.be/MuFemXLq6zk
Spotify🔊: https://spoti.fi/4jw1D4S

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 28 ---
Video ID: MuFemXLq6zk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MuFemXLq6zk
Title: Raydium vs PumpFun: Who Owns the Users? | Round Table
Published: 2025-04-10 08:00:19 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we explore PumpFun’s competition with Raydium, frontend design as a competitive moat, Solana’s share of network REV and application revenue, Ethereum’s ongoing scaling and governance challenges, and Bitcoin’s correlation to the stock market.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

PumpSwap Data: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1905691039912087660

Fluid Dashboard: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1908165062650675637

PumpFun Dashboard: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/analytics/pumpfun

Bitcoin March 2025 Update: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/flashnotes/bitcoin-march-2025-update

Solana March 2025 Update: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/flashnotes/solana-march-2025-update
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Carlos: https://x.com/0xcarlosg
Follow Jacob: https://x.com/0xSharples
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to the 0xResearch Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:34 The Decoupling Narrative
6:43 Outlook For Crypto Majors
10:57 Ethereum's Struggles
15:27 Ledger Ad
15:43 Solana's REV Share
21:21 Diving into the PumpFun Data
30:31 Ledger Ad
31:04 Who Owns the End User?
37:34 Incentivizing User Behavior
47:15 PumpFun vs Raydium: What's Next?
52:01 New Opportunities Going Forward
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 29 ---
Video ID: gv7VX6qW9n8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gv7VX6qW9n8
Title: Hating on Crypto (With Love) | Felix Jauvin & James Christoph
Published: 2025-04-07 08:00:39 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Felix Jauvin, Host of the Forward Guidance podcast, and James Christoph, a guy from our Telegram group, to dive into current crypto market positioning, stablecoin monetization, and Hyperliquid’s HLP. We also discuss institutional interest in DeFi tokens, crypto’s split token-equity dynamic, risks for Ethena and Pendle, pumpfun's staying power, and why Robinhood may outcompete Coinbase.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow James Christoph: https://x.com/JamesChristoph_
Follow Felix: https://x.com/fejau_inc
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to the 0xResearch Newsletter: ⁠https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:00 Current Crypto Positioning
9:42 Who is Buying Defi Tokens?
16:49 Crypto's Split Equity & Token Dynamic
21:09 Stablecoins Are Booming
28:08 Thoughts on Ethena and Pendle
36:07 What Happened to Hyperliquid?
48:08 Looking at Pumpfun Data
57:47 Robinhood vs Coinbase
1:04:43 Crypto Needs Undercollateralized Lending
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/0xresearch
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 30 ---
Video ID: aN88BWrOIOQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aN88BWrOIOQ
Title: The Stablecoin Boom: Why Institutions Are Betting on Stablecoin Growth | Round Table
Published: 2025-04-03 08:00:00 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts are back from DAS NYC to unpack Q1’s market volatility, institutional sentiment around crypto, and the growing stablecoin landscape. They also explore regulation such as the GENIUS Act, and how retail can position amid shifting market dynamics. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Luke: https://x.com/0xMether
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:29 Market Thoughts
7:45 Takeaways From DAS NYC
21:02 Ledger Ad
21:18 The GENIUS Act & Stablecoin Fragmentation
32:01 Ledger Ad
32:34 Thoughts on Plasma
36:01 Playing the Stablecoin Boom
51:04 Big Picture Outlook
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 31 ---
Video ID: zXjEQk7m8zg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zXjEQk7m8zg
Title: Live From DAS: Do VCs Still Matter? | Haseeb Qureshi & Mike Dudas
Published: 2025-03-31 08:00:45 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Haseeb Qureshi, and Mike Dudas debate whether VCs still matter in crypto. They unpack the rise of meme coins, crowd sale platforms, and the challenges of sustainable token models—while defending the evolving role of VCs as long-term partners in the ecosystem.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Haseeb: https://x.com/hosseeb
Follow Mike: https://x.com/mdudas
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:10 Why VCs Don't Matter
3:27 Counter Arguments
13:34 What is a Valid Criticism of Good VCs?
16:52 Is There Too Much Crypto Infrastructure?
26:01 Thoughts on Memecoins
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 32 ---
Video ID: NqDGC5WCNz0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NqDGC5WCNz0
Title: Live From DAS: Tokenizing the World - Institutions Enter the Arena | Carlos & Marc
Published: 2025-03-28 08:00:18 UTC
Description:
Live from DAS 2025, Carlos and Marc from Blockworks Research join us to dive deep into the evolving world of tokenization and real-world assets. We explore institutional adoption, private credit dominance in RWAs, permissioned blockchains, and the future of stablecoins.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Follow Carlos: https://x.com/0xcarlosg
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:23 Why Are RWAs Mostly Private Credit?
6:11 Getting Exposure to RWAs
9:09 Permissioned Blockchains
15:46 Crypto's Institutional Transition
20:34 DAS Takeaways
24:41 Getting Exposure to Stablecoin Growth
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 33 ---
Video ID: QcS7EFOjMAE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QcS7EFOjMAE
Title: Live From DAS: Is PumpFun’s Peak Behind Us? | Round Table
Published: 2025-03-27 08:00:17 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we discuss the evolving landscape of institutional crypto adoption. We explore differences in investment focus between traditional institutions and crypto natives, the sustainability of memecoin activity, and the competitive positioning of DeFi protocols like Aave. The conversation also touches on emerging blockchain ecosystems and the broader implications of regulatory shifts on market structure.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Doing your crypto taxes doesn’t have to suck. Say goodbye to tax season stress with Crypto Tax Calculator - built for degens like you: 3,000+ integrations to support all your wallets, exchanges, and on-chain activity with deep integrations into dApps & smart contracts. A custom pricing oracle to handle even the most chaotic portfolios. Full support for IRS rules and accurate, CPA-endorsed tax reports. 

Generate reports your accountant will love or file directly yourself. Create an account. Import your wallets and exchanges. Review and download your tax report. 

Get started today and make tax season easy! You can use our exclusive discount code BW2025 to enjoy 30% off all paid CTC plans until April 15th, 2025.  

Follow this link to get started: https://cryptotaxcalculator.io/us/?coupon=BW2025&utm_source=blockworks&utm_medium=podcast&utm_campaign=0x
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! Use Code 0x10 at checkout for 10% off!

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:12 DAS Vibes
4:02 What Are Institutions Investing In?
8:20 Ledger Ad
8:36 How Do Decentralized Exchanges Compete?
10:22 Is Aave Fumbling Their Lead?
18:53 Ads (Ledger & CryptoTaxCalculator)
19:58 Did PumpFun Activity Peak?
31:39 Betting On Two Chains Going Forward
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 34 ---
Video ID: DLeCDmTIFI0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DLeCDmTIFI0
Title: Live From DAS: The Return of Bitcoin-Backed Lending | John Glover
Published: 2025-03-26 08:00:09 UTC
Description:
This episode of 0xResearch explores Bitcoin-backed lending with John Glover, CIO of Ledn. He discusses why Bitcoin is an ideal collateral, how risk management helped Ledn survive market collapses, and the growing demand for Bitcoin-backed loans globally. The conversation also touches on DeFi lending, regulatory challenges, and Ledn’s plans for expanding funding options.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! 

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow John: https://x.com/john_w_glover
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:07 Why Use Bitcoin as Collateral?
2:11 Implementing Proper Risk Management
5:09 Bitcoin-Backed Loans vs Traditional Loans
7:07 Borrowing Activity
11:38 Loan Risk Methodology
12:53 Offering Loans on Other Digital Assets
16:39 Looking Forward
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
I think really what we're working on is not to do anything that's groundbreaking. We're just working on bringing more traditional finance type products into this industry. Um, and doing that in a very simple way. We we've we're big believers that the best restaurants have the smallest menus. We're trying to be very focused on being the best Bitcoin back lender into the space. Nothing said on Zox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is forformational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Pokio, Ryan, and our guests may hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed. Okay, John, let's just kick it off quickly. Quick intro about yourself. Quick intro about Letin. Sure. My name is John Glover. I'm the CIO of Letin. Uh, Leen is a first and foremost a lender of dollars against Bitcoin uh and ETH collateral to the retail sector globally. Um, but we also on the other side of that need to fund that book. So, we are also a very big borrower of dollars backed by Bitcoin. Perfect. Let's let's just start it simple, right? Why Bitcoin? What what makes Bitcoin this pristine collateral for this kind of job? Well, I come from uh many many years in Tradfi as a lot of us do and uh when I look at the collateral that we were accepting when I was in the banking world, they were things like tea bills or stocks or other uh asset classes that had distinct trading hours. So, they were open from, you know, 9:30 to 4:30 Monday to Friday, no holidays, closed on weekends, closed in the evenings. Um, and so you had price gap risk and when you're accepting that as collateral and you have a liquidation threshold, you've got this gap risk that you know someone you've got Tesla stock that you've taken as collateral and Elon does something crazy over the weekend and Tesla opens 10% lower and now you're exposed to this this potential loss. Um, so Bitcoin has 247 365 markets, very very deep and growing liquidity. Um, so you just don't have that exposure to uh, you know, something going wrong when you're sleeping and the market's closed, you know. Yeah. Okay, perfect. Makes sense. So, how about you give us a more holistic view of the Bitcoin lending space in general, how we've come from a couple years ago from the, you know, the Celsiuses and the Blockfires of the world to where we are now. Yeah, I mean, it's been a really interesting journey, especially for, you know, for someone who already had a lot of gray hair to start. I've got a lot more since I got here. But um so when when I joined uh Leen, I was I was hired to help with the risk management of the firm. Um and when I looked at what some of our competitors were doing, it was really concerning to me. Um because they were paying yield on tokens that didn't have an institutional lending market. So there was no way to generate yield on the tokens that they're paying yield on. Um, we saw we were approached by people like Three Arrows Capital to lend them money, but they wouldn't share financial statements. They wouldn't they weren't transparent at all about their uh their creditworthiness. So, we didn't lend to them, but our competitors were. So, there were a lot of concerns that I had in the the way the market was growing. Um, and I've got just this little anecdote to tell. Um, there we had a board meeting where one of the board members said, "Why is Leen not as big as BlockFi?" And I said, 'I have no idea how they're as big as they are because we're growing as quickly as we can and they're growing 10 times faster. They can only be doing that through taking risk. Um, and then it was like eight months later that everything blew up and Blockby went out of business and we remained in business because we just did not I'm not even saying it was groundbreaking risk management. It was just traditional smart risk management in credit underwriting, in market exposure, in making sure that we were very transparent to our clients and what they were doing in protecting our own balance sheet and protecting our clients assets. And so we were able to survive. But what happened when Celsius and BlockFi and Genesis and Voyager all went bankrupt is trust left um for a long time. And so we suffered from that because people thought that we may be the next BlockFi. So we saw our uh retail loan book go from about I think at the time it was around 300 million in outstanding loans to about 45 million because people just paid back their loans because they were nervous about losing their collateral like you know some others did at Blockfire Genesis or um uh Celsius. And so it was a matter of building back up that trust. Um, and also we knew that since we survived and we did things the right way, as long as we could stick around long enough for the wave to come back in that we would do well. Um, and so what happened in March of last year when everything kind of took off again, uh, we saw our loan book grow and we're now almost double what our maximum loan book size was prior prior to the, uh, the events of FTX and and Alamade, etc. So, it's been very good. Been very good. It's always sad to hear and it's a very common theme in the space where the bad actors, malicious or otherwise, end up taking down the rest of the space with them, especially reputational wise. But, um, let's dive a little bit deeper. So, how does your Bitcoin back loans differ from a traditional loan that most of us are used to here? Um, really not that different from, you know, we're not trying to reinvent uh the wheel here. We're just trying to bring traditional financial products into the digital asset space. And it's very easy from a North American perspective to just go, well, you know, if you need money, why don't you just borrow it from the bank? Um, well, first off, we've got a lot of clients who are really digital asset rich, but don't have a lot of real world assets or even really high incomes. Um, and they can't borrow against their Bitcoin collateral at a traditional institution. So, that's a big portion of our book. But, it's just like taking out a loan against your car or against your a mortgage against your house. You're just taking out a mortgage against your Bitcoin. Um and then if we look at you know our Latin American client base which is quite a large portion of our of our exposure um they don't have access to traditional financial institutions period even if they have other assets they just can't borrow against them because that's really for the wealthy in some of those countries and so that's another place they come to let to access their to unlock some of the wealth that they have in their Bitcoin just to pay bills or to buy a car or to pay for the kids' education or to go on holiday or in North America to start a business or to buy a house etc. So um it's really to go to your question of how does it differ from traditional lending products it really isn't different but it does have that pristine nature of the collateral. So it's quite a safe uh it's quite a safe lending protocol. Okay, that makes sense. It's not it's not a different loan process. It's more that the collateral itself is more inclusive permissionless global. Okay, makes sense. But and a faster loan process, right? And 24/7 transparent, right? And okay, so on that note, who So you you mentioned Latin America, let let's talk more about your customers like who who else are there? Is it is it institutions, hedge funds, retail, and like what what are the typical loans that they're coming to you for? What are the purposes of this? Yeah, let's just tackle that. So we we've got a number of different kind of cohorts of of lender of borrowers at Lein. So we have our minimum loan size is $500. So we are retail focused primarily. Our average loan size is around somewhere under $50,000 but we have you know tens of thousands of these loans outstanding. Um we also have loans up to I think our highest loan right now is 5 million or $7 million in in notional. So it's a lot of high net worth individuals. It's a lot of retail clients. We have some corporate clients now that have treasury that they want to borrow against. they want to put that to work. Um, and they are in I think 122 countries around the world. So, it's very diverse. Uh, you asked about use cases. It's kind of what I was talking about. It's to pay for their kids' education. It's to, uh, you know, rent a bigger apartment. It's to buy a car, go on a vacation, in some cases, buy property, or to invest in other asset classes. So, take out a dollar loan and invest it into traditional asset classes. And then with these customers, are they how long is these typical loans? Are they repeat customers? Are they coming off other services? Like can you go more into that? Sure. So our all of our loans are a one-year term, but you can repay at any time without penalty because consumer lending laws require that. Um our average loan duration is around 160 days. Um but we have loans that are much longer. Some people will just renew their loan every year um because they still have need of the asset and their value of their collateral keeps going up so they can take more loans against the collateral that they have. Um so it's really it's really varied but we do see um our average client takes out about 1.3 loans per year. So even those that are getting paid back they tend to take out another loan later in the year as they need it. And is that is that growing? Is that number trending upward? 1.3. Um it has been growing um which is great. because we want to make sure that our clients are getting as much utility as possible as they can, but also as I mentioned, as the value of their collateral goes up, they've got additional collateral they can take out a loan against. So, they'll add to their loan balance by just taking out a second loan against the existing collateral that they have. Okay. Very interesting. So, how how are you funding the both how is it being funded? The demand side of this and the supply side. So, I said we've got kind of two facets of our business. We have the retail side, which is really where the vast majority of our dollars go to the retail lending, but we need to fund that. So, we have a couple methods that we can fund. We have growth accounts. We call them growth accounts. It's like a savings account. Um, where you can put USDC or USDT on deposit with us and we'll pay you a yield for that. The way we generate that yield is lending to our retail clients in an over collateralized basis. That's one small source of funding. It used to be quite large when we could offer that in the US and Canada. We can't do that uh anymore. So we that's only maybe maybe 15% of our book is funded through that. Um the rest of our book is funded through bilateral loan agreements with larger players that are um wholesale lenders into the space. So we overcolateralized to them with Bitcoin and we use that to fund our retail loan book. Um, one name that's public that we can talk about is Signum Bank out of Switzerland. They did a syndicate the the world's first syndicated Bitcoin back loan uh was done for us and so that's one of our sources of funding and we have other counterparties like that. And and you mentioned you're not allowed to do those similar loans in the US and Canada anymore. The savings accounts can't offer savings accounts. Yeah. Do you expect that to change anytime soon given this new administration? I would I would think that it probably will change. Um, and you know, hopefully it does because it gives people access to higher yield on their dollars. Um, we had there's a ratings agency in the crypto space called AIO ratings. We had them rate our business. They rated us at A minus, which is like investment grade. Um, so it gives people confidence that this is a safe way to generate yield on their dollar. So hopefully we'll be able to offer that again in the US at some point. And I assume when they did this this rating this methodology, they looked at your I guess your risk methodology, how you would require rebalancing of collateral based on LTV. Is it can you go a little bit more into into this risk methodology that you have? Sure. So all of our retail loans start at a 50% LTV. So if you want to borrow $100,000, you need to put on deposit with us $200,000 worth of Bitcoin. Um, once that LTV hits 70%, our clients get an automatic notification that their loan is getting into liquidation territory. So, you may want to add more collateral or pay down part of your loan, but get that into a healthier territory. Um, all of our loans are uh they're measured for uh LTV every 60 seconds, 247. As soon as that LTV hits 80%, we liquidate their collateral in a sufficient amount to repay the principal and acred interest. The loan gets repaid. The balance of the uh Bitcoin collateral is then given back to the client. Um we've done $1.2 billion worth of uh retail loans um across I think 57,000 or 60,000 individual loans. And we've never lost a penny or Satoshi on any of the loans because of that methodology. I never lost a Satoshi. That should be that should be the slogan there. That's a great track record. Um, okay, that's great. Coming up on time, I want to circle back to the first question, right? Bitcoin as the pristine asset. You all are Bitcoinbacked lender. Let me ask this in a kind of funny way. Are you all Bitcoin maxis? Do you all see yourself offering these similar products on any other asset besides Bitcoin? Perhaps Ethereum, perhaps something else later down the line? What are your thoughts there? Um, first off, I wouldn't say that we're all Bitcoin maxis, although we do have some Bitcoin maxis in the company for sure. Um, but uh, no, I think we we're all uh we're all big believers in digital assets, very big believers in Bitcoin, um, but more believers that we should be able to level the financial playing field around the world and give people access to financial products. To your question on will we accept other assets as they'd rather do that than post it as collateral. So they're happy to keep their Bitcoin intact. Um they don't want to wrap it and put it onto DeFi. They just rather keep it intact posted as collateral and borrow against that. No, that makes sense. I mean for Bitcoin, there's no as of yet there's no Bitcoin DeFi. There's no way that you can trustlessly just put your asset and earn yield in it. So I mean Ethereum, there's some alternatives. For your Ethereum product though, do you have different loan to value ratios? Is it is it more volatile? Is it the same exact Yeah. No, it's all the same. We plug it into our same technology and uh as I said we've never had a loss from that. The the volatility of Ethereum is not high enough to concern us that our tech's not correct for that. And then in a similar vein in the future I mean there's teams working on Bitcoin DeFi right through these L2s through these other chains. Do you do you see that will create more demand in general for Bitcoin lending? Do you see this as a competitor? I mean how do you view that? Well, I mean already there is there's competition from DeFi lending. We think that it's very different subset of clients who are interested in that. I think once if Bitcoin truly can be used onchain as collateral in the DeFi space without changing its formation. So without wrapping it, without having to bridge to another protocol, um I think that will open up more uh demand and there will be people who would rather do it in that fashion. I think the the difference from a CFI lending perspective and the clients that deal with us is they want to make sure that it's uh that there is AML KYC and then they're not going to fall foul of any kind of regulatory or tax implications. So I think there's a place for both. Um but we'll see when that really develops and we'll see how it works out. Also you give me giving me your thoughts here. I think another hindrance with DeFi lending is that the rates are all variable and they can change as quickly as the cryp crypto markets change on a weekly basis. So I I don't know if you have thoughts on that. Yeah, for sure. I know there are some uh there's some projects that are being worked on for fixedterm fixed rate uh lending that's going on now. That's really just more of a a matching book and find people who are willing to borrow at those rates and lend at those rates. Um yeah, variable rate is definitely challenging for people. People want the certainty of knowing exactly what they're going to have to pay month- on-month if they have to. By the way, you don't have to pay monthly interest to us. It's all bullet payment at the end. Um, which is one of the big differences with ourselves and our competitor. But people want to know that um get that certainty. So, I think that until that market develops more, there'll be more demand probably for the CFI space where it's fixed. So, when you borrow from us, you know exactly what your interest rate is. you can pay that back whenever you like, but you know that for the next year that interest rate is not changing. Okay. And last question here. What are the um what are the big plans Linen has over the next year? You know, what are you what are you bringing to the space? Well, we're do we're we've got some plans on the funding side, which um I I'll be excited to announce when it's done, but it's we're not there yet because one of the biggest challenges for everyone in this space is access to dollars. And I think the last panel talked about that a little bit. We've developed some really great funding relationships with really strong partners, but the rates are still relatively high for an investment grade borrower like ourselves. Um, if we were to be doing this in Tradfi, we'd be paying five 5% 5 and a half% for dollars. We're paying a lot more than that uh for dollars because there's just not access yet. What we're working on is going to be unlocking that for us in the Tradfi space, which is really exciting. So, that'll be announced at some point. Um, and the I I think really what we're working on is not to do anything that's groundbreaking. We're just working on bringing more traditional finance type products into this industry. Um, and doing that in a very simple way. We we've we're big believers that the best restaurants have the smallest menus. We're trying to be very focused on being the best Bitcoin back lender into the space, but adding things like uh auto topup features so that if you are getting to that, you know, 70 75% LTV, you can automatically have your Bitcoin that you've got with us moved over into your collateral pool. Um because once it gets in the collateral pool, it's locked in there until uh so you don't necessarily want to overcolateralize beyond what you have to. But if you've got excess Bitcoin, you can have that sitting in a transaction account as we call it and it'll automatically go and top up your Bitcoin collateral so that your loan becomes healthy again. So things like that that are facilitating um ease of management for our clients is that's the kind of things we're working on. Okay, great. Perfecting whether it exists. Love it. Everybody, thank you John for your expertise. Thank you very much everyone. [Music]

========================================

--- Video 35 ---
Video ID: OxvEQI0uwuQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OxvEQI0uwuQ
Title: Live From DAS: Building Empirical Valuation Frameworks For Digital Assets | Jon & Matthew
Published: 2025-03-25 08:00:29 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we dive into the challenges of valuing digital assets with Ryan Connor, Jon Charbonneau from DBA, and Matthew Sigel from VanEck. The discussion covers the applicability of traditional valuation models to crypto, the role of sentiment and flows, the impact of tokenomics, and the relevance of technical analysis in the space.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! 

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Jon: https://x.com/jon_charb
Follow Matthew: https://x.com/matthew_sigel
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh

--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:59 Do TradFi Valuation Metrics Apply to Crypto?
7:57 Crypto Native Valuation Metrics
11:47 How Do Tokenomics Affect Valuations?
19:18 Using Technical Analysis
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 36 ---
Video ID: GGPWisEDLpw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GGPWisEDLpw
Title: Live From DAS: JitoSOL, Staked ETFs, and the Future of Solana Governance | Lucas Bruder
Published: 2025-03-24 08:00:20 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Jito Labs CEO Lucas Bruder joined us at DAS to discuss crypto’s growing dialogue with regulators, and the potential for staked ETFs. We also dive into Solana governance, SIMD-228 and SIMD-123, and the evolving validator landscape.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

JitoSOL Securities Classification Report: https://x.com/buffalu__/status/1902008044566839601
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!

Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: https://x.com/dYdX
--
Missed DAS? Join us from June 24th-June 26th at Permissionless IV! 

Tickets: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iv
--
Follow Lucas: https://x.com/buffalu__
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:09 JitoSOL Securities Classification Report
5:00 Staked ETFs
6:31 Thoughts on SIMD-228 & SIMD-123
13:15 dYdX Snippet
18:01 The End State For Solana Validators
22:34 Solana Governance
25:36 Jito Foundation's Tokenomics Proposal
28:58 Are There Any Efficient DAOs?
31:25 The Future of Jito Tips
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
Vibes are good right now. I think ignore the noise. Best way to ignore the noise is to get in the arena, start building. Nothing said on Zox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is forformational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Pokio, Ryan, and our guests may hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed. What's up, guys? Welcome back to another episode of Zerx Research. Today I'm joined by Dan Smith and CEO and co-founder of Gidto Labs, Lucas, also known as Buffalo. How you doing? Good. How are you guys? Pleasure to be here, man. How are the How are the vibes? We're at D. We got a bunch of suits walking around. I've never seen you in a suit coat before, so this is already exciting. Yeah, tried to do my best here, but I think the vibes are pretty good. It's uh very cool conference. cool to be in New York and it feels very professional which is first for me for a conference. It's uh most of the conferences are a little more DJ leaning. So far it's pretty professional so it's cool to see that. That's what we went for. Get you a man that can do both, baby. Yep. Um all right, diving into it. Lucas, you guys put out a note on Genosol securities this morning. Yeah. Or specifically about how it's not a security. Do you want to talk a bit about that? Yeah, there's a report that was released today, Monday. What's the date? No, today's Tuesday. It is indeed Tuesday. Uh what the 18th? March 18th. 18th of March. Yeah. Um yeah, today Jetto Foundation put out a report about Jetto Soul and doing a legal analysis on how it's not a security. It's really good reading. And I think a lot of projects have these they might have something like this internal on some legal analysis and uh kind of felt like it was time to release this and so it goes over what is staking kind of blockchain agnostic staking dives into Salana staking and delegated proof of stake. So on you know on Salana the staking is slightly different in that you can delegate your stake to other validators. On Ethereum you uh you kind of run the validator yourself or you can delegate that to some delegate the operation of it to someone else. And then it goes into geto soul. What does liquid staking on Salana look like? Talks about stakeet a lot which is something we invested a lot of time into basically automating the entire delegation of the gotool stake pool. And then it goes over uh all the lawyers will appreciate this. It goes very deep into the securities laws and especially in the context of judo soul and talks about how uh it's it's not a security. So yeah, it's super cool. I highly recommend reading it. It's uh there's a lot of good snippets in there on how Getool works, how stake stake works that I think institutions will appreciate, especially the the security analysis piece of it. And I think there's gonna be a lot of good snippets in there that kind of get pulled out and summarized. So, uh, yeah, I think the SEC hopefully will I know Hester put out a piece on a few important things that she cares a lot about. You know, you saw your memecoin post on how memecoins are in securities. I think staking is a very big thing right now. I think liquid staking is also very big. So, hoping to see some more guidance come out from the SEC on that those topics. Yeah, I love that you guys made this public. Like as you mentioned, you know, a lot of teams do do this work, but releasing it is kind of like that next step. And do you think there's been a change of tune? I know you spent some time in Washington not that long ago. I saw you tweeting about that. Like the regulators want to have these uh conversations a little bit more frequently or a little bit more open and interested in that. Like obviously that's been the the narrative behind the Trump administration, but are you seeing any of that firsthand? Yeah, for sure. We went and saw the SEC. I think we're the first industry team to go see them. talked about staking and liquid staking in context of ETFs. I think there's a um there's a desire to work with uh the industry on creating uh level playing field and more transparent rules and regulations, less regulation by enforcement and more like let's work with you guys. Let's figure something out. What makes sense? How do we define decentralization and control and securities and things like that? So, it's pretty cool. I never I never interacted with the administration or SEC previously. Uh going into them felt on our own like we emailed them and asked to have a meeting which is kind of weird and like never would have happened previously. So, it's cool to do that. And uh I feel like we can have like a real change there through policy whether it's on liquid staking or taxes or whatever it is like it's kind of in our court and I feel like we can do a lot there. So definitely noticing a change and excited to keep doing more work there. Nice. I love that initiative. And I guess one more follow on here is you mentioned the uh the the relevance of this has to ETFs and of course staked ETFs. Um, you know, right now we have the ETH ETFs alive, but you cannot like there's no staking associated with that, which to me, uh, as somebody who loves the the idea of REV is um, just a little bit backwards, right? Like the network creates this value, uh, generates it off user activity and I can't stake my assets to earn my share of that. So, in some ways, it's like a worse version of the asset that is being offered to, you know, retail and not only just retail, but also institutions as well. Um, so do you think that there's a good chance that we see a change of tune there and opening up not only the ETH ETF but all future ETFs to being able to uh to have that staking function so that the these assets can earn uh their portion of network rev 100%. I think staking and as you said like you want to investors want extra yield and they want to be exposed to the upside of the activity on the network not only through the price appreciation but any yield and rev that occurs to token holders and staking in these products is purely superior to not staking. uh you can earn you know a few percent yield depends on the network and there's a few kind of like hurdle there's a few hurdles to hop through on taxes and the way that these trusts are set up I'm confident that people will be able to structure them so that they make sense and I think it's a matter of time before their stake ETFs and liquid stake ETFs is it's inevitable. Perfect. Um, talking about staking and yield, I want to get your honest opinions on SIMD28. Were you happy or sad that it didn't pass through? What would it Yeah. Um, I was personally sad. I wasn't in the trenches as much as others like kind of debating this, but uh I'm a little sad. I think the Anatoli said that yeah, we kind of just copied Cosmos inflation curve and that's what we did. That's fine. And like there's a million and one things to do when you're creating a network and messing with the yield isn't one of them. It's like okay let's just copy this and there's like all these engineering challenges and go to market challenges that we have to focus on. This is the last thing and so I think salon is at a point now where it's more stable. There's a lot of activity, there's a lot of rev. And when you think of why yield exists on these L1s in the first place and why the curve is there, it's to bootstrap the network effects, get the network started, and get network security. And if you go back like zoom way out and you're like, okay, why do we need the security? How much is the right amount of security? It has something to do with the amount of stake that's staked to the network. there's probably some number of validators that you want to and so I think the yield's too high on Salana. Um I would like to see it lower. Obviously 228 was 228 was way more contentious than I thought it would have been. No kidding. Like honestly I'm glad the votes over just so my Twitter timeline can heal a little bit. What are we going to argue about now? Oh well the Salana ad of course. Yeah. Um, but there's I think there will be like variations of it that might be a little more left curve. So, let's just cut the issuance in half or instead of going down 50 15% every year, let's do 30%. Uh, there will probably be variations of that that may be successful or maybe they won't be. On the bright side, at least SIMD 123 passed though, so I feel like that one like 228 took all the spotlight. uh maybe you can just give a quick highlight of or overview of what 123 is and how that changes the network. Yeah, I guess uh I can go back to 228 too for those that aren't familiar real quick. 228 was basically uh setting a kind of a dynamic rate for inflation on Salana. So there was some target stake rate that uh you'd want to achieve. I can't remember the exact percentage. Is it like 50% or something? 50. I think it was like over 50. Um but then once you got below that 33% threshold, it started actually increasing. Yeah. So yeah, if the amount of stake on Salana goes down, then the inflation would increase to incentivize more people to stake. If the stake rate was too high, then the inflation would go down. Uh 123 is about sharing block rewards in protocol. This uh in retrospect should have been added from day one on Salana. Um the stakers and the delegators are today the um all the block rewards from priority fees and transactions on Salana go to the validators hot wallet and 123 makes a end protocol way for the block rewards to get distributed to stakers stake accounts and when you think about it the delegators and stakers are they're delegating their soul to the validator which is giving that validator the power to produce blocks and that validator gets to produce blocks based on the prorat a share of their stake on the entire network and yeah I think that like they stakers need to get get exposure to rev the the only previous way they've done that is through the judo tips and this whole tip distribution protocol there's some validators are distributing tip or uh priority fees out of protocol to their stakers or their LST or something. And so 123 it adds it makes it transparent and it makes it so that stakers can realize some of the rev on the network. Yeah. The interesting piece here that I noticed was there were sort of like two groups that were pretty vocal um or coordinated in their efforts to vote no on uh 228. But uh I guess it'd be interesting to compare the analysis of like who voted no on 228 and yes on 123. But uh it was the custodians um which they actually are incentivized to care only about nominal yield rather than real yield because they take a commission on the nominal yield, right? So the higher the number is then the more money that this kind of create generates for their businesses which is actually like a weird twisted and a semi- depressing framing here. It's like it's kind of like a marketing budget, right? Like if the custodians are incentivized to push their products onto their client base, that's could potentially a net good for Salana. Um, I don't personally agree with that, but I like I get where that framework comes from. Um, and then it was actually uh lost in from Helas posted a thread that's kind of pointing um there was like a huge block of no votes that came in all within like the same hour and 13 of the 20 validators that voted no in this block were on the uh like leading uh the leaderboard for having sandwiches in every block. Yeah. which is very interesting that like that's another like you know max extractor type if you will that was incentivized to just make as much money possible on the network doesn't necessarily care about the network health. Um so it's kind of interesting to see the the dichotomy of like who is leaning yes who is leading no and what their incentive mismatch was. Yeah I also think that there's there's a lot of competition between validators and Salana right now. Um there's been there's been a race to the bottom essentially on fees. So a lot of validators especially the small ones are already at 0% commission for the inflation and they might have some uh they might have a small like geo mev commission where they get some of the geo tips but uh yeah so 96 there's been a lot of interesting like economic things happening on Salana recently. So you had 7096 which uh before 7096 50% of priority fees were burned. 50% went to the validators. 7096 made it 100% to the validators. And then you have what the 22A and 123 discussion. There's been a really uh pretty steep race to the bottom in the the smaller validators trying to compete to get stake from stakers and stake pools. So, they're already running with 0% commission. With 123, it adds another commission type. And so, there is kind of an interesting thing where like that could just happen with 123 as well. What's up, guys? Um, welcome back to ZX Research. Today, I'm joined by Antonio from Dydx. Thanks for coming on, Antonio. Hey, thanks so much for having me. You started in crypto 10 years ago. How has the environment changed? Um, would you say in terms of users? Um, would you say the earlier users were more sophisticated and now we're kind of getting dumber and dumber? Um, not necessarily actually. Honestly, I'd say the users are probably more sophisticated by a lot now than they were back then. Um, but at the same time, it feels completely different like 10 years ago when I was a software engineer at Coinbase and Coinbase was like 100 people at the time. Um, and it really felt like nobody cared at all about what we were doing. Like nobody even knew what we were doing. Um, but we all were kind of crazy and cared about this Bitcoin thing. Like Ethereum wasn't even invented yet. Um, so that was kind of the only big name in town. Um, but it just felt like, you know, this this smaller space like a lot of new technologies do of a couple of nerds just being really excited about this new thing. I remember learning about Ethereum for the first time and being like, "Oh, well, this has the potential to change the world." And it was really all about this like potentiality. Like even Coinbase, I think, had I forget, but it was no more than like just like singledigit millions of dollars a day in in volume. And even DYDX is is quite a lot more than that now. Um, and and right now I feel like crypto is at this inflection point where we're kind of moving out of hopefully this potential phase like oh crypto could potentially be all these things and let's read white papers and let's buy into ICOs or whatever and try to capitalize on that to okay let's get serious now like what is it actually being used for today and how does this make my life better today and that's really the bar that products should hold themselves to rather than trying to create these narratives or this hype around what you could be tomorrow. Um, and and I think that's really starting to happen um with a lot of things within DeFi and in crypto more generally a bit in NFTTS um that that people are actually using and that's exciting but it's not that many people and I think we still have like at least four or five orders of magnitude more people to to go to onboard into crypto and that has to be the bar that we hold ourselves to. How what products are we building that make, you know, billions of people's lives better on a daily basis and is not just like, oh, I can ape into this coin and make some huge amount of money. Like, that's great. I have no problem with that. Um, but there's got to be something else, too. Makes sense. Um, lastly, there's a new administration and potentially a new SEC care. Um, well, a new USC care. How do you see that impacting the industry? I think it's a really positive thing overall. Um, and obviously crypto has become a somewhat partisan issue. Though I think long-term it's really important that it remains a really bipartisan issue. Um, because even if you know the quote like right side is in power right now, um, no pun intended. Um, this probably won't be the case forever and and crypto is going to be something that again we're all really buying into for the long term. Um, so I think it's just continually important that we educate everyone, policy makers included, on the benefits of crypto and how it's really fundamentally different than anything that's come before. And so it should probably be regulated in a different way. It's it's not necessarily rocket science. Um, and really what we're looking for, and I'll just speak for DYDX's part in all of this, is regulation and law making that makes sense for DeFi, especially. Um, like centralized exchanges a little bit different. Like that's still a fairly similar model to traditional finance. Um but in DeFi, like why do you need audits? Just go open up Ether Scan and look any second that you want to. It's like hundred times better. Um and and so there shouldn't be requirements that like some body has to do audit reports or or whatever. Um but maybe there are some requirements that make sense like should the marketing match what the actual code is? Probably. Yeah. Like I'd be pretty in favor of that. Um so why don't we talk about those things? and really just we've been focused a lot on education for policy makers at DYDX and that's going to continue um no matter who's in charge but it is something I'm excited about. Fantastic. And to our listeners, what would you and to builders who might want to be build who might want to build products um that use the DYDX orderbook? What would you say? Um where should they go? What should they read about? So you can check out all the info at dydx.exchange ordx on Twitter. And if you're interested in me, I'm Antonio M. Giuliano on Twitter. Fantastic. Thank you, Antonio. Thank you very much. What do you think the long-term uh end state is for like validators on a network? Because uh you know, Anatoy's always been pushing the idea of like, you know, there's going to be businesses that are willing to run their validator at a loss. Uh you know, maybe like an RPC provider being a chief example there, right? they can provide a better core service to their clients by having this you know well high stake RPC um this high stake validator and uh you know Anatoy's always been pushing that idea and then there's also I think this other element where if you play this out long enough like you kind of see margins compressed there where validators should operate the network for some margin uh because there's just you know it's relatively it's a permissionless set so anybody can come in and join and compete uh and I'm kind of curious curious what how you view that world because it's got pretty contentious with the 228 vote where yeah I think running a validator is going to be super competitive and it's been pretty competitive for a while and then all the memecoin stuff happened and rev was through the roof validators were making insane amounts of money uh you can look at like how much geos public validators were making or helas it's like insane amounts of money and then I think Now there's just going to be there's just going to be a lot of competition and so it's very important as a validator to find ways to differentiate yourself. Um you I it would be it would be unwise to just think that stake is going to come your way. you need to go out there and work and it's a real business so you have to do marketing and there's a lot of validators that have done well with this whether it's building RPC's uh infrastructure or building dashboards to track validator performance and things like that and I want to see more of that and ideally there's there's ways that you can spend a lot of time and like trying to find a way to differentiate yourself one thing with SIMD228 that I was curious about is like you said um previously validators were making a lot of money just off priority fees and network activity. One of my concerns was that annualizing that and saying like oh this is going to go on forever could be a bit risky. Do you think that's a fair take or would you say I think we should annualize the Trump launch and just yeah just see that into the future. Well that is some of the takes that I saw were literally people saying that saying look at how much money people are making on this. I think 2A would have passed if it the vote was going on at that time. Oh, there we go. That's a spicy take. Yeah. Yeah. It's interesting to see how emotions are so important in these types of decisions. What do you think about the the governance system more broadly? Um I want to go back to your question. Sorry. Sorry. What was your 72? I feel like a lot of people ended up Do you think it's like presumptuous to say priority fees and network network activity are going to continue to be doing very very well such that we can cut out the issuance bit of it. Um I don't know if that's like I don't know if I agree with that phrasing there. I think they're kind of they they're kind of unrelated in my mind. the inflation is more of a way to well I don't know actually I don't think it's fair to annualize that but I do think the inflation is a cost to the network there's custodians and other validator operators that um depending on how you do your taxes when you get the staking rewards you that might be considered income at that time and so those custodians and companies have to sell that soul immediately and that is not very good for the price of Salana. Uh especially if you talk to people that were staking in the last cycle uh in 2021, they were getting a bunch of staking. The staking rate was higher in 2021. They were getting a ton of money when Soul's at 250 from staking rewards and then Soul went down to $8 and they got their tax bill and they were like, "Oh crap, this this is a big problem." Um, so that's like the perfect example where it's a cost of the network. It 228 I think would have been good for the price of soul. There would probably be other variations of it. Do you have anything you want to ask now? No, governance is boring. So I take the question back. All right. Um, well, I think I would like to talk about governance. Okay, let's do it. Let's do it. What did you think about the the signaling votes? Like does it have does it get put are incentives in the right hands with validators voting? And we've kind of saw some interesting polling techniques for getting stakers opinions or even like vote splitting. Yeah, I think it's it's a it's I would consider this like v0ero or maybe even less of like Salana governance. I think there's never been that spicy of governance before. 96 was kind of spicy, but this one was like super spicy. It became very political and that was unfortunate. But I guess that's like the world we're in today. But uh yeah, I want to see there needs to be a way there needs to be a way for stakers to have a a way to override their validator. And it's not just a trust me bro thing. It's like um you could either I don't know what the best answer to this is, but maybe there's a way for validators to signal ahead of time what they want to vote on and lock it in and then stakers can override them or stakers get the tokens directly. I don't know if that's the best idea because like stakers aren't probably as there's probably hundreds of thousands of stakers in a like 1500 validators. So you're just gonna get way more participation through them. Um I'm also coming at this from the angle of like uh the stake pool JO Soul like how can Jetto Soul there's Judo Soul is probably one of the largest single stakers on the network as far as like uh stake accounts and things like that. It has 16.5 million soul and there wasn't a really thought put into from like Geto side but also governance side how do LSTs get involved? Uh how do how do judo soul holders get to vote on these things? And so having some way for validators to lock in their vote ahead of time or getting so then like maybe you can rearrange your validator set to get the vote you want or there's a way for stakers to vote. I don't know like what the best answer is here, but there's kind of a weird thing where like there wasn't any way for judo soul stakers to vote or just like normal staker stakers in general. And uh having better guarantees about their voice being heard from like the actual protocol level or the governance level would be good versus like hey uh I heard stories of like validator or stakers asking their validators to vote yes and then uh some of the operators just voted no. Um so there's a lot of like drama behind the scenes on this but getting better guarantees would be good. I hate to have to say this, but doesn't Cosmos have a I was literally going to say you had a funny tweet of like anytime something happens, there's like a Cosmos pro that's like, well, we've actually done this already. But honestly, this is an example where I think that's probably true. One useful Yeah. One of the useful things that um I think before we end it off, I want to ask two questions. One is you guys had a tokconomics proposal um that Andrew posted a few days ago, maybe last week. Yeah, Andrew from the foundation. Andrew from the foundation separate. Um I want to get the lab's take on it or maybe your personal take on it. I know we have to be a little bit careful about but what do you where do you see like Solana's maturing? You guys they're thinking more about how the economics matter like how the token distribution matters. Is this something that you guys are actively thinking about as well? Uh yeah, the Jetto Foundation and like people there and also other just go token holders hit up the foundation and me all the time like suggesting ideas. I think there's a lot to consider. Um some people take more of a short-term view and try to optimize for short-term thinking. I think we are pretty good about uh trying to balance short-term and long-term. There's some long-term ideas that you can do too. Uh I think it's still open question of what happens, but the discussion should definitely take place on it. And yeah, there's a lot of cool stuff going on like the, you know, there's the buybacks, the buyback and burns. Um, there's like the protocol and liquidity and there's like a ton of there's a ton of other variations and I would like to see something that balances a short-term and long-term and really positions the protocol to be successful on a multi-year time horizon. Yeah, I can like feel the presence of uh David, our head of advisory, like lurking over my shoulder here as he uh has been super anti- buyback just for the idea of like, you know, you got two options like reinvesting growth in any capacity or return value uh cash flow to the token. Um and so he actually posted a pretty interesting piece on the a forum as they uh were kind of going through the same discussion. Um that's basically it's like other ideas of instead of buying back like you can still provide value to the long-term growth of the network uh or the protocol or the application the business whatever it may be. So definitely I'm a personal fan as well of like the idea of reinvesting that in growth like building out a new product line hiring a new dev team whatever it may be to like continue the expansion of the goto product suite. Yeah, I mean we're also uh like the Jetto protocol is special too because there's some JTO and Jetto soul restaking. So there's kind of like the buyback buyback and burn and then there's the incentivizing behavior that you want to see angle. Maybe you could send some more fees to the the resters as well. Um yeah, I'd also say it's special in another way, right? Because there's not that many Dows that have uh strong cash flows that are tied to sustainable products, right? in the me infrastructure. I think about 3% goes back to the DAO and then a 4% fee on the goto soul saking uh yields. Yeah. And the the goto dowo war chest is insanely big not only from those but just the goto tokens. I think it's like 400 and something million dollars. So yeah, hopefully I think as we all have seen like it's really hard to run Dows efficiently and there's a lot of wasteful spending in Dows and you just hate to see that like there's someone's got to figure out something to to make it more efficient. Are there any like are there any efficient Dows that you've seen that are really spending and reinvesting on a multi-year time horizon? Yeah, it's a great question. Um it's interesting like okay so we just brought up A and like Mark Zeller has like pretty aggressive uh personality let's say and I think he's done a great job of like riding the ship of a DA keeping them on the right track. Um I think he's probably rubbed people some people the wrong way but like that's you know kind of the the nature of doing business in some regard. Um so honestly I'm I'm personally a fan of what he's doing there. Um but like I think we've there's way more examples unfortunately of failed Dows. Yeah. Uh and it's like almost not a lot of lessons learned, right? Like in hindsight, a lot of it's pretty obvious, right? You build this strong business, you have a great team of founders and uh you know core core founding engineers and then you hand your business over to a bunch of strangers on the internet, right? And it's like okay, shocker, that doesn't work out as often as we'd like it to. So it's about like how can you uh decentralize the right pieces of the puzzle that don't um in some regard the the long-term success of the business. Uh yeah, I think we just haven't figured it out and in some ways it does feel like we're just going the very long way around like rebuilding corporate structures. Um so I don't know when we probably shouldn't rebuild they're pretty efficient. We've got great businesses in the world but the question is like you know the idea of decentralization and and what how important is that and you know where do we implement that? So I really like the interesting uh you know sort of like experiments you've been running with futur uh you know you've had one that is uh closed and another one I believe that's live right now related to the switchboard in CNN. Yeah. Um so that's a pretty cool experimentation. In theory that's like this really really great idea. It's just a question of like what do we need to tweak to get those systems live and ready. Yeah. I think the the protocol should be like the the DAO members and foundation should be open to experimenting. I think there's still is pretty interesting and something that uh I think there's more experimentation that needs to happen but it's an interesting idea. It doesn't work for every decision that you make. The I think the the setup time is pretty significant of figuring out how to structure it and what the market is and all that but futur is really interesting and as you said there's a lot of examples on what not to do. So figuring out what to do is uh pretty fun. There's a a very large design space there. Awesome. I know we're running up on time here, but I got one more question I want to jump in here with with is uh so I feel we talked a lot about Geto Soul. We've touched on the resaking piece, but what is the future of the uh tipping infrastructure? Like how has that been going? I know that's kind of like a huge engineering burden of keeping this thing up and running. And if you can talk to us a bit about, you know, what your future direction is there um and what maybe a potential V2 would look like. Yeah. So, uh, geto tips got sent over to the tip router to kind of decentralize that and upload that. And yeah, I would say that the last, let's see, Judo Solana was released in 2022. I think it did like $3 of Rev in 2022, 3 million in 2023, 650 million in 2024. I think we're at 450 right now for this year. So it's madness and like the activity on the network went from nothing. I guess we released Geto Salana on the way right before Breakpoint in 2022 and then there's just this massive Salana bear after that and spent a lot of time building this out with certain assumptions on the network and what type of activity we'd see. And now we kind of have some time to zoom out and take all the learnings from the past year and kind of rethink the way that MEV on Salana works, how the Salana blockchain works and all the different stakeholders and um yeah, I'd say that we're like the current thing is just a vzero and definitely rethinking about how to make this better and we don't just want to build on Solana, we want to make it better than it could be without Jetto and we're kind of in this like grow the pie mindset. So trying to unlock a lot of new features and make it make everything way more collaborative from Jetto's angle compared to like the closed source talk to these guys angle before. So yeah, there's a lot going on behind the scenes and hopefully we can talk more about it soon. Awesome. Well, thanks a lot, Lucas. Any followup? No, no, that's uh um fantastic. Lucas, thanks for coming on. It's been a great conversation. Any anything to leave with the people with? Vibes are good. Yeah, I think it's uh vibes are good right now. I think ignore the noise. Best way to ignore the noise is to get in the arena, start building whether it's uh reporting and things like that or talking about Salana data to building a protocol. So definitely get involved and uh ignore the market. Just keep pushing. Amen. Amen. And you're writing now. You got the Substack up. Check it out. Yeah, I got I need to cook up another one soon. But um yeah, that was M. Mert told me to write more. Shout out Shout out M. Shout out M. Awesome. Well, thanks a lot, Lucas. Thanks, [Music]

========================================

--- Video 37 ---
Video ID: grSMvrjFJC4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=grSMvrjFJC4
Title: Data Deep Dive: Are Memecoins Dead? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-03-20 08:00:37 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Danny and Westie discuss their current outlook for the crypto market, Solana's controversial ad, and whether or not memes are truly dead. They analyze onchain data, explore governance dynamics around SIMD-228, and debate whether TradFi firms like Robinhood are poised to dominate established players in DeFi. The duo also reflects on the broader crypto landscape, offering insights on market sentiment, speculative cycles, and the importance of stepping back during uncertain times.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

BWR: Chain Comparison Dashboard: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/analytics/l1

SIMD-228 Voting Status: https://dune.com/kagren0/simd-0228-voting-status
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Doing your crypto taxes doesn’t have to suck. Say goodbye to tax season stress with Crypto Tax Calculator - built for degens like you: 3,000+ integrations to support all your wallets, exchanges, and on-chain activity with deep integrations into dApps & smart contracts. A custom pricing oracle to handle even the most chaotic portfolios. Full support for IRS rules and accurate, CPA-endorsed tax reports. 

Generate reports your accountant will love or file directly yourself. Create an account. Import your wallets and exchanges. Review and download your tax report. 

Get started today and make tax season easy! You can use our exclusive discount code BW2025 to enjoy 30% off all paid CTC plans until April 15th, 2025.  

Follow this link to get started: https://cryptotaxcalculator.io/us/?coupon=BW2025&utm_source=blockworks&utm_medium=podcast&utm_campaign=0x
--
Follow Westie: https://x.com/WestieCapital
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:59 Market Outlook
6:45 Solana's Advertisement and Subsequent Fallout
12:48 Ledger Ad
13:04 Are Memes Dead?
28:48 Ledger Ad
29:22 Base's Increased Memecoin Activity
35:22 SIMD-228 Fails to Pass
49:43 CryptoTaxCalculator Ad
50:14 Is TradFi going to Eat Our Lunch?
1:03:55 Closing Comments
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 38 ---
Video ID: fD2onVl2o94
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fD2onVl2o94
Title: How Arbitrum is Pushing the Limits | Steven Goldfeder
Published: 2025-03-17 08:00:36 UTC
Description:
In this episode of 0xResearch, Steven Goldfeder, co-founder and CEO of Offchain Labs, joins to discuss Arbitrum's latest developments. To kick things off, Steven breaks down Timeboost, a new transaction ordering policy aimed at balancing fairness and MEV value capture. We also dive into Ethereum’s interoperability challenges, governance dynamics, and the long-term vision for scaling and innovation. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

ARB: A Timeboost Turnaround?: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/flashnotes/arb-a-timeboost-turnaround
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!

Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: https://x.com/dYdX
--
Follow Steven: https://x.com/sgoldfed
Follow Darren: https://x.com/0xMims
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:55 What is Timeboost?
12:11 Feedback on the Timeboost Proposal
14:22 Achieving True Interoperability
20:28 Real-time Proving and Its Impact on Interop
26:56 The Evolution of Wallets
31:16 What Should Ethereum Enshrine?
39:32 dYdX Snippet
43:04 The L2 Landscape Today
48:51 Arbitrum Governance
59:34 Looking Forward
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
our goal here by the way there are a lot of interesting people working on a lot of really good people working on this EF is working this we just want we just want to bias towards action right I don't want to spend a year writing the absolute best spec and then another year implementing that because I think so much is here today I want to I want to say hey this is what works today we're building this right now which is what we're doing and we can continue to analyze it and continue to improve it and I want to be in all those conversations and calls and if in a year or two we have something better let's swap that in but this is a solution that that this is a problem that needs a solution today nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice bachio Ryan and our guest May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of zerx research today I'm joined by Steven goldfader the co-founder and CEO of offchain labs thanks for coming on the show Stephen great to be here thanks for having me me um I think we should probably arbitrum is massive and everybody knows about you guys so I think I'll try and keep it as focused as possible and I want to talk about time boost interoperability and where arbitrum stands today um but before we get started it might be a bit helpful to get a short overview of what you guys have been working at offchain Labs over the past few months absolutely so I would say there are broadly three pillars so um we obviously continue to contribute heavily to arbitrum and arbit development um some of the biggest new techical development uh developments there are arbitr from stylus which gives developers the ability to write smart contracts in Rust and c and C++ uh right alongside and fully interoperable with evm so you can have say a single application that's a mixture of you know solidity evm and and stylus code um number two is bold uh this recently shipped on mayet this uh was the is the new challenge protocol which among other things uh opened up Val validation and arbitr chains for everyone so now anyone can be a validator fully permissionless of arbit chains which is a very very big upgrade when it come to comes to a security perspective because ultimately the validators are the one providing Securities and how anybody can participate in that uh another one is time boost um which is a new transaction order po ordering policy which tries to um sort of um give everyone what they want so appeal to both people who just want fast block times on the Chain but also internalize some of the MV value as well so that's uh basically on the arbiton side technical some of the big things we've been working on we also built prism which is the leading layer one consensus client for ethereum um a lot of interesting things going on there a lot of P Das development um looking to increase the blob count so a lot of uh very interesting layer one development and a particular layer one development that's going to continue to help ethereum be the platform for successful layer twos right so so there's a an interesting merger of these two threads where U increasingly a lot of the layer one development is focused on um you know the rooll up Centric road map itself and becoming uh the dominant platform for ler tws and we've also been working a lot on interoperability ethereum is well particularly if you ask someone outside the ecosystem they tell you ethereum is fragmented today um I think a lot of it is is a narrative problem but there's also obviously some technical truth to it ultimately I think it's a good thing um because it means there's a lot of different people developing different things and trying and experimenting right and the other side of that coin is things are a bit fragmented so the question is how can we build the best ethereum user experience possible not just the developer experience but also the user experience from onboarding to uh interacting across multiple chains in the ethereum ecosystem how do we make that seamless and intuitive and we've been doing a lot of work on that at off train Labs as well fantastic um I want to talk about all of those but I think the main thing um to get us started would be time boost um can you walk us through what the time boost um upgrade will be the proposal is and what exactly me it wants to achieve um yes and by the way it's it's it's well timed this just went on live went live on tally which is the onchain voting platform so it's uh you know uh being actively voted on in the Dow in the final stages now right so started off a snapshot get approved and now it's actually in the onchain voting process so definitely a very timely time to discuss this is something the Dow is waiting right now and yeah so what time boost is you know it's funny because you actually take a step back there's always been this push it says decentralize the sequencer and I'm a big fan of decentralizing the sequencer but I think what people don't realize always is decentralizing the sequencer doesn't mean anything in a vacuum because you have to ask the next question is what do you want the sequencer to do or what policy would you like the decentralized sequencer to enforce right so there's a sequencer which sequences transactions According to some policy and those policies can be en force in a centralized or decentralized matter and depending what the policy is you know the decentralization path looks very different so today let's focus on on the policy and there broadly there are you know before time boost there have been two broad classes of policies among sequencers the orb sequencer still today and always has done a first come first serve ordering policy which basically means you send transactions to it and it publishes the transactions in the order that it sees them there's another policy all the way on the other end end of the extreme which says so so sorry on the arbitrum side the first come first serve tries to enforce some order of fairness right so those who come first and there will be those that argue this is not fair but ultimately you know it's a very very um basic concept of fairness that the the transactions should be processed in the orders that order that they arrived on the other hand you have people that argue for systems called what we call me meev auctions or mea which you may have seen over time which is the idea is no don't prioritize the order that they came in give uh the first spot to the highest bidder right so maximize the value for the tra for the chain ma maximize the value capture for the chain um for maximize the value capture for the chain in in ordering transactions and your average user you know a user a regular user who just wants to pay say a little bit and doesn't actually want you know to pay a lot might see that his transactions get delayed or deprioritized and these are like sort of you know the two bookends here so on the one hand you have the thing that's maximally fair I would say to your average user they're going to get their transaction in quickly without delay and by the way that's one of the things people really like about arbit today that it's fast it's efficient and you know you have really fast block times Arbitron block times in the public network are 250 Mill 250 milliseconds which is basically the fastest blockchain out there you have other uh blockchains today that are looking and trying you're building all sorts of pre-confirmation to try to get the block times this low but arbitrum natively supports uh 250 millisecond confirmations and actually even faster you have orbit chains which are arbitr chains that are uh others are running using the same technology stack that actually go down to 100 milliseconds a good example of that it's a chain called rehea that does that so the technology is really stable um at very very low block times on the other hand though you have the me auctions which is like great for internalizing me value because what happens is so so so what's the problem with the first come first served but the problem is there are still MV Searchers in the chain and they really want to get you know their their transactions in quickly so what do they do they try to shave off the time to the sequencer and they end up paying a whole lot of money exter internally to the system say to you know uh web or Cloud providers or try to buy you know uh computing power in particular locations really to try to shave off uh milliseconds to get to the sequence more quickly so with today all that value is being externalized right all the who's capturing the value from MV it's not that it's not happening it's that um there are just paying others maybe they're paying their cloud provider maybe they're paying someone else so they're capturing whatever value they capture themselves and it's all going outside the system the chain is not capturing M auction the chain is actually capturing that value right your average user transaction might get delayed for a long time but the chain is going to actually capture the value of the M because if I want to buy priority I'm not going to go ahead and try to you know get better positioning and shave off some milliseconds by getting a better connection Cloud connection or getting a better Cloud positioning I'm just going to you know bid dirting the auction and that's going to be my best my best path to to do that and the beneficiary of that is is the chain so the question is how can you like have the best of both worlds and that's what time boost tries to really achieve the last technical piece before we get into the time boost solution is uh another future of arbitrum today which uh will remain and that is that it has a private mempool right so the idea is that your transactions aren't publicly broadcast uh for others to see before they're actually included they're privately sent to the sequencer and the sequencer publishes it so if I'm looking at your transactions the very first time I know of your transaction is when it's already actually published and what that means is there's no front running I can't try to oh I see that you're trying to do this trade let me pay a lot of money now to try to get in front of your trade in front of your trade um I can again I can blindly try to buy better positioning saying hey I think someone might be doing a trade like this I want to get in over here but I can't actually look at your transactions in front one them we think that's a really important property it's one that exists in arbitrum today and it's one that we want to be preserved in any solution so what time boost does is it kind of tries to straddle both of these worlds and get you know give you the best of both worlds and what it does is it says arbitr is still going to have these really fast block times uh but there's going to be a notion of an express lane and so you can buy basically for a short period of time you can auction and buy an express lane which gives you a slight priority and the way to think about it is all the express lane transactions will get included in the next in the next block some of the non-express Lan transactions might get pushed one block later right so you're still going to and what that means is for your average user that's just playing their game or or doing something you know basic they just want to know they're going to have a really fast block time they're still going to have a really fast block time you know the worst cases they'll be included not in the very next block but in the block after that but the block times are very fast and so it's still going to feel very fast to them for those that want to buy a little bit of an edge they'll be able to buy the express Lan ticket to guarantee that they will be included in the very next block uh of these transactions and what we see here is um you know a really uh ni nice properties for both people again those that don't care about ordering aren't going to get delayed right no matter how much these other people bid they're still know that they their transaction is going to get included very quickly they're not going to get delayed indefinitely and maybe the next block maybe the one after that but really that they won't get delayed past that but those that want to By Priority are now going to have an option to do that for the chain so the chain is still going to is now going to actually collect a lot of the value that's being spent in the ecosystem anyway but today it's actually being spent externally and the chain is collecting zero of that value and with time boost um but as far as I understand so since there's a private men pool you can't do front running but you can still um do liquidations because you have the knowledge of after the block so for the next block I can include um healthy me like back running as well as like liquidating lending positions Etc right correct exactly so yes the way we like to think about it is there's different types of me um we think front running is you know the bad type of me one that we think should be um eliminated to the extent possible and then there's like back running which basically says like you know hey I see a transaction here I want to get my transaction very quickly and maybe I want to buy an express lane ticket so I can know that I'll get my transaction immediately after your after after in the next block after this transaction or something like that um that we consider to be more healthy M things like Arbitrage uh again so it's the idea here is not to say all MV is bad but we think the idea of you know seeing you user transactions and front running them that's something we'd like to prevent and the current arbitrum design today doesn't allow for that uh and the arbitrum post time boost will not allow for that for that either that makes sense um what's feedback been like and are there any like General concerns over the time boost proposal yeah I think that there's been a very very healthy um debate about time boost um generally um you know it's it's it's a new system that kind of deviates from you know the priority fee like systems that others are using today so anytime you introduce something new there are those that are going to have you know the uh fear questions or hey like why don't we just use this ABCDE this exists today and I think it's a very strong value proposition which it really provides you know some very very highly desired features but also um you know provides some of the B benefits of some of these other systems so I think it's a very unique interesting place in the design space and ultimately though there are there are definitely people that you know have questions and see it differently which is why I'm very happy that it's you know going to the Dow and and those voices will be heard right I don't I don't know what will happen uh at the Dow honestly I think that there's a good chance that it gets pasted I think there's some chance that um some voices say Hey you know we don't want this and um it's not a win or loss to me either way I'm a proponent of it I think it's a good idea but ultimately the way we set up the system is that um the community decides and if the community decides hey you know we don't want this or not at this time that's okay the nice thing is that we've also built in I think one of the one of the places of some uh questions or concern and honestly uncertainty because you know no matter how much modeling you do until the thing actually runs in public you don't exactly know is you know how much uh you know how how much delay can you buy right so I mentioned the default is 250 milliseconds which is basically one block time uh that can be shrunk down you could do 50 milliseconds of Advantage you know it can be it can be shrunk or expanded so uh the proposal and the way that it's written gives um you know the operator the sequencer the ability to uh you know figure that out in some range to find the optimal the optimal uh um amount of time for time boost and I think again there will be some I would imagine parameter finding and making you know once the system is live but ultimately um I think that this gives a sequencer enough uh latitude to uh find a really really good uh set of parameters okay so uh since you guys have been in the L2 interrupt working group I'm curious what are the biggest challenges you've seen in achieving true interoperability for the ethereum ecosystem yeah it's a great question so I think first I'll say is I think many in the community view interop as this very very deep deep technical you know research problem I think that there's an aspect of that but I would actually argue that probably 90% of it is a ux problem and then there's at 10% which is a deep research problem what I mean by that is there's definitely like a lot of deep research you can do around say bridging between chains deep interrup um you know even like arbitrary message passaging how to do this and Trust minimiz ways uh efficiently um Etc and we'll definitely get better than that over time but I think we already have a really really good tool set but it's not necessarily being presented to users in the most intuitive way in a way that you know they can just like know exactly what to do um when I speak to users you know there's some like just L2 Fair right honestly you can go to coinbase or binance or really any any exchange and you know you don't need to know anything about nl2 you just say I want to use arbitrum and arbitrum is there like like ethereum like Solano like any other chain any other chain but there's definitely some uh fear among users like oh this seems more confusing because it's a layer to so I think a lot of it is a narrative part but also like ux you go to the salana ecosystem you know the Phantom on boarding you go to Jupiter you know exactly what to do you know what to you know what to use and it's very very clear I think because there are so many layer twos and because there's some of this like almost confusion without even using the product and just like is assumed complexity right so I just assume that using a layer two is hard even though it's not like there's there's a lot that we that we have to do there to actually package up the user experience so a wallets is is is is a really really great place to start and say how do we um you know just get better onboarding experience for users or a lot of really good teams building in the wall in the wallet space today and I think just um integrating some of the Technical Solutions we know how to do today is going to be um a big step to that so we at offchain Labs recently announced something called the uh Universal intent engine and this is an intent based interrupt system and our goal is to basically get less than 3 second uh interrupt between any different any chains that are that that are participating in this with an initial um five chains uh as part five chains initially and hopefully expanding much larger so permission list opens open set of contracts that can work today and on any evm chain and the idea is it's intent based right so the idea is that um it's using liquidity uh and intents but it also has something which is really really neat because one of the problems with these systems is like if you have a liquid chain you'll have an ecosystem of solvers that will participate and can actually make this system work but let's say there's like a new chain that launches today right there are over a 100 arbit from orbit chains in development solvers aren't going to have the incentives and the liquidity to be able to support all those so we added something called the um solver Loan program which is being uh funded by the Arbitron Foundation initially it's a really nice solution that basically says um you know you can go on these chains and get basically interest free short-term loans to go ahead and actually know solve these intents and it makes it economically feasible for solvers to come in they don't have to lock up liquidity and fragmented ways in different chains you know the the liquidities there there's like a hub and arbitrum one so they can they can manage their their liquidity over there take these loans pay them back and the nice thing is it's extendable right so the Arbitron Foundation is not going to be able to do this for 100 200 a thousand chains but if you're launching a new chain yourself you can go ahead and participate and you know put up the liquidity yourself maybe in your own token and now have your chain basically easily become part of this and what the universal intent engine does it tells you on any chain that pops up solvers know exactly where to go on that chain to find these intents right so we're basically trying to solve this problem um as stage one with you know providing the backend infrastructure to make bridging and interoperability really really easy uh between chains but also putting in the liquidity incentives to make to make the system work and make sure that those solvers are incentivized to participate in different chains I think step two here um is making sure now that you know this is nice these intent based Solutions and this Universal intent engine are nice developer Solutions what we really need is wallet infrastructure that just abstracts us away from users right what we need the experience is hey I'm a user on arbitrum I want to go and trade something on some other chain uh maybe that's another chain in the arbit ecosystem even right maybe it's ape chain and I want my wallet to do the following I want my wallet to say trade this asset and AR for this asset on AP chain abstract away the fact that on arbitrum the gas token is eth on ape chain the gas token is ape and just do this for me and by the way show me my balances in one in one in one place right we have all the technology to do this but I think this is basically where 90% of interop lives and we're we've been pushing very very strongly ahead uh with this vision and really want to see ethereum uh interop look like that look like the user goes they can do anything cross chain in the ecosystem there's an intent based solution that works works in the background eventually again and that's where the 9010 comes in maybe in in a year or two or three or four or five from now the back background infrastructure is going to swap out a little bit a little bit maybe it'll be more efficient maybe it'll be more trustless maybe we'll rely Less on intense and more on something else I don't know but we have enough today that we can already build an excellent user experience and packaging that user experience together for users is uh I would say um a large part of of the of the battle today and I'm confident that we as an ecosystem will do this uh we have the tools to do this we have the desire to do this you mentioned you know working groups there's a lot of different teams coming together that are trying to solve this and I think you know we are definitely doing a large part in in bringing a lot of the tech to the table that makes this possible and I think uh together as an ecosystem we will solve this for users so just like I just want to follow up here with like a like a quick question to that so you say that um intense it sounds like intents more or less get us 90% of the way there in terms of solving interoperability and I've seen like um I've seen other discussions where they focus more on the research side of things so like like uh real-time proving some people say that like true interoperability won't be here until real- time proving is here and I guess in your view that this is essentially like a non-issue right like intents mostly get us there real-time uh proving and stuff would only serve as like a complimentary or if you could just help me complete the view here I think realtime proving actually I'll say something even a little spicier I actually don't think real time proving helps very much uh for many of the way that people ways that people think it does I think intense is one you know good piece there's also you know tools that can be used for arbitrary message passing as well and there's a host of different solutions and different service providers you know we work across interop with teams like across and layer zero and chain link there's a lot of different and circle right there's a lot of different pieces for different particular assets that also can help so it's a lot of it packaging together and that's why you know really the wallet is helpful right if you're if you're doing if you're using usdc you'll probably use you know um you know you know circles native you know ccip right if you're using uh some other asset you might use an nintend bra so so it's it's really about packages to users and not you know making a user say okay for this particular asset like what should what what should I use should I use a cross should I use layer zero is this an of it's really about packaging This Together uh and making it seems for users but your question though uh about real time proving around realtime proving there's a big problem uh that people don't really address and realtime proving doesn't actually solve this right so the the vision of real-time proving and I'll try to sell it for a second before I tell you why I disagree the vision of realtime proving is hey you know we can just use zero knowledge based Solutions if chain a can BAS basically just give you a proof of what it did to chain B right so chain a gives a proof to chain B of the current state of the chain and it's real time that's all you need for interrupt right because chain B just ingests that proof and Don doesn't need to wait for anything else wonderful it can go ahead and process those balances and you can just basically pass these proofs along in arbitrary ways and chains just can trustless like do everything it's a great vision the problem is the problem is there's another piece so say that I'm chain a and you're chain B we're both realtime Prova bles zero knowledge chain I you I hand you a proof in real time it says hey um you know on my chain Alice uh says that she wants to go ahead on chain a Alice says that she wants to go ahead and transfer funds to chain B you see that proof you verify it checks out so now you're saying okay so chain B can go ahead and now um you know and and and now um accept that deposit if you will right so uh honor honor that honor that cross chain uh send now let's say the problem is is doesn't really work unless you trust me the operator of chain a or the sequencer or whoever that is whoever is producing that proof right what's stopping me from producing a second proof a second proof also in real time that says actually Alice is sending those those same funds to a different place right so you have now I can produce if I'm the one producing that you know producing those proof say I'm the sequencer of that chain or whatever that rol is in that chain I go ahead I produce you two different proofs that um are two different histories right and if you will double spend Alice's coins and the answer what stopping you is these should be you don't want to actually just trust a proof from me a proof doesn't mean anything unless it's the canonical proof you need the L1 settlement time right so you need to actually go ahead and this proof is not just a proof of some chain some TR chain the transactions that I'm proving are included uh in the L1 block they have fin ity those transactions so I know that hey it's not just even giving me a proof of some set of transactions I actually know that those are the corre correct transactions so I need to really two things I need to know that the set of transactions are final are correct and also I need to know that okay what happens what's the execution so the proof can provide me the execution of those transactions but I also need to know that this is the correct set of transactions because otherwise I can give you two very very different histories of my chain give you real-time proofs and they'll both uh you know seem correct to you you and you won't really know uh which one if you accept one I can go and you know kind of rug you and give you the second one after that so what you really need is finality and it turns out that L1 finality is not something we can do in real time right it takes 12 to 18 minutes to get to get real layer one finalities if you have these two ZK rollups even if they're giving you real time proofs until you have that finality there could be an L1 reorg right so even if you see it on layer one included in a block there can be a reorg and that set of transactions that you're looking at which you have a proof for is is worthless because the actual set of transactions that were included in layer one is a completely different set of transactions and you actually gave you know you credited Bob in your chain because you saw proof that said hey Alice paid Bob and ask asked those money to asked for those funds to be sent to your chain but actually in the real set that actually ends up getting finality Alice sent those funds to Carol and now Bob has these chains so so what you have is one of two things either you need to wait for L1 finality or you basically need these chains to trust each other right you need to trust me not that the proof is correct CU that you can verify that I'm not going to create another proof but if you need to trust me that I'm not going to create another proof then the proof is not very helpful you're just kind of trusting me right so just trust me that I'm going to submit these transactions to to to the layer one so U that's why I'm bearish uh real I'm not bearish real time proving I should say because I think it's a great technology and zero proof is fantastic but I'm bearish um realtime proving as being a realtime interupt solution I think there's always going to be this optimistic period where you're trusting someone and therefore until we get to like instant finality in layer one which we're nowhere near I don't even think we have paths to know how to get there until we get to that point um you know the Delta between instant zero knowledge proofs and zero knowledge proofs that take 10 minutes is actually not going to be um very very helpful for us that makes sense um I want to talk about this wallet thing that you brought up twice because I think it's I agree with you completely I think we should abstract as much as we can at the wallet level um especially with intents like completely I think some stuff is theoretical and we work towards like some theoretical interoperability but at the end of the day like intents are fantastic there's some trade-offs that come with relying on solvers but I mean if you have to trust parties you have to trust parties um are you guys working on anything with regard to that like are you working with wallet providers are you working on um your own solution potentially or how do you see that like wallet space evolved to abstract away orbit chains but also abstract away like other Els or interactions between them yes we're we're working very very very uh heavily in the interoperability place and think that it has to be a it has to be number two things one it has to be a solution that involves many different parties right and that's actually one thing which I think I want to you know zero on a second interoperability is never going to be solved by one team and you know what we like to do is say how do we you know build our technology but also work together and and help and facilitate you know the ecosystem in in solving this if a few years back and we still a partnership that's actually very strong today we announced a partnership with espresso systems on interoperability Tech um I could talk about the specific flavor what we're working on with them but I actually want to make a meta point which is and we announc then this is true then was was true then and it's true today the reason why we want to work with others is because you know if I went ahead and created the arbital interoperability stack I can promise you that like the op chains aren't going to use it and like polygon chains aren't going to use it and I very much think that in order you know to get out of our own way we need to actually enable neutral parties work together put out you know really good infastructure together with with with others as well that we can all sign on and say hey this can be the interoperability stack not just for my particular stack not just for Arbitron chains but actually for ethereum and maybe even Beyond right and let's just unify as much as we can and I think this is a mistake that a lot of teams fall into where they very much try to build a walled interrup you know experience in their particular branded environment but we have a a larger environment that we're trying to interrupt that's called ethereum right so I don't need to create some other like multi-chain structure in ethereum my goal with arbit from morbit chains is to uh make them as easy to connect to any chain that that that that a user might want to go to right so it's not just say hey if you're in the orbit ecosystem you connect really really fast to any other orbit chain there will be Times by the way where where from a technology reason we can have better Tech between two chains like that of course we should use that but more broadly you know unless there is a good reason for it I don't want to build artificial walls so if you know the the uh the universal intent engine that we mentioned is a great example it's just evm contracts and there's no reason that uh you can't launch it on any evm chain so I don't want to build a wall and say only Arbitron chains can use this I actually want to build the best in drop because if you're a user if you want to go from arbit to base you're going to get there if I try to add like friction it's just going to make you more annoyed and maybe your your likelihood of coming back will be less right we're not stopping you from getting there so therefore I think the thing that we can do best is say how do I make that path for you to get in this case off of arbitrum the easiest and most seamless possible and not add any artificial friction at all so you know we're working very very hard we'll have you know more to share specifically soon you ready announce the first phase of of um of our of our work here which was the universal intent engine to make interop between any two chains you know fast and again our our goal here by the way there are a lot of interesting people working on a lot of really good people working on this EF is working on this we want we just want to bias towards action right I don't want to spend a year writing the absolute best spec and then another year implementing that because I think so much is here today I want to I want to say hey this is what works today we're building this right now which is what we're doing and we can continue to analyze it and continue to improve it and want to be in all those conversations and calls and if in a year or two we have something better let's swap that in but this is a solution that that this is a problem that needs a solution today so and yes we will be doing a lot more so some Alpha will doing a lot lot more in this space directly as well um but um I'll leave it there for right now yeah and so actually I kind of want to touch on that so um off chains played a big role in ethereum's development uh both with this Universal intense engine and also with the prism uh client that you mentioned earlier and so just like I'm thinking on like a greater scale uh in the ethereum ecosystem Beyond Uh ethereum's current problem area of scaling what are there any other Primitives that you think should be enshrined into ethereum for greater versatility of the network I would say um you know other than like things like continuing to iterate on like pre-compiled and the like I would say that that you know the current development path you know is is the is the right way to go where we have a very rollup you know a rollup Centric road map and allow a lot of the say execution Innovation to happen you know in in the in the inside the rollups now if there are like pre- compiles that will make all rollups life life easier and I think that's something we should absolutely do and look at if there are new cryptographic pre-compiled and the like things we can enshrine inside ethereum but I I get very nervous when people talk about ining ethereum that we're going to actually stifle Innovation if I look at ethereum comp to the other ecosystems the thing that it has really nice is the flip side of this quote unquote fragmentation coin it's the fact that you have you know dozens of independent excellent core development teams building on ethereum with slight variations because they're not the same people not the same teams and don't have the same ideas but often have you know very similar at least overlapping Vision if we stifle that Innovation and we got this some what our competitor's ecosystems look like you'll have one or two teams building out the entire ecosystem and you know what you'll have you'll have less fragment a you also have less diversity you'll have less experimentation and I think ultimately that's a bad thing right so um I'd like to see ethereum you know continue on its path and not enshrine like deep execution uh unless it's like really like a common denominator to benefit all rollups like hey if you could say hey all rollups need the evm pre-compiled so like let's figure out a way to do that in a way that you know as metallic said he put out a blog post about Native rollups in a way that's extendable so now you know we have this base thing which everyone can use on efficiently and now you can add these other features that's fantastic but if you look at ethereum even in execution environments you have us that are supplementing the evm with our Rich from stylus um and by the way that's not a New Concept if you go back to ethereum history there was something called ewm which was the exact same vision wanted to do that on ethereum we've uh you that project uh was discontinued but not for you know really mostly for technical reasons U we've you know accomplished that today and you know I'd love to see that eventually go back and you know become part of core ethereum if the community is interested in it you have teams like uh um you know uh fuel building the fuel VM you have the starware team building Cairo you have teams like Phoenix building a fully homeomorphic encryp encryption encrypted version of the of the of the evm the idea is that this Innovation is very very powerful and if you fast forward five years from now I can't tell you for sure I have my ideas but I can't tell you for sure which one of these paths will have one out and which will be more dominant than but what I can tell you pretty much for sure is that the evm as it stands today um will be improved by then and we'll have taken Innovation from one or more of these paths and it will become part of the core evm and that's why I think it's so important not to uh cut off this experimentation or discourage even this diversity on ethereum yes it comes with a price it looks like fragmentation you have different teams different Visions doing different things and you know it's a lot less uh you know it looks a lot less cohesive and say another ecosystem where one team's calling the shots and there's no one else you know dissenting and everyone's building towards the exact API but you know this is a place where I disagree with SE toi who says hey there's only six interesting smart contracts we don't need to execute you don't need to innovate on the execution layer today I think that's a very uh I think that's an incorrect Vision because I think there will be so much Innovation and by the way don't just look forward and take my guest Look Backwards five years ago today right like completely completely a different world I remember when we were initially raising funds for offchain labs is a little more than five years ago about six years ago um and no one wanted to talk to me by the way the word rollup didn't exist um and initially people didn't want to talk about something new because they their question that they had was is it a state Channel or is it plasma right so the notion was back then everyone knows that scaling is going to happen via State channels or plasma and if you don't agree with that then you're wrong and I don't even want to talk to you obviously that's not the way that things evolved and now we have something called rollups and state channels and plasma look like things of the past although there's been a little bit bit of resurgence in interest in plasma but but but still you know rollups are dominating the day so I think if we Look Backwards it would be foolish to say that we know today exactly what the future will look like and the only way that we know that ethereum will be safe in the future and by safe I mean continue to be relevant is if we allow that Innovation to happen and the good news is that Innovation is happening primarily on ethereum so I don't know exactly which thread will wi out but I like all these smart people with different ideas doing their things in the ethereum ecosystem yeah uh yeah so like the ewm like ethereum 1.x that's a deep call yeah um so just to touch on the um on the safe portion of what of what you've said um ethereum is known to be likely one of the safest chains right and just like in terms of like the cons the sheer number of consensus and execution clients right but at the same time something can be said that these clients might like slow the time for like ethereum upgrade and many have said this online so I'm curious to know like how would you from the um from the perspective of someone that like helps develop the consensus clients uh balance the product update like timeline for ethereum so one of the nice things about the layered architecture is we can have innovation in different layers and not actually have to have a dependency on them so I think it's a good thing that the consensus client layer moves slowly what I think that would become a bad thing if we said hey we can't do any Innovation anywhere else or we can't have execution layer Innovation because until we figure out this consensus please so you know even in the consensus client right we've done a lot of innovation there right the whole move from proof of work to prove a stake the merge was a you know years long process maybe that was you'll say that was slow but I think that there's an aspect of taking getting it right understanding ethereum is is a very mature project today and we can't just you know push changes you know willy-nilly we actually have to test them make sure that they're um really respon the responsible thing to do um and battle tested before we actually put them live on mainnet so there's definitely some friction there but again the nice thing about the layered architecture is it's not really slowing down Innovation on these other layers right when when etheria moved from proof of uh work to proof of stake arbitrum also moved from proof of work to proof of stake but it didn't have to do anything right it just benefited from that layer underneath it and arbitrum has been able to evolve itself and add stylist without any input without any approval from you know the execution layer right even internally the prism folks you know didn't have to say okay we're going to allow stylist to happen because all that it is is smart contracts that happen to ethereum and that's actually the benefit of of the layered architecture so um I think it's good to have certain layers that move a little slower and certain layers that move a little more quickly and that to me is literally the entirety of the benefit of the rollup centry growth map if you take a different ecosystem which doesn't have this and you wanted to make some execution uh change you're going to have to actually do that coupled together with the consensus client and have to make this whole systemwide change and test all these pieces together whereas now we have very very well-defined apis if you don't change you know the evm layer do whatever you want on the consensus as long as we think it's a good idea on that layer and everyone else will just inherit that I think that's how we allow for both you know the software to aify but also to have uh innovation uh where we think we still need rapid um progress what's up guys um welcome back to ZX research today I'm joined by Antonio from dydx thanks for coming on Antonio hey thanks so much for having me what would you say is a North star for dydx yeah so right now there's two things that are important trading volume is the Hallmark of any exchange right it's like that's um users putting through real dollars and volume real dollars and fees Etc but one of the things we are very focused on right now is the number of active Traders on dydx perhaps even more than the volume right now um and it's really just trying to make the product more accessible um make sure that it's not only really sophisticated traders that are trading on this thing and that have access to this thing um and and really just trying to improve that by orders of magnitude to make dydx more widely used um and that'll obviously play into trading volume eventually and into the bottom line but it's probably users I would say is the Northstar metric right now perfect and what would you say is your general outlook for 2025 both for dydx as well as for crypto yeah so I'll start with dydx and then we can zoom out but with dydx as I mentioned really in q1 we're focused a lot on quality focused on a few new things like this simpler trading experience um then longer into this year I think you'll see us starting to really develop some novel things on the product side again what is that exactly going to look like again I don't totally know yet I have a few ideas um but I think you'll start to see the form factor of dydx diverge from what you've seen in other exchanges and that's going to be intentional um I really want to take a shot at developing a product that is new and that's again really uniquely enabled by web 3 in crypto generally um obviously the price action has been pretty positive for the past month or two I'm not going to make any wild predictions on where the price is going to end up by the end of the year or so hopefully we're in the earlier stages of a bull market um but we'll see on that and the these things have a way of teasing you and taking a little bit longer than you think but the the biggest thing that I'm always excited about much more than the price action is the development action and what types of new things are being built within crypto I have been a big fan of pump fun just from the sense that it's a really novel type of product that we haven't had access to before um there's a lot of things going on with iteration of current products dydx like a uniso perhaps a hyper liquid some other things um but yeah just really excited to see what can be built with crypto social f is and another trends that I'm excited about and just really trying to make crypto something that the real world pays attention to because I think crypto right now is something that's become fairly Niche and that's fine like there's nothing wrong with that but I got into crypto 10 years ago because I really felt like it has the potential to change the world and have we done that as a space yet no not really like sometime we we sort of did or we on the precipice of that with like FTX and SPF and all these sort of things so that's what they promised but that blew up um and now we still have great products there's still a lot of opportunity for trading that's really important obviously I'm you know running a decentralized Rd exchange um but at the same time I am really excited about the potential of crypto to Branch out Beyond and just become something that everyone cares about and everyone can pay attention to and even if it's under the hood plays a big part in their daily lives I'm going to shift away a bit from Technical and I want to talk a bit about the L2 landscape um sure obviously over the past year and a half things have changed quite a bit I think Bas is has eaten a bit into the market share of arbit trim um and we have other fast EVMS launching l2s like Mega E and monat just launched death net I don't know when they're going to launch their main net yet but um how do you guys plan on competing with um these other chains both on a speed um level I know you guys have the fastest block times I guess activity level makes more sense um and on the other hand one thing I feel like arbitrum had going on for it was defy tokens and legit product tokens for a really long time um the market shifted quite a bit since then I would say like since the days of arbitrum Defi and L2 Defi and now we're getting more more attention into random tokens um is that something that you're concerned about do you think attention needs to shift back into arbit in some way any thoughts on how to bring back um more activity my thoughts are we have to have like very long-term uh convictions and what's important and what's not important right um that being said you can't ignore the shortterm right so if you're just going to look at the 10-year Vision uh you actually might not survive to to to see that 10-year Vision out so you can't just say all right I don't care about anything today I have this other future in mind you just need to build towards that you have to engage with the shortterm but Al ultimately you with a long-term Focus I think we as an ecosystem actually did a very very good job at that right so arbitrum you know Meme season didn't take off in arbitrum right so let's just call us Spa spay here right it didn't happen there um ultimately I don't think that's a bad thing we didn't go very heavily after it like you know other other other ecosystems did um there are some structural reasons such as the front running protection and fairness which I think made it less um um attractive for some of these developers to launch some of these things in arbitrum and those were values that we didn't question and say all right let's let's get rid of that to to sort of you know make this uh more attractive for a particular type of token in a particular type of time we had long-term convictions on on the importance of certain aspects of the software and the bets we've taken we've built I think very very strongly towards those and actually like you know if you look at if you look at today it's funny we're having this ation today as opposed to say three months ago if you look at today we're actually seeing some of that you know come back if you look at literally go to defi Lama today arbitrium is again the number one token the number one sorry uh L2 when it comes to Dex volume right so it has for a while because of the meme activity it wasn't but when it comes to the real defi economic activity that was always shining through an arbitrum as the meme stuff quiets down again look at today um and it's been that way for most of the past week arbitrum has you know reclaimed it its spot and it's you know I think it's like number four of any blockchain it's been number three it's like you know basically ethereum arbitrum salana BC are are basically um you know taking those top four spots so that's like an example of not getting too clouded right three months ago you might have said oh my God like memec coins it's it's losing all but like it's okay like have a long have long-term conviction about the bets You're Building I personally am long-term convicted about a few bets one number one is I want to say fi right the merger of Defi and trafi we're seeing a lot of this tokenization um stable coins are doing really well in arbitrum just a week and a half or two weeks ago usdt announced the usdt zero expansion where arbitrum is the Hub now for basically all new usdt chains that are you know other than the four originally natively minted chains we're seeing a lot of this Innovation um as well there's going to be some other interesting um other interesting stable coin activity that we're that we're seeing in arbitrum um um I think you know stay tuned for for for for some uh more announcements month on on that end uh when it comes to additional new stable coin adoption and we're seeing that happen uh very strongly in arbitrum so I think arbitrum is doing well there another place where arbitrum is doing really well this is still a nent industry but what is gaming um arbitrum has definitely the top out to uh mind Shar and gaming and I would argue one of the tops in all in all in all blockchains and that's the place where again it's not the most popular bet today it's not the BET of like mem coins and AI coins you know or maybe it's not the bet that was popular or two ago but it comes from a long-term conviction and when the market like didn't gaming didn't take off in in a large way as soon as I thought it would be we didn't we weren't like all right let's give up on this bet no we were like doubling and tripling down um you know there's the gaming developer conference in San Francisco in a few weeks we're going to have a very large presence there uh as an ecosystem because we have a long-term conviction in that bet even if that's not the case today and that's because if we look where the the long-term value is so again if you look at these core metrics you know today arbitrum has um been number one in in tvl on the Chain you know in in overall Bridge tvl from day one um yes it's definitely gone a little more competitive but also um you know we don't uh manufacture any any of our uh metrics at all so what you see is is is really the truth it's organic it's what you get yeah it'll definitely be competitive but I think having long-term conviction and staying true to those is going to hold true and again we can already see that today where these metrics where arbitrum had been lagging for the past few months is already becoming you know rising to the top again as some of the what I'll call like shortterm Cycles you know die down yeah that makes sense um I think we actually see this quite often because real world assets and real world use cases and gaming takes a lot of time and long time and lot like a lot of effort and capital to build out um often it's like a criticism for l1s and l2s that focus on them um one question I wanted to ask and I I've always wanted to ask this to somebody from offchain Labs you guys have potentially one of the strongest like I guess strongest um most dynamic and like kind of competitive governance forum and governance system to the point that do you guys at offc Labs ever worry that it might be negative for new applications if a lot of applications control a lot of governance and um votes Etc so I've developed a very strong uh opinion around this really and it's it's little over the past few months and some of this conversation has happened in in in public some of it has happened there was uh just at Denver there was an Arbitron delegate day some of this is happening in private as well among delegates and I think that there's uh and again it wasn't me pushing this necessarily I think the ecosystem has really come to this um sort of new understanding and I think we need what we need is um we need to really differentiate between different types of actors in the ecosystem right so there should be arbitrum aligned entities and then there there are like Enders and service providers I think one of the problems that we see in the ecosystem today is that there's no clear you know line there always so you'll have um and this is something which I had this you know I won't say the details right now but if you look on my Twitter I kind of had like this whole public thing a couple weeks ago where you you had a a a service provider who was you know doing something you know who was had a job to do something for arbit from Defi and then you know in the other breath they were just talking about all the other ecosystems are doing this and like if you look at me at offchain Labs if like my head of product or my head of strategy was also the head of product the head of strategy and my competitor you know that would be a problem at the same time by the way like I look at the lights here if the utility company is also servicing my competitor that's not a problem I don't expect exclusivity for my utility company or my ISP or any of those Services even things like my my Auditors right I don't mind if you know those that are auditing arbitrum code as long as they're professionals and good at what they do are also auditing you know competitors they're not paid to be uh you know strategic and operate operators for arbitrum they're paid to do a particular service and I think so I think there's been honestly some uh confusion and conflation of these roles and what we need to see is a delineation of you know a separation of these roles where there are service providers and vendors that do specific roles and then there are those that are operationally and strategically pushing the Dow and also I think a strong honestly conflict of interest policy which is and we've seen actually this this happen very well a really good example is when the GMX folks actually voted to fund synthetics uh right so a competitor but they were able to understand that in this role it's not about them hurting their competitor they actually want to do what they think is best for the arbit nucle system and you know GMX folks uh coin flip has been actually fantastic AR arbitr delegates so I don't think that there is like a again hard hard line that need to draw on all these things but but ultimately I think that um what we need is in the Dow we need that those that are making strategic and operating decisions of the Dow and those are incentivized to do so are like all in and want arbitrum to win the same way you know again if you guys were at blockworks but also working at misari they'll be like what's going on like that doesn't work similar I think for a offchain labs and similar for the Arbitron Dow you need to make sure that the right people are making the right decisions and that we're not like incentivizing the Dow has these programs to incentivize delegates and pay delegates it's not paying them or incentivizing delegates in ways that sort of you know doesn't ask for that Allegiance and doesn't doesn't require that commitment you know like any job uh even if it's not an actual job um you know it needs people that are aligned and want the Dow to win I think that that that's the fundamental route I think that will answer all those questions so when it comes to how can new projects come in and align themselves well the answer is like if we have the right set of people at the Dow um and the right set of people doesn't mean they necessarily agree with me and everything it just means people that are there with the right incentives for the right reasons that they want arbitrum to win whatever that means to them and it might be a different thing for me that's great because I'm not them and I'm not the Dow and we want people with diversity of opinions and diversity of you know thought and how arbitrum wins but the place where I don't want diversity is I want everyone that's making decisions to want arbitrum to win and to be aligned for that outcome and if that's the case and it's the best thing to incentivize new projects and new protocols for Dow and not just entrench you know uh existing ones then I think that U we'll get to the right decisions but again I think the answer is really one step earlier making sure that the incentives and the alignment of the people making these decisions are what you'd expect in any organization so I actually I'd like to follow up on this point as someone that's pretty involved in the da um I've seen some like talk lately about um about like preferences to certain protocols so like just like uh the Dow should have like a preference to arbit from aligned protocols like native protocols versus like something that's multi-chain uh something like uh or I won't give an example but like I kind of see this in a way being conflicting with like uh embracing more of a multi-chain interoperability like uh ecosystem right and so like how would you in your view how do you reconcile like these two things like trying to like build out a native ecosystem alongside like the whole like allowing an arbitrum user to access any protocol on um from anywhere if that makes sense it makes a lot of sense I think ultimately you know it's going to be both of those if you look at we mentioned arbitrum Dex volume before if you look at you know where's that volume coming from the number one this again just today so number one is unis Swap and number two is Camelot so you have right there right the and by the way an arbitrum is not just like another Unis swap chain you know if you look at Unis swaps volume where does their volume come from it's probably like 2 point something billion yesterday comes from ethereum and 600 or so million come from arbitrum so arbitrum is like definitively like a very very important chain to Unis Swap and actually a massive driver of their volume right even the fact that it's about a quarter or so of of ethereum volume and the their number two chain today is important so um that that's to say like I think arbitrum is in a very strong position that it's not just like another generic deployment for these protocols but actually even for the multi-chain protocols you know pretty important and pretty exciting and I view you know I assume that the incentives will be aligned there but of course there's also importance of having uh a native uh ecosystem and making sure again it's about alignment right making sure that projects that are all in an arbit and want arbit to win because um you know certainly with with protocols that are multi-chain they'll just follow the users you know more more immediately more immediately and feel like okay where are my users where if they're an arbitrum that's great but like they're less like necessarily bought in you know def fact you know in in in an automatic way to uh the arbitrum vision so the answer is like everything else I think you need a really strong balance between these two I think we want arbitrum to be you know the best experience in the in the way that you're cross chain and multi-chain behem us arbit should be a very important chain to them and one where they know that their customers can come and they'll do well but also I do think having a homegrown ecosystem uh of innovation is important because I just don't want arbit to become this chain where it's just like these established protocols but the Innovation is happening elsewhere and often when you when you you know when I'm building a new protocol you don't no one starts off as a multi-chain you know Behemoth they have to start off somewhere so it's really the question of how do we incentivize those that Areo their very first place to build how do we make sure that their arbitrum home that arbitrum is a comfortable place for them and I think we have to make arbitrum uh open and fair for all of them and actually if you look to arbitrum history um this is really enshrined in in the values that that brought brought arbitrum to where it was at the very very first early earliest days of arbitrum arbitrum went live uh to developers in May of 2021 arbitrum only went live to users in August of 2021 and there was like a lot of uh there were a lot of people pushing in say July of that year in July going hey we're ready open this up and we said no we really want to give everyone a fair and open shot to be ready at the same time and let's go back to the de example on the same day that Unis swab went Live Sushi swap went live and another Dex you may have not heard of uh called swapper by DX da went live as well and the reason I mentioned that is it wasn't like it never was us saying like hey we're going to roll out the red carpet for you know this particular decks and and make them win it's like hey no we're going to try to be fair and create an open and competitive ecosystem for everyone and if unisoft is Win winning on layer one there's a very good chance that they're going to win on Layer Two because they're probably winning for a reason they know what they're doing they know how to execute but it's not going to be because we unfairly advantaged everyone so the the best thing that we can do is create an environment where it's open and fair and everyone thinks that they have a fair shot and by the way I think if you look more broadly at the Arbor from you system this this um you know neutrality is actually something that's helped it a lot right so if you look at stable coin volume today or you know stable coin market cap arbitrum is one of the top chains or stable coin market cap it's one of the only chain that has you know significant you know measured in billions of dollars of both usdc and usdt and the answer is because you know whereas there are some chains that like are usdc chains and like usdt would not be welcome there there are some chains that are usdt chain right we don't expect to see a large usdc balance on Tron I wouldn't expect to see a large usdt balance on base because these ecosystems are sort of natively aligned with the with these arbit has always been a position of we want to do really well on our layer we want to really be the best infrastructure layer but create opportunities for everyone else to create open competitive Innovation and we see that happen right with with assets as well as well as protocols where they can come and have their best TR doesn't mean that the little guy it doesn't mean that swapper is going to out compete Unis swap it doesn't mean that the little ones will always you know do that but it means that they're not going to be unfairly disadvantaged they'll have the opportunity to execute and what happens sometimes you know uh the larger ones wins sometimes you have something like GMX which came to arbitrum when was you know actually came from BSC originally it was basically had very very had no traction at the time and has turned into one of the most important protocols in all of Defi and that's because you know we didn't say oh well you have to be successful to get an advantage in arbit it's like no if you're a team that's willing to build and try you're going to have a fair shot some will rise to the top others won't but it won't be us you know putting our Thumb in the scale and deciding who the winners are perfect um that makes a lot of sense Stephen before we end it I um I have one last question what I guess upgrades or in initiatives are you guys working on at opan Labs over the next few months that you think people need to look into that they should read more about um Research into and what should they be looking forward to over the next six months or maybe a year yeah so I think we we've covered most of them today I would say Stylus is definitely still a sleeping giant today we're seeing some really interesting usage of of stylus uh one example is a team called Renegade Finance which is doing onchain dark pools um and the cool thing here is these have about a ton of zero knowledge proofs in them maybe about a dozen zkps verification for every transaction because it's doing this like private dark poool the irony is you know because stylus allows you to bring in off-the-shelf uh you know zero knowledge cryptographic libraries written in other languages that are about 10x more efficient on average than say solidity it's actually becoming even though we're not a ZK rollup on the application layer um stylus you know makes arbiton the most attractive place for say you know zero knowledge uh protocols and zero knowledge applications again because you can bring in these native cryptographic libraries that are just much much more efficient and have been around for many years that being said today the Innovation that we're seeing is mostly in these areas like Renegade where they're doing things that are fundamentally imp possible without stylus right they're bringing in libraries that you know doing the amounts of zkp in this zkps in this example that they couldn't do otherwise I think what what what's underexplored today is stylus as a scaling solution right because maybe maybe you want to do something that's running just fine on chain today but it's computationally expensive you can say hey let me rewrite some of these components and stylist and I'll get a 10x benefit so that I think we've seen less of today but I think that's going to happen more and more over time the foundation is investing heavily and has Grant programs you know targeted at stylist developers so I think we'll see a lot of that of new innovation come out there today there over time and I watch that I continue to watch uh things like time boost as I mentioned uh watching that vote seeing what happens is interesting um if it does go live on chain which I you know I personally uh think there's a very good chance that it will and it's something that we are proponents of um then I think it's going to be interesting to see how that develops over time and how that those markets um you know stand themselves up and and come and and uh and um you know just keeping an eye on that I think is going to be very very interesting um and then really just in the on the side of the ecosystem development you know you'll see at least from my team but I think just from the ecosystem more convictions in our core bets right so defi trafi uh stablecoins rwas and gaming are going to be pillars that doesn't mean that we won't be uh interested in emerging Trends as well but it means you know you always have to balance these things and we're you know very much going to be in the Camp of we are a very very long-term vision and even if there's another cycle where you know we're still not valuing these things as much we think there's a lot of value there long term and we've been uh pretty consistent on that for a very long time perfect um Stephen thanks so much for coming on this was fantastic thank you so much for having me [Music]

========================================

--- Video 39 ---
Video ID: fyMKYv9_YFg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fyMKYv9_YFg
Title: What Does SIMD-228 Mean For Solana? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-03-13 08:00:39 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts dives into key market updates, including the U.S. Strategic Bitcoin Reserve announcement, and Bitcoin’s outlook going forward. They also explore Solana’s SIMD-228 proposal, and its implications for validators and staking rewards. Finally, they discuss the future of real-world assets onchain

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Bitcoin February 2025 Update: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/flashnotes/bitcoin-february-2025-update

SIMD-228 Deep Dive: https://x.com/0xcarlosg/status/1899570952943387023

The Effects of SIMD-96: https://x.com/0xcarlosg/status/1892181938770694418
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Doing your crypto taxes doesn’t have to suck. Say goodbye to tax season stress with Crypto Tax Calculator - built for degens like you: 3,000+ integrations to support all your wallets, exchanges, and on-chain activity with deep integrations into dApps & smart contracts. A custom pricing oracle to handle even the most chaotic portfolios. Full support for IRS rules and accurate, CPA-endorsed tax reports. 

Generate reports your accountant will love or file directly yourself. Create an account. Import your wallets and exchanges. Review and download your tax report. 

Get started today and make tax season easy! You can use our exclusive discount code BW2025 to enjoy 30% off all paid CTC plans until April 15th, 2025.  

Follow this link to get started: https://cryptotaxcalculator.io/us/?coupon=BW2025&utm_source=blockworks&utm_medium=podcast&utm_campaign=0x
--
Join us at DAS NYC 2025!  Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2025-new-york
--
0xResearch needs your help! 

We’re conducting an audience survey to help us get a better picture of who our listeners are, and what you want to see from the show. What do you like about the show? What can we improve on?

To contribute, follow this link: https://blockworks-research.beehiiv.com/forms/a97db4d7-5ff3-4a02-9089-d521bc64babd
--
Follow Carlos: https://x.com/0xcarlosg
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:06 Reactions to the Strategic Bitcoin Reserve
5:00 Bitcoin's Outlook Going Forward
15:37 Ledger Ad
15:53 TradFi's Plans to Enable 24-Hour Trading
23:48 Ledger Ad
24:21 The SIMD-228 Debate
37:03 Future Proposals After SIMD-228
44:09 CryptoTaxCalculator Ad
44:41 Expectations For RWAs
57:56 DAS NYC 2025
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
I think the reason like just CMD 228 was so controversial is that it is one of the first changes that I can think of that is not just purely technical but it's also very economic in nature nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice Pacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed hey guys welcome back to another episode of zerox research uh before we get into the show today um as we've been doing for the past few weeks I want to give a sh one last shout out to das um it's coming to New York it's going to be next week both Carlos and Mark here on the call from the research team will be there um as well as some other folks from the team and some great speakers and members from around the industry so if you want to get your tickets um this is It's kind of your last chance um going into next week use code 0x10 at the link in the description grab some tickets and hopefully we'll see you guys at D next week um all right let's let's dive into it today like I said Carlos and Mark here with me today um couple of big relatively big announcements I think there's sort of an up uh maybe a positive and a negative to the announcement around the Bitcoin the Strategic Bitcoin Reserve that came out um over this past week um kind of terming it the seized Bitcoin reserve it still fits the spr acronym there but I think the market was maybe a little OV excited about what this announcement could be um there may have been like an implicit expectation that the US government would be buying Bitcoin on some Cadence like the kind of Senator lamus has has alluded to um with her kind of ideal of getting to like you know a million units of Bitcoin but either way um executive order from Trump came out there is this establishment of the Strategic Bitcoin reserve and the United States digital ass stockpile um talked a little bit previously about this um stockpile reserve of other assets as well it seems largely that the text of this and like the intention here is specifically to just not sell you know leading cryptocurrencies that are seized from illicit activities really um and that it seems like that may have been a disappointment for the General market that was maybe expecting more um what are your guys high level thoughts here is this like were we expecting this is is this countered or any thoughts that we had or is this more or less than we expected this soon I think it was largely expected I like the fact that they highlighted Bitcoin this time around and they didn't like just let leave it at digital asset stockpile I think it's good that Bitcoin will have like a preferential spot if you will on the reserve and I think like at the end of the day it will be the main focus which is the way it should have been from like the start um I agree with you like um I think they will most likely just not sell the assets that they have ceased in the past from like uh silk growth and other uh hacks but yeah it could be like um I I wouldn't like rule out um some states uh buying Bitcoin like in the next year or so or some changes that allows like the government to like uh actually get some buy orders in but like at this stage it seems highly unlikely yeah I agree I think it was largely expected at least for us inally I was just hoping that the market was also pricing in like a nothing Burger I mean most of these kind of crypto White House Summits are most of these White House Summits are sorry and not just crypto related so I mean I think it's big in the sense that you know if we look 6 months ago 5 months ago we wouldn't have imagined being you know crypto being an agenda in the white house I think from that lens it's really good um you know not selling um the the Bitcoin that's that's already in possession okay at least there's no sell pressure there I think that's a good thing um I'm also happy that David Saks kind of walked back on Trump's post um with the Ada xrp he just said you know Trump just tweeted out the five largest by market cap don't read too much into it and I think I I'm glad to see a little bit more formalization around why that was like remarked on so overall I think the markets pulled back slightly I think there was some a little bit rumors of maybe taxes like a reduction on taxes for crypto long-term gains and you know that didn't materialize so there was a slight pullback but I think I think it was largely expected and it you know it went the way that you know I think we largely thought it would how do we feel about the outlook for like Bitcoin from here and I know Mark you've done a recent monthly report on monthly note on on Bitcoin in General on the network like what are our thoughts going forward Carlos you mentioned you know there are some states that are pushing bills through you know house local state house and senates at at the moment um to formalize some kind of like state level um Bitcoin Investments but uh I guess going forward this is it it's a bit different now like I think prior to this event you know there was some like opium still left in a lot of you know maybe retails mind of you know hey the government's going to buy our bags um with that out of the way you know what's sort of next or where should people be looking or what should we we be thinking about going forward I think something that's unappreciated is black crck adding Bitcoin to their model portfolio and I think they put a 2% allocation which means that not just from the pure Bitcoin ETFs just people just like hedge funds or maybe Pension funds and traditional advisors choosing their own allocation but other ETFs That Base that use um black Rock's model portfolio as a sort of index or Benchmark will start to have this as an asset allocation in their portfolio long term it was a recent change I think it was maybe last month um and you know it's going to take you know for chief investment officers and portfolio managers is going to take them some while to you know do the sharp ratio analysis and whatever else their internal processes are to include this into their into their structures and start to advise it to clients but I think that is another structural Tailwind for Bitcoin moving forward um and you know if it was if we were in a different type of Market that would have been probably all over the Twitter timeline and and you know social media but now it doesn't get a peep out of anybody but again I think it's just another you know slow increment to what just mainstream adoption of of just of Bitcoin and you know potentially other assets as well yeah it's a great call I want to to share this um chart you you pulled for the recent report on bitcoin but also highlighting that the the ibit ETF has seen the greatest amount of flows retained as well um and maybe that has something to do with you know just their General the the investors that are using this fund or how they're treating it or thinking about it going forward um but I think you make a good point just generally in terms of the the long-term view here um it it seems things are are relatively positive but it's just that the short-term Market action has you know left some some people in the crowds a little bit confused as to to what's going on right now yeah definitely and then I mean with with black rock retention I mean I I I'm not 100% certain but anecdotally when I see these 13f filings reports come out every quarter which is any any in financial institution that has over $100 million of an asset needs to report it in these in these filings and anecdotally I just see them as you know Goldman Sachs and these other large Finance institutions so I think it's probably like you said the um the holder base the buyer base of these assets is why black rock has such a higher retention rate compared to others um I mean that being said last month wasn't the best for Bitcoin Flows In general we saw I think we saw like $3.6 billion doar of outflows and black rock was I think Black Rock contributed to $775 million of those so it wasn't wasn't strong from them either gray scale gray scale continues to bleed like I I don't know when we're going to get this grayscale overhang out and done with I mean at this point I think them launching their fund might have been a net negative for for the industry if it wasn't for that little ETF transition um but I mean yeah we see it here February one of the worst month by far hands down no question about it and you know when we normally have on an average on a monthly basis structural inflows coming in from the btfs and then this month last month February we had negative price returns then the ETFs the ETF outflows did not help with that right and so we saw one of bitcoin's largest draw Downs um for for the past maybe over a year and a half um and I don't know if it's I don't know if the ETF flows lead the price action or vice versa it's really hard to say there's some modeling to be done on that um but I'm you know this chart here that we have up it's not it's as February so maybe not up to date but I think the draw down was close to 28% um which seems for some reason to be like around the Max draw down Bitcoin is experiencing and I thought maybe it what the flow of ETFs and this new mainstream adoption was helping dampen the volatility of Bitcoin but even in a month where we had record ETF outflows it still hasn't drawn down more than 28% knock onward hope hopefully hopefully that's it for now but yeah I um it's it's it's a fascinating quote unquote cycle thus far for Bitcoin yeah I largely agree like even if Bitcoin has seen draw Downs I think it has shown remarkable strength relative to other uh crypto assets like if you just focus on February performance um Sol like draw down like 18% against Bitcoin and like it's just like this type of volatility I think it's normal for a bull market I think we forget that in 2021 Bitcoin uh probably had a Max drw down of 50% or something like that like in the midst of the bull market and I agree with Mark like the structural inflows from the ETFs have largely have largely changed that Dynamic where we don't see as sharp draw downs but I think like it's not something that that should like entirely surprises and in the past like uh month or so we have seen some macros uncertainty and I think like it's not just Bitcoin that has performed poorly I think in general risk assets have taken a hit and you cannot just expect it to be uncorrelated from everything else in the financial system it's just like the way it is is just correlated with global liquidity and the not yeah I think that's a great call Carlos the Trump admin is has been making it very clear and not to macrol LARP too hard on this pod we try to avoid that usually but they've been making it pretty clear that they're okay with seeing some volatility and risk assets um for the time being time being to sort of achieve their goals um when it comes to rates yields and then the budget going forward so that's I think essentially what we've been seeing in both equities and you know I think Bitcoin and other crypto crypto assets have been hit by that maybe flight away from risk um for the time being so yeah there's I it's hard to get into a sense of having some sort of bulletproof asset there's there's always going to be up and down um that comes with things so it's not too surprising on that side of things but um maybe another go ahead Mark no I was going to say yeah since not to be too mcky but since we've have this macro uncertainty we've definitely seen an increase in the correlations between you know Bitcoin and all the other assets and then it and then it does it does it put into context okay what what are we looking forward to are we just looking forward to when this you know fed starts to cut interest rates or are we you know are we looking to when taries down you know but and you actually you know I I maybe mentioned things longterm structural long-term Tailwinds and if I had to like just try and think about it pull something out the only Catalyst let's call it that I can think of is um Michael sailor with his new um21 billion do raise with has Preferred 8% coupon stock and you know if if he does succeed with this and I don't see why he wouldn't you know raise $21 billion if somebody could do it it's probably Michael sailor and from an investor point of view you know an 8% coupon then you know at probably and the yield is higher because I think stock SDK that's what the um preferred stock ticker is it's it's trading at around like 86 so I think the yield is probably somewhere 9 10% as an investor if you can get that kind of dividend yield plus if Bitcoin does well you know it's going to be correlated and you can get some of the msdr stock on the convertible right then this can do this can be a pretty welcome back stop for the for the Bitcoin and enhance enhance the whole crypto industry right now I mean for perspective $21 billion at today's prices is roughly 270,000 Bitcoin and um since the havening Bitcoin you know miners there's an emission of 164,000 Bitcoin per year so Michael saor will basically buy up the next year and a half Supply worth of of Bitcoin emissions in you know the the speed at which he goes I assume probably somewhere around three months you know so if if if if we can get that as some kind of a as some kind of a catalyst some kind of fire to ignite or reverse the tides then then then maybe there is some hope for the industry but I I I hate relying so much on Michael saor be buying the dips yeah I think maybe the the a way of thinking about it is obviously when when Bitcoin is is performing well into the upside um you know it gives him more ammo to sort of keep keep raising and and keep buying and kind of repeat that cycle over and over to the downside I don't think he can be so quick about you know constantly getting fresh new capital in but to your point it may have some level of a dampening effect whereas on the upside it probably had a little bit of an ample Ying effect to bitcoin so um but yeah I think the big question is just if it continues to the downside or we go sideways for a while like what's his real ability to kind of continue raising cash and and buying more BTC um he he's certainly going to be limited to some extent as compared to a few months ago when you know price was really up only um but but it's a great point I think a lot of people have been really leaning into how much of an impact do the s or buys really have on the market I think you know if we look back back to 2021 the question was like how much do stimulus checks have have had an impact on the market and now it's like Michael sailor is sort of like the stimulus check for Bitcoin almost this episode is brought to you by Ledger the global leader in digital asset security celebrating 10 years of innovation Ledger Remains the most secure Hardware wallet for your crypto and logins trusted by 7 million users and securing 20% of the world's digital assets follow the link in today's show notes to grab your Ledger now but I guess other other relatively big news I suppose not for a while but um something that's becoming more and more clear is this idea of like the continued shift towards always on global markets that you know crypto markets have basically pioneered and um been pushing pushing on um for the past you know 10 15 years at this point but um we're seeing NASDAQ they've announced their plans to enable 24-hour trading um it sounds like sometime in 2026 this is you know highly dependent on regulatory approval obviously um as well as some infrastructure upgrades maybe that utili blockchain technology maybe that is just upgrades the existing system so that clearing housers and the other intermediary pieces pieces that handle trading and and clearing and settlement of of different assets um can actually work around the clock but either way I think we're seeing this this trend um more and more especially with you know coming into this new admin um some of some of these Legacy institutions um Legacy markets are more open to the idea of you know Round the Clock 247 always on markets um I think you know we've seen examples from Robin Hood and even coinbase trying to push on that front they've recently announced a a us perpetuals um sort of release as well so I guess I'm just curious your guys thoughts here in terms of like what what are the real impacts of this do we just expect more and more like still have the NASDAQ and QQQ BTC 10day rolling correlation up like are we just expecting continued convergence of these assets where you know today there is still some separation where you know the crypto markets and the equities markets while you know risk patterns and liquidity patterns are correlated to an extent um you might have some different like sets of investors are we just getting to an eventual point in the future where everything is merged and people are just trading all this stuff you know all in one place or all from one you know brokerage or environment I think yeah I think it's an interesting question like if you look at crypto it trades 247 365 days a year and so by definition there's no other asset class that incorporates information as fast as crypto and I think we've seen it uh time and time again front run information faster than other markets react faster than other markets and if you look at like I don't know equities they trade like what 200 days a year they don't trade uh 247 they trade like in an eight hour period or something like that so I think like the move towards 247 uh 365 day trading it's um inevitable and what I think one of the effects that we'll see is just like uh every asset like every asset class incorporating information as fast as crypto does today which can add interesting Dynamics to like uh Capital markets at a at a global scale yeah definitely um I'm looking forward to it because I think for one I'm kind of tired of crypto being the only insurent to express your Viewpoint after hours or maybe on a weekend it gets so volatile um and if there are more Traders online and I'm sorry for them when this happens your job is going to get a lot harder but when that happens it's going to be just generally more liquidity in the market on weekends and other viewpoints I think I think crypto will see more liquidity because Traders won't be shutting off on a on a Friday evening and it will there will be multiple things to you know maybe pay trade as well but largely so I think it's going to be good from a volatility perspective because in the sense of relative comparison like stocks if when this starts they're not going to be as they're going to be more fly traded than they are during the weekdays during eight hour during the eight hour window especially during Us hours and when they when we if it goes to 24/7 on weekends it's going to become a lot more volatile well as you know liquidity dries up on those during those after hours but it's still being traded somewhere and then that starts to make sharp ratios less appealing in general starts to make things a little bit riskier um but then it makes crypto less risky in in in relative comparison because because it's been doing this and the volatility for crypto has been coming down I mean if you look at it at 2024 Bitcoin was less volatile than 35 stocks in the S&P 500 right so the larg 500 companies in US Bitcoin had less volatility than some of them and then if you look at like private Equity markets these things tend to have better risk adjusted ratios than public equities um but it's I think it's really because they're only valued less than once a quarter right so it can go up if there was a true market it can be going up 10% every up and down 10% through the entire time and then it just chooses one point on the Dot Plot on March 31st so I think I think this will help with that comparison between the two different markets and um and also open up people to having just just open up people to having 24/7 trading Technologies like Robin Hood you can already trade stocks and crypto on the same platform and you know with ETFs you can you integrate that into whatever ATS provider you're using for the stock brokerage and then it it starts to become very dissimilar especially if if we move past this just memes and and speculative phase that we're in as as every new industry is in and start to look at like fundamental growths and look at them as startups and businesses but that you can trade on public markets 24/7 then I start I then I start to see like more fundamental driven approaches and more investors coming into the crypto markets as well yeah I guess also the question is when we'll start to see the stocks like issued on chain directly because right now we have kind of like the this uh mix and match approach where we have like traditional rails like and then on top of that you add like technological um I don't know like um yeah like just technology to allow for these 247 trading but like in the back and you still have like the old system so it's not really like completely transformational I think I I'm excited for the time where we issue stocks directly on chain and we have like these native asset issuance and I'm just not sure if they'll use like their own DLT or they'll use like a public blockchain or of that sort but that that's obviously like something more like in the long term that will than something we'll see right now yeah great points I think Mark your comments around volatility are probably felt by market participants over the past few months especially with a lot of like Trump admin announcements on Friday nights Saturdays Sunday evenings um deep seek over the weekend I think a lot of that stuff we saw you know Bitcoin and and crypto assets move to the downside um or upside and then also move when markets opened on Monday morning as well um like alongside equities so yeah that I think that's a great Point it'll be interesting to see sort of how the volatility of both markets transform if we get to a place in the future where really all assets are traded Around the Clock um big big shift in in the game and yeah like you said uh I I don't envy any of the traders that then have to monitor things literally 247 um is isn't that kind of what we do now yeah I guess if you're in crypto you already do that so um I guess maybe they just need to get used to it if everything is going to be tokenized Ledger is the global leader in digital asset security trusted by 7 million users in securing 20% of the world's digital assets in recent years Ledger has built a comprehensive ecosystem of products and services making digital ownership more secure and accessible for everyone Ledger's newest devices Ledger stacks and Ledger Flex introduce the world's first secure touch screens making it easier and safer to manage your transactions and assets alongside Ledger stacks and Ledger Flex they have also launched The Ledger security key app offering a safer alternative to traditional passwords and enhancing your digital security follow the link into Today's Show notes to get started with Ledger today I guess moving on another thing that uh I think we're monitoring currently um and I'd love to get some insight from Carlos on is on there's been a lot of debate over SD 228 um and impacts to the chain impacts to basically yield rates staking rates kind of all related um so I would love Carlos if you could actually sort of start from like a generalized discussion of why SMD sd2 228 um and walk us through like what it means potential impacts and and then we can take a look at like what's going on because there's been some debates and there's actually um a vote up now to to go through with it or not right so yeah basically Sal's inflation follows today affects the mission schedule um the current inflation rate is around 4.6% annualized uh here in this chart you can see that uh inflation has gone up a little bit in the past month the reason for that is because simd 96 was activated uh for those who don't know just a quick refresher cd96 removed the burn from the priority fee and so what that means is that right now when there is a sech in onchain activity there's no burn on the on the priority fee and hence uh you cannot offset that issuance as you can as you can see like during the Trump uh mem coin launch around uh January 20 you saw a huge spike in the burn rate and that kind of offsets the volatility but that's not the case anymore because there's just no not burn anymore um so with this in mind like attention shifted toward uh CMD 228 and there's a sense of urgency by some people in the community that says that inflation is too high right now and Solana is basically overpaying for the security so I think we have right now I think we have in the slides like uh uh um like an image of the curve if we could show it that would be awesome um so we have moved like like what simd 228 proposes is essentially a static curve like yeah exactly this one based on the staking participation rate and so the idea of this curve is to increase its aggressiveness once the staking participation rate drops below 50% so that the new uh inflation rate proposed by CD 228 surpasses the fixed emission schedule once the staking participation rate drops below 33% uh which is like this like where the black line crosses with a purple line and the idea of this is just to increase uh the security in case there's a huge drop in the stake which is not expected but is a good like uh mechanism so with a current staking participation rate of uh around 63% Souls inflation rate will drop to about 0.96% under CD 228 uh which is obviously a big drop from the 4.6% that we were discussing previously and this has sparked some big debate in the salanta community uh there have been huge conversations going up in recent weeks I'm I'm sure people have seen them but basically the idea uh is that CD 228 can reduce the profitability of salana validators significantly especially small validators and does it could reduce the validator count uh the reason for this is that today uh the biggest cost for being a validator on Solana is um voting cost which is a recuring cost and is around $60,000 per month and some some validators are really already run like in thin margins and if CMD 228 reduces like their um like a huge portion of the revenue then they could become un profitable and drop off um helus drew some estimates around what that number could look like and the current estimate is around like 3% of the validator count could drop off which to be honest is not that big of a of a concern and then the other point against SD 228 which I think it's more present is the one made by ly Li of the Solana foundation and she mentions that it's a mistake to change Solana's inflation at a time of bck institutional interest just before ETFs potentially go live this year and the reason for that and I think it's an underappreciated point is that Soul inflation sort of subsidizes institutional distribution today where if you look at custodians ETP issures in Europe they don't actually have exposure to the underlying asset which is soul but they do benefit from Soul inflation so other things equal they prefer having a higher nominal staking yield if and they don't really care where it comes from than having like a lower yield but it's just based on like real revenue and like just think about it like from an example like uh think about a staking ETP in Europe and the ETP issuer takes a portion of the staking rate um other things equal like inflation being so high today benefits them because they get a higher percentage of that uh of the staking yield and they have higher revenues does they have like an incentive to sell soul to their clients since the same goes for custodians and other types of like institutional players and so if you remove that uh inflation there could be like this risk where some of this institutional uh players lose interest like in promoting um soul to their clients and so so the idea of Lely is that um Soul could actually lose some institutional interest after cd2 28 I don't necessarily agree with the stake but it's obviously I think it's the strongest like um argument against implementing CD 228 yeah I just I pulled up the list of validators by stake and to your to the point you can see you know binance stake and coin base Ledger by figment and figment themselves and Galaxy as well they all have you know commission rates of 5 to 8% and obviously very large amounts of stake today which like you would expect is you know from customers using their um using their services and depositing their their assets um and staking them via that you know custodian um so yeah I think just drives home the point of maybe the potential value there yeah yeah funny thing is Carlos we both came from separate European ETF ETF and ETP issuers so we kind of like live this industry for a little bit and yeah I know you don't necessarily agree and I don't think and I I agree either I mean they they still have Stak eth even though eth was like 3% at one point I mean they're still going to offer these products because AUM is is just more revenue on their on their table for them I mean even if they have to charge a management fee I mean look at Bitcoin or ethereum ETFs in the US right now or even Bitcoin etps in Europe there's a management fee there and they're one of the more popular products I really think I really think the demand side is more important than what issuers do for marketing and whatnot I mean you know Bitcoin you know I I mean black Ro can help Market Bitcoin a lot but I you know I think like Solana can Market itself and I think investors retail or institutional want a coin with a good story and possibly a low inflation health helps that story as it's helped Bitcoin in its past as ethereum have tried to use with their disinflationary fee model so I think the demand side is more important than than that um and I think I think you agree with that too and um but I I wanted to ask you know it's we're on the voting now I think it has like just over eight hours left um what do you think the outcome is going to be yeah like absolutely I I think we can share like the live voting but just before that one point that I want to like drive home is like you mentioned like the etps in Europe like I think one of the one of L's arguments here is like if you look at sole etps like the sole ETP at least where I W where I was it was the biggest like it was the highest ETP by assets under management even even higher than Bitcoin and so she kind of uses this argument like one of the reasons Soul etps have gotten so big in Europe like even higher than Bitcoin is because of this like staking um yield that they get on top of the underlying exposure and and so other things equal like if you have like a staking ETP and a staking Soul ETP and the issuer makes more money on the so ETP then obviously they have like an underlying incentive to sell you the so ETP over the E ETP so I think that's one of the points like ly was making which again I I agree with you like demand is more important but I think it's also like crucial to understand the other side of the of the argument and yeah like just looking at this boat status like uh boting ATS ends at EPO 755 that's about 60 hours from now so right now we're at Epoch uh 7 54 it has about eight hours left and then we have like two days left from EP 755 we have not yet reached uh the Quorum required for the boat to pass uh about 28% of active validators have voted we need more than 33% of validators to vote for CD 228 to pass and if we meet uh Quorum like it's likely that CD 228 passes because you see that uh from the validators that have voted there is a majority of yes but we you need to wait uh basically around two days to see like what the outcome of the boat is uh below we see simd 123 uh it's being voted in the same uh time frame uh we see a more favorable uh opinion here again we have not reached Quorum uh it's only at 23% we need more than 33% for that to pass for those who don't know uh just quickly cd123 is just like the block Revenue distribution proposal so right now if you're a validator you can set a commission rate for issuance rewards but you cannot share priority fees with your stakers so what cd123 would do is it allows validators to share priority fees with stakers natively and so obviously an important proposal as well for aligning validators with uh with stakers I don't want to call either of these things early but it has seemed like the broader Community sentiment around at least around um 228 has been largely positive from what I've seen or at least in favor of the proposal um like you've mentioned Lily seemed to be the the largest and loudest voice on the opposite end um in the against Camp um but I I think we've seen broadly the community has been in favor of so it would not be surprising to see this pass um with a with a yes um I guess going forward the combination of these two things are there other like additional proposals in the future um around the staking rate or other changes to the network that we expect um to come into the future and kind of play into these Dynamics as well Carlos yes there are future proposals that I think are relevant to discuss I think the the reason like just CMD 228 was so controversial is that it is one of the first changes that I can think of that it's not just purely technical but it's also very economic in nature and most of the proposals that we have seen those far are very engineered uh Focus where it's just like let's solve this bug in the protocol Let's uh make this more efficient whereas here it's yes it's it's somewhat related to like it's technical of course but it's also very economical and it like um it has this side of what is the implication on salty asset and and on the flows that it could generate which core devs I mean they are brilliant in salana but they are not so in touch like with the institutional uh side of things which I think was one of like Le's points and so in terms of like future proposal there's a proposal to um increase the block limit on salana so basically the block size to 60 um million cus I think and so right now there's like Solana's Logan is basically increased bandwidth reduced latency right so right now uh devs are trying to increase the block size gradually to eventually double it uh potentially this year and that would increase bandwidth and so I asked uh one of the um core people at Ana if there were also like plans to reduce latency that is reduce lot times below like the 400 milliseconds and other things equal I think they prefer reducing latency over increasing like bandwidth so reducing slot times over doubling uh block size but the problem is that this has more complex implications around the validator ecosystem and one of the things things is that if you reduce the slot time to let's say from 400 milliseconds to 200 milliseconds you would double the amount of votes necessary for validators essentially and so validators with votings being the like the biggest cost that would increase uh like cost by a lot for validators so you need to do other things before you're able to like push these boundaries of performance such as like abstracting away boating cost or reducing them or like yeah just a bunch of things that it has Downstream implication on a lot of things that you need to think about before doing that how do the like potential increases to like the CU limit for blocks as well as you know if we were to actually get to a point in the future where they could alleviate some of the voting costs and reduce you know the the time for blocks as well like the expected additional requirements for validators for example like on this this CU change for example do we expect most validators to basically be able to just turn that on and be good to go or is there an expectation of a need to like raise the the general requirement of like capabilities of a validating node so right now the right now the CU limit increases are very very conservative to the like to the extent that it really doesn't have any effect like on the Network performance at large but and the reason they're doing it that way is because just for the reasons you mentioned they want to make sure that there are no like um unexpected consequences in terms of like validators maybe some validators have hardcoded some uh some like assumptions they just want to make sure that uh there are no like unexpected changes and they they are doing it gradually so that they can eventually double and make sure that no that like will suffer or be subjected to like uh yeah any kind of like U negative impact uh in terms of reducing slot times it's a lot harder to do and it's it's not just voting costs like imagine for instance you have to push the limits of consensus to the point like how fast can you propagate like information in the network and make sure like every validator is in line to like uh be able to uh have that information in like 200 milliseconds or 50 milliseconds and so yeah that's a lot uh that's a problem that's a lot more challenging but uh the rewards are also a lot higher yeah I guess the culture in salana has been very differentiated I would say from that of ethereum but it it would not be surprising to continue down this road um where increased requirements increased you know throughput R latency ibrl um lead to generally increased like capabilities and requirements out of validators and where maybe at some point we get back to the discussion of like how decentralized how centralized um is to one way or the other um I think the eth camp has been boldly in the camp of like not wanting to raise any requirements for a long time keeping things very simple for the like at home solo Staker um I think that's really not been the case for for salana but who knows if you know if the goal is really to just kind of keep shipping and and increasing the capabilities of the network um that might become a conversation at some point in the future as well if you know significant numbers of validators have to drop out basically to be honest I kind of prefer sana's approach right now like not letting let's call it the weakest lengths to hold back the entire chain um but even in that same way we we saw ethereum increase their gas limit by 20% this year um the 60 million compute units increase what is this what this be the first increase like let's call it block increase in like two years the no it would be the second uh we had an increase in I want to say January but yeah like two two months ago or or three months ago okay yeah I like I know I like this trend and um I think you can you can you know sana's been on the path of performance first and then we can you know figure out the centralization a little bit later however you want to measure that um and I think it's above things like Aptos and SOI that uses you know bft consensus which has like you know you're limited to like 1 to 200 validators there so it's miles ahead of that but yeah yep great points um and great coverage thank you Carlos for the the Deep dive on 228 have you been getting silon chain this year farming on 10 plus wallets across different different ecosystems well cryptex calculator is here to help cryptex calculator has 3,000 plus Integrations to support all of your wallets Exchange accounts and onchain activity and a custom pricing Oracle to handle even the most chaotic port folios get started today and make tax season easy you can use our exclusive discount code BW 2025 to enjoy 30% off all paid CTC plans until April 15th of this year follow the link in the show notes below to get started I think maybe maybe one last topic because there's been a lot of discussion and I I think we've kind of alluded it to a little bit um in recent calls and even today around this like continued Trend towards you know maybe trafi adoption of potentially crypto rails this idea that like rwas is a bit of a Hot Topic today um real world asset protocols I just wanted to share one chart from our friends at defi llama um with some data from their narratives tracker but we can see here that purple line is the AI category and the orange line is the rwa category um so it's it's interesting to see how quickly this Market shifts between from one narrative to the next um was very much the Hot Topic um in late 24 going into 2025 and you know maybe partially spurred on by the new Administration and you know easing regulations etc etc um this this concept of like rwa protocols rwa tokens are um maybe hot in everyone's mind now I guess the the sort of lingering question here from me is is it getting a little bit disconnected from reality do people really have like reality and expectations set correctly around real world asset protocols um I I think it calls back to some conversations around you know if if some of these large institutions are going to come in do we really expect these like open source and um kind of like freely available technologies that have been built out to ACR to you know the Dow protocol tokens sitting around those or is it going to be you know the black rocks that come in adopt the the tech you know build it on build it with their own staff with their own servers what have you you know spit out their own chain um and we see the value basically just acre to them in the form of you know captured revenues or or something of the like I I guess I'm curious your guys thoughts like are there are there names or or protocols in the rdba space that were're genuinely excited about um and we're not so concerned about like a sort of a capture of this space from the entering participants I think it's going to be tough for for Dow's like incumbent I mean um upcoming protocols that come really capture the rwa profits I think it's going to be existing existing try markets because that's I mean that's where trillions of the assets already are right and you know if you look at it now it's you know real world assets are growing the most popular one is stable coins but we don't really consider we don't really bucket that into it but real world assets have been growing but albeit slowly I know um rwa axyz has keeps track of all the um the assets on different chains but I think I I don't I don't see how you can trade these things with without in a not being in a kyc manner so because these things already have existing regulations around them they aren't just some kind of mean coin that's spun up I think there's going to be two paths for it there going to be like Black Rock has their own version of Ono you know and they they start to build up stuff or like Providence for example um and on here we see rw. XYZ they have this um chart to show you the different private assets by category and if we look at that private credit that in the blue line by far the most massive and all of that is coming from one chain that's Providence blockchain and they it's mostly private credit from Helo H loocks which is like home credit loans basically um think of it like many mortgages and you know so they got they already tapped into the crypto markets the blockchain markets with existing traditional Financial inform um instruments and they're also issuing some of this stuff directly on chain um using like yeah um certain certain tokenization standards that have been around for a while it's just that our you know like Providence has adopted them first and integrated it into the chain and I think what's interesting about them too is that they aren't a fully permissionless train in the sense that it is permission permissionless to run a valid but in order to bring in new up codes you need a certain a quorum of the of the existing validators to agree on bringing in those up codes or you can call them contracts the existing contracts are all Financial based you can build your derivatives and dexes and other things as well but the reason why they did that was to prevent you know Meme coins or um certain kind of nfts with royalties from flood in up the chain and they want to be and in my opinion this is probably the closest thing to an app chain that there is because it you know in any other app chain you can just build whatever you want but this one has some kind of limitations on that so I think that seems to be the most successful way to do it if we only measure things by tvl of rwa I think another way which is also likely is permissioned chains or in my opinion maybe permissioned l2s and I say L2 is because these large institutions it's probably easier to to just use the evm because there's so much documentation there it's probably easier to get a developer AI can probably help you with it as well given the resources and you can have full control over your environment through that centralized sequencer so it just seem and there's you know Ras providers as well so it just seems like the lowest hanging fruit for them versus if they were to spin up their own chain you know JP Morgan has their own chain but that's a specialized chain if they spin up their own chain then what becomes the point because then every large institution is has their own Silo chains and then you basically what benefits are you getting you might as well have kept it on your traditional database in the first place so unless you know unless traditional financial institutions have some standard that they you know come together and agree on which is not that's something that they do all the time and especially in the financial sector but maybe not something with such an emerging technology not so early so more likely they will go to interrupt solutions that already exist in the open source space and if layer tws can figure out that interrupt I I see that as just the lowest hanging fruit for them to have quote unquote The Best of Both Worlds how do you think about the limitation of like ethereum l2s today from like a throughput perspective because I I think it kind of calls back to your point about you know if there's not if there's not really much of an advantage or a benefit like why not just keep it on your private server um and with most L2 like Bas is really the only example that's trying to really push and scale throughput but the majority of them still sit at sort of like the eth standard of doing like 10 to 20 TPS which I'm imagining like if we're thinking about some of these very large financial institutions like the amount of money and the amount of customers that they have and the amount of maybe transition of asset or like movement of assets that they might be dealing with um there might be an expectation of being able to handle higher throughput um I don't know if that puts press pressure on this evm idea or just you know they're all going to be adopters of like w for example and and really just scale the heck out of a sequencer like Bas is doing yeah that's that's a really good question I mean I think initially pilot programs I think you know move these rwas don't really move as much as we think they do like things that really move are like treasury markets very liquid very short-term instruments and those aren't going to be put on chain there's no point they already work fine I think it's slower moving things like private credit to private Equity these and you don't need as high of a throughput for it so maybe there's a scenario where you know 10 20 25 50 TPS is fine for the current use case and as and as they start to as these things become on chain and now it opens them to becoming more traded more frequently and then then you might need to me might need more throughput so it can grow as adoption grows maybe the backend infrastructure grows with it as well but the early days is might not be as necessary um or you can do you know Providence 20 you know like how much of a validators relatively smaller nod set um and you know just beef up the requirements you have IBC if you really want to have some kind of interrupt um but then it but again it really depends on it really depends on what standard they go around and I I don't think I don't think they are going to when they're doing this analysis I don't think they're going to jump to that level of it I think it's going to start off at pilot projects as as you always have to do and I think the easiest pilot project is evm and then once unless you really start to see the benefit and hire a proper team to build it out and maybe they say oh we should do this one maybe we should look look for a faster chain or something else depending on what your criteria I think I think probably l2s or or well I think probably l2s would just be the way or something evm related will probably be the way yeah I agree with that l2s just allow for a faster time to Market you don't have to worry about like building consensus bootstrapping about valat set in case like you wanted it to be like your own chain it just makes sense to build an L2 there's also like Avalanche subnets that were specifically focused on like uh institutional players I think that's uh something like we could keep an eye on uh there's also this interesting thing about like Mark mentioned like standardization like there are some erc20 standard RC standards like are specific for like uh you know for permissioned uh kind of things like allow for uh blacklisting and and that kind of stuff uh you also have like token extensions on Solana which like the main focus was to allow institutions to enter the chain like with private transfers uh control over who gets uh to control like the like the token and whatnot so I think like we're seeing a push from many ecosystems uh to on board rwa on their chain and with that like it's obvious why because it can unlock like a huge amount of like tvl and uh distribution but like yeah I just uh I think it's very early stage I I honestly think the main issue today is not technological but rather Regulatory and many of this like institutional players just don't know what's their right way to do it and if you on board like an rwa onchain there's also this issue of how do you have legal like like a legal claim on the onchain instrument where when you trade it like offchain because uh like these items like are usually like issued on off chain first so you need to make sure there's like a legal way for like when you transfer ownership of that asset onchain there's also a way to do it like on an offchain basis if that makes sense and so like one of the things that I'm excited about is just like issue things directly on chain because it makees things a lot easier than just like having this like a hybrid system where you have like a traditional rails and on top of that you tokenize things I think that adds a lot of friction and you lose a lot of the benefits of blockchain technology that way great points I it is interesting to see the continued Drive in a lot of the newer chains at least towards like I mean this increased bandwidth reduced latency seems to be the motto for most of like The Cutting Edge teams at this point you know the monads the mega eths you know there's Fogo there's untu there's a bunch of different chains even suen Aptos I think is really the same same ideology there um and I think interesting to hear a contrast here when we we think about um you know institutions wanting to bring RW on chain and maybe that not really being um their consideration today um but you know it this could be a little bit of a difference in terms of timelines and expectations of like where things are going obviously salana has a need to like service their retail Traders today whereas you know this the distant future of like onchain institutional usage is is not quite here yet so um different needs for for different times I guess is maybe the the one big takeaway there at the moment um but we're I think we're still early to a lot of this stuff and I think the point around regulations is is key you know I think we're still looking like at least in the US we're waiting for you know uh stable coin Bill we're waiting for clarification around a market structure Bill probably various other things that might impact you know whether Banks might even be allowed to custody different cryptocurrencies um a lot of different things that aren't in place yet that are sort of keeping any kind of interested parties sort of held back from doing anything right at this moment um but since I have both you guys here and you're both going to be in Das next week maybe to close off the episode this week I'd just be curious to hear from you guys like either the guest or speaker you're most excited to hear from adass next week or a talk or any um event that you'll be taking part in um while you're there next week I'm excited to hear uh Ryan Ryan Connor spanel on like valuation I think that would be interesting yeah I mean I I'm looking forward to what I'm involved in um I'm I'm moderating on um Bitcoin centralized lending and then one on marinad taking and definitely thank you should come and checking out I'll also be mcing on the first day for the investor track so it's going to be a fun time all around awesome Shameless shill for Mark uh definitely if you haven't already if you're interested if you want to head to das it is next week like I've said this is sort of like the last chance um to grab your tickets 0x10 is the code if you want to get 10% off tickets the link in the description go see Mark he'll be M like he said he'll be mcing he'll be doing a few things um cash flows Connor we'll be talking about valuations of things um as would be expected from a man that goes by cash flows Connors so uh we will see you all next week either at Das or on the next pod um thanks for coming on guys and uh we'll see you all next time [Music]

========================================

--- Video 40 ---
Video ID: gAnT9YXx4Q0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gAnT9YXx4Q0
Title: Can Frontends Act as a Moat? | Josh Litchman & Tolks
Published: 2025-03-10 08:00:38 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by the one and only Josh Litchman to discuss the power of front-end moats, building effective feedback loops, and the evolving landscape of crypto gaming. The conversation dives into how opinionated front ends shape user behavior, why order flow is the ultimate asset, and how games like Pixels leverage behavioral economics. We also explore the shift from traditional front ends to trading bots, the challenges of designing sustainable in-game economies, and the growing role of liquid funds in crypto markets.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!

Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: https://x.com/dYdX
--
Join us at DAS NYC 2025!  Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2025-new-york
--
0xResearch needs your help! 

We’re conducting an audience survey to help us get a better picture of who our listeners are, and what you want to see from the show. What do you like about the show? What can we improve on?

To contribute, follow this link: https://blockworks-research.beehiiv.com/forms/a97db4d7-5ff3-4a02-9089-d521bc64babd
--
Follow Josh: https://x.com/joshlitchman
Follow Tolks: https://x.com/_tolks
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:39 Sui's World Liberty Finance Announcement
7:24 Defensive vs Growth Tokens
16:32 Can Front Ends be a Moat?
28:13 The Shift to Trading Bots
42:53 dYdX Snippet
45:29 Crypto Gaming Today
55:13 How Can Onchain Games Capture Users?
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 41 ---
Video ID: tnnLJe0nKLY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tnnLJe0nKLY
Title: Solana’s DEX War, Base’s Flashblocks, and RWAs | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-03-06 09:01:07 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts dive into key market developments, including Trump’s recent comments on a potential U.S. crypto reserve and its market implications. They debate whether Bitcoin should be the sole asset in such a reserve, and analyze broader market sentiment. The discussion shifts to Solana’s DEX landscape, and the potential impact of Pump.fun’s new AMM on Raydium’s trading volumes. The conversation also covers Base’s Flashblocks announcement. Finally, they explore the tokenization of real-world assets, the role of institutions like Coinbase and BlackRock, and the evolving regulatory landscape.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Raydium Analytics: https://raydium.blockworksresearch.com/

Solana: February 2025 Update: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1896919181918163128

Class Dismissed: End of Raydium’s Graduations: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1894357544359137658

Base Announces Flashblocks: https://x.com/buildonbase/status/1895223243713458184
--
Doing your crypto taxes doesn’t have to suck. Say goodbye to tax season stress with Crypto Tax Calculator - built for degens like you: 3,000+ integrations to support all your wallets, exchanges, and on-chain activity with deep integrations into dApps & smart contracts. A custom pricing oracle to handle even the most chaotic portfolios. Full support for IRS rules and accurate, CPA-endorsed tax reports. 

Generate reports your accountant will love or file directly yourself. Create an account. Import your wallets and exchanges. Review and download your tax report. 

Get started today and make tax season easy! You can use our exclusive discount code BW2025 to enjoy 30% off all paid CTC plans until April 15th, 2025.  

Follow this link to get started: https://cryptotaxcalculator.io/us/?coupon=BW2025&utm_source=blockworks&utm_medium=podcast&utm_campaign=0x
--
Join us at DAS NYC 2025!  Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2025-new-york
--
0xResearch needs your help! 

We’re conducting an audience survey to help us get a better picture of who our listeners are, and what you want to see from the show. What do you like about the show? What can we improve on?

To contribute, follow this link: https://blockworks-research.beehiiv.com/forms/a97db4d7-5ff3-4a02-9089-d521bc64babd
--
Follow Carlos: https://x.com/0xcarlosg
Follow Daniel: https://x.com/_dshap
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:37 Trump's Comments on the Crypto Reserve
8:56 The Solana DEX Landscape
17:05 Pumpfuns Native AMM
28:15 Base Announces Flashblocks
42:38 Connecting Base Liquidity to Coinbase
48:18 Crypto Tax Calculator Ad
48:49 The RWA Sector
1:04:06 Closing Comments
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 42 ---
Video ID: 6yDFmwj4Qc0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6yDFmwj4Qc0
Title: The Evolution of Alt Seasons | Tolks & zkMike
Published: 2025-03-04 16:41:13 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Tolks and zkMike to discuss the U.S. Strategic Reserve, the maturation of crypto markets, and the thesis behind Grass. We also covered Bitcoin order flow, sentiment at ETHDenver, and utilizing the latest AI tools for research.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Udi’s Take on the SBR: https://x.com/udiWertheimer/status/1896349477650530344

Grass Episode: https://youtu.be/W7YJ8e2yZ58?feature=shared
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!

Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: https://x.com/dYdX
--
Join us at DAS NYC 2025!  Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2025-new-york
--
0xResearch needs your help! 

We’re conducting an audience survey to help us get a better picture of who our listeners are, and what you want to see from the show. What do you like about the show? What can we improve on?

To contribute, follow this link: https://blockworks-research.beehiiv.com/forms/a97db4d7-5ff3-4a02-9089-d521bc64babd
--
Follow zkMike: https://x.com/_zkmike
Follow Tolks: https://x.com/_tolks
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:29 Market Thoughts & the Strategic Reserve
14:11 Crypto is Maturing
27:07 dYdX Snippet
29:52 Building Research Processes With AI
38:56 The Grass Thesis
53:50 ETHDenver Sentiment
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 43 ---
Video ID: fJnOAFh38ds
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fJnOAFh38ds
Title: Kaito’s Airdrop: Genius or Giveaway Gone Wrong? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-02-27 09:00:49 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss the recent ByBit hack, Kaito’s airdrop, and the sustainability of airdrops. They also dive into the various token deployment methods, and DeFi UX today. Finally, they shout out the mad man trying to CTO Aptos.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Doing your crypto taxes doesn’t have to suck. Say goodbye to tax season stress with Crypto Tax Calculator - built for degens like you: 3,000+ integrations to support all your wallets, exchanges, and on-chain activity with deep integrations into dApps & smart contracts. A custom pricing oracle to handle even the most chaotic portfolios. Full support for IRS rules and accurate, CPA-endorsed tax reports. 

Generate reports your accountant will love or file directly yourself. Create an account. Import your wallets and exchanges. Review and download your tax report. 

Get started today and make tax season easy! You can use our exclusive discount code BW2025 to enjoy 30% off all paid CTC plans until April 15th, 2025.  

Follow this link to get started: https://cryptotaxcalculator.io/us/?coupon=BW2025&utm_source=blockworks&utm_medium=podcast&utm_campaign=0x
--
Join us at DAS NYC 2025!  Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2025-new-york
--
0xResearch needs your help! 

We’re conducting an audience survey to help us get a better picture of who our listeners are, and what you want to see from the show. What do you like about the show? What can we improve on?

To contribute, follow this link: https://blockworks-research.beehiiv.com/forms/a97db4d7-5ff3-4a02-9089-d521bc64babd
--
Follow David: https://x.com/EffortCapital
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Westie: https://x.com/WestieCapital
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:31 Thoughts on the ByBit Hack
18:03 Did Kaito Airdrop Too Much?
31:36 Airdrop Sustainability
37:16 Crypto Tax Calculator Ad
37:48 Regulatory Catalysts & Token Deployment Methods
56:48 DeFi UX Today
1:03:09 The Guy Trying to CTO Aptos
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 44 ---
Video ID: 1Z-uKAYBAmI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Z-uKAYBAmI
Title: Solana’s Vibe Shift, Restaking, and Yapping About Kaito | Ian Unsworth
Published: 2025-02-24 09:00:04 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Ian Unsworth, Co-founder of Kairos Research to discuss restaking, compressed yields, and SIMD-228. We also dive into Solana’s vibe shift, Solana REV post TRUMP and LIBRA, and Unichain’s slow start. Finally, we end the episode with some yapping about Kaito, new high performance networks, and what does a restaking guy look like?

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

SIMD-228: Reducing SOL’s Inflation: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1880616152776552694

Kairos Research x Firstset: https://x.com/Kairos_Res/status/1886811200345817547
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!

Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: https://x.com/dYdX
--
Join us at DAS NYC 2025!  Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2025-new-york
--
0xResearch needs your help! 

We’re conducting an audience survey to help us get a better picture of who our listeners are, and what you want to see from the show. What do you like about the show? What can we improve on?

To contribute, follow this link: https://blockworks-research.beehiiv.com/forms/a97db4d7-5ff3-4a02-9089-d521bc64babd
--
Follow Ian: https://x.com/Ian_Unsworth
Follow Dan Smith: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:54 Restaking, Compressed Yields & SIMD-228
10:10 Solana's Vibe Shift
20:57 Solana REV Post Trump & Libra
32:09 Unichain's Launch
34:28 dYdX Snippet
39:24 Yapping About Kaito
57:29 Kairos Research x Firstset
1:00:47 New High Performance Networks
1:14:18 Closing Comments
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 45 ---
Video ID: zRVEYmksUWE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zRVEYmksUWE
Title: Bitcoin’s Institutional Bid, Solana’s Memecoin Fallout, and HyperEVM | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-02-20 09:01:12 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss Bitcoin’s new institutional buyers, current market sentiment, and Solana REV. They also dive into the current state of memecoins, and what the next phase, if any, looks like. Finally, they cover institutional development taking place in crypto, and the breaking news of HyperEVMs launch, as well as Monad’s testnet. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Doing your crypto taxes doesn’t have to suck. Say goodbye to tax season stress with Crypto Tax Calculator - built for degens like you: 3,000+ integrations to support all your wallets, exchanges, and on-chain activity with deep integrations into dApps & smart contracts. A custom pricing oracle to handle even the most chaotic portfolios. Full support for IRS rules and accurate, CPA-endorsed tax reports. 

Generate reports your accountant will love or file directly yourself. Create an account. Import your wallets and exchanges. Review and download your tax report. 

Get started today and make tax season easy! You can use our exclusive discount code BW2025 to enjoy 30% off all paid CTC plans until April 15th, 2025.  

Follow this link to get started: https://cryptotaxcalculator.io/us/?coupon=BW2025&utm_source=blockworks&utm_medium=podcast&utm_campaign=0x
--
Join us at DAS NYC 2025!  Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2025-new-york
--
0xResearch needs your help! 

We’re conducting an audience survey to help us get a better picture of who our listeners are, and what you want to see from the show. What do you like about the show? What can we improve on?

To contribute, follow this link: https://blockworks-research.beehiiv.com/forms/a97db4d7-5ff3-4a02-9089-d521bc64babd
--
Follow Daniel: https://x.com/_dshap
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 DAS NYC 2025
5:27 Bitcoin's New Buyers & Market Sentiment
17:00 Ledger Ad
17:16 Solana REV, Memecoins, and Fundamental Plays
27:24 Ledger Ad
27:58 The Next Phase of Memecoins
37:23 Institutional Development
45:24 CryptoTax Ad
45:55 HyperEVM & Monad's Testnet
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 46 ---
Video ID: U5agfMM1Ut0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U5agfMM1Ut0
Title: Ethereum’s Future, Berachain’s Q5 Launch, and App Revenue | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-02-13 09:00:35 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss the current state of the market, Super Cycle cope, and Ethereum’s future. They also dive into the idea of native rollups, and what it means to be aligned with Ethereum. Finally, they unpack Berachain’s launch; what went right, what went wrong, and what might happen going forward. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Berachain Launch: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/flashnotes/berachain-launch

Berachain Dashboard:https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1889361323676594550
--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps.

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
0xResearch needs your help! 

We’re conducting an audience survey to help us get a better picture of who our listeners are, and what you want to see from the show. What do you like about the show? What can we improve on?

To contribute, follow this link: https://blockworks-research.beehiiv.com/forms/a97db4d7-5ff3-4a02-9089-d521bc64babd
--
Join us at DAS NYC 2025!  Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2025-new-york
--
Follow Darren: https://x.com/0xMims
Follow Marc:https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:12 Market Outlook
6:02 Super Cycle Cope
10:36 Ads (SKALE and Ledger)
11:17 Eth Strategy & Ethereum's Future
22:58 Native Rollups & Ethereum Alignment
35:24 Ads (SKALE and Ledger)
36:40 Berachain Launch
45:56 Timing Launches
54:53 Surely People Will Start Building Apps?
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 47 ---
Video ID: GpCqbM2QZUM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GpCqbM2QZUM
Title: The Binance Listing Premium, Jito’s TipRouter, and VectorFun  | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-02-06 09:00:17 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss Solana Post-TRUMP launch, Jito’s TipRouter, and the Binance Listing Premium. They also unpack the relationship between VectorFun and Tensor. Finally, they end the episode with coverage of social trading apps, and Berachain's imminent launch.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.

--
Resources
Jito TipRouter: Real Yield for JTO Stakers: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1885023825806713064

The Binance Listing Premium: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1884641984327168133

Vector’s Fun is Tensor’s Tailwind: https://x.com/defi_kay_/status/1885430866169782465

--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps.

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
0xResearch needs your help! 

We’re conducting an audience survey to help us get a better picture of who our listeners are, and what you want to see from the show. What do you like about the show? What can we improve on?

To contribute, follow this link: https://blockworks-research.beehiiv.com/forms/a97db4d7-5ff3-4a02-9089-d521bc64babd
--
Join us at DAS NYC 2025!  Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2025-new-york
--
Follow Carlos: https://x.com/0xcarlosg
Follow Luke: https://x.com/0xMether
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
(0:00) Introduction
(1:51) Market Outlook
(5:15) Solana Post-TRUMP Launch
(9:39) Ads (SKALE and Ledger)
(10:20) Jito's TipRouter
(18:23) The Binance Listing Premium
(28:05) Ads (SKALE and Ledger)
(29:21) Vector's Fun is Tensor's Tailwind
(38:33) Social Trading Apps
(46:18) Berachain Announces Launch Date
(49:44) Closing Comments
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 48 ---
Video ID: 3wkw-BA-REE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3wkw-BA-REE
Title: Bringing IP Onchain With Story Protocol | Andrea & Jason
Published: 2025-02-04 15:00:05 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Jason and Andrea from Story Protocol joined us to discuss onchain IP, validating IP, and the primary use cases for Story Protocol. We also dove into Story’s Agent TCP/IP and all that it entails. Finally, we ended the episode with discussion on exporting IP to other chains, centralized competitors, and where onchain IP is headed.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!

Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: https://x.com/dYdX
--
Join us at DAS NYC 2025!  Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2025-new-york
--
0xResearch needs your help! 

We’re conducting an audience survey to help us get a better picture of who our listeners are, and what you want to see from the show. What do you like about the show? What can we improve on?

To contribute, follow this link: https://blockworks-research.beehiiv.com/forms/a97db4d7-5ff3-4a02-9089-d521bc64babd
--
Follow Story Protocol: https://x.com/StoryProtocol
Follow Andrea: https://x.com/devrelius
Follow Jason: https://x.com/jasonjzhao
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
0:45 Overview of Story Protocol
5:48 The IP Marketplace on Story
10:27 Validating IP
15:23 Primary Use Cases
25:45 Private IP
27:36 dYdX Ad
32:03 Story's Agent TCP/IP
38:22 How Do Royalties Work?
46:04 Exporting IP to Other Chains
48:39 Story Protocol Frontends
52:03 Centralized Competitors
54:45 Onchain IP Going Forward
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 49 ---
Video ID: pNocr5SOdjE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pNocr5SOdjE
Title: Jupiter’s Dominance, SAB 121 Repealed, and XMoney | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-01-30 09:00:51 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss DeepSeek’s impact on the market, Trump’s executive orders and the repeal of SAB 121, and the recent XMoney announcement. They also unpack TRUMP’s impact on Solana. Finally, they close the episode with a deep dive into Jupiter’s recent flurry of announcements, and their continued dominance in the Solana Ecosystem.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps.

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Join us at DAS NYC 2025!  Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2025-new-york
--
0xResearch needs your help! 

We’re conducting an audience survey to help us get a better picture of who our listeners are, and what you want to see from the show. What do you like about the show? What can we improve on?

To contribute, follow this link: https://blockworks-research.beehiiv.com/forms/a97db4d7-5ff3-4a02-9089-d521bc64babd
--
Follow Carlos: https://x.com/0xcarlosg 
Follow Daniel: https://x.com/_dshap
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:09 DeepSeek Volatility
6:20 Trump's Executive Orders
14:00 SKALE Ad
14:24 SAB 121 Repealed
20:09 XMoney Announced
24:32 SKALE Ad
25:14 Trump's Impact on Solana
34:13 The Onchain Attention Games
39:31 Jupiter's Big Announcements
53:24 Solana Revert Rates & Jupiter Perp Dominance
1:02:38 Closing Thoughts
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 50 ---
Video ID: le5tZTuMWzk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=le5tZTuMWzk
Title: Abstract’s Creator Flywheel | Luca Netz
Published: 2025-01-27 09:00:50 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Luca Netz joins us to discuss the upcoming launch of Abstract Chain, their consumer-centric focus, and Abstract’s focus on UX. We also discuss the decision behind using Celestia for DA, Abstract’s Hub of Fun, valuing IP onchain, and avoiding brand dilution. Finally, we got Luca’s thoughts on where L2s and NFTs are headed.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!

Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: https://x.com/dYdX
--
Follow Abstract: https://x.com/abstractchain
Follow Luca: https://x.com/LucaNetz
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:12 Why Build Abstract Chain?
3:16 Abstract's Consumer-centric Focus
8:14 User Onboarding and Incentivization
11:20 Supporting the Abstract Ecosystem
12:19 Takeaways From the Base Team
13:38 Abstact's Hub of Fun
18:40 Hardware Expansion in Crypto
20:36 Appealing to the Average Person
22:46 dYdX Snippet
26:13 The Journey Towards Abstract
30:05 Valuing IP Onchain & Brand Dilution
35:45 L2s & NFTs Going Forward
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
streamers are going to be able to make content pin abstract apps on those streams and ultimately make content to their user base around those products built on abstract it's very much the first time that crypto has ever you know automated the flywheel and really benefited and tried to point rewards specifically around content creators now this seems pretty ridiculous to me because if you look at you know how the biggest businesses in the world have been built you know five out of 10 of them have all been around rewarding and and and fostering the content creator yet nobody in crypto has ever done it before it's pretty strange and this is the part that I'm most excited about nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice Pacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the companies funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of Z research tday I'm joined by lucet from iglo Inc um abstract chain and pudgy penguins thanks for coming on the show Luka hey happy to be here um I guess today's main focus will kind of be abstract chain I know you have um a lot of a lot of businesses out now but how how did you guys why did you guys decide to build that abstract chain what was the main purpose behind it I think from our perspective we kind of realize that all the blockchains are being commoditized and ultimately what pudy penguins in our community has is I think the proprietary things that I think are ultimately going to be differentiated and differentiate chains moving forward which is community culture operational excellence every ingredient that I think is needed to make a successful blockchain ecosystem we already have via the the community and the culture that we've cultivated over the last couple of years so in a world where you know we have the moat why and go bring that moat to another ecosystem for pennies of the dollar uh didn't make any sense now that was the initial thesis and why we did it what ultimately has transpired since building abstract has been know the l2s you know are are doing I think everything wrong with the exception of bass now it's important to know I don't look at ZK sync or arbitrum and optimism as true l2s cultural hubs as as vitalic would Define them I look at them as Tech stacks and nucleuses to these culture hubs that ultimately have their core differentiating Factor so remove optimism ZK sync and arbitrum from the equation and I think the only competitor and the only L2 doing anything worth anything uh is BAS and I think they're putting on an absolute master class but in world where I think l2s are a scaling solution for ethereum they are the future uh and and looking at the landscape I realize well this this race has yet to be won uh and to be frank it's an open ocean and I think a lot of how people are building them are in the wrong uh spirit and in the wrong mindset and I think there's a lot of room for disruption not only to bring you know a bar none Community culture and ecosystem to the L2 landscape But ultimately to bring uh a new Fresh perspective on how I think l2s are going to be built moving forward and so you're going to see this by the time this launches you know abstract will be live you guys will see what I think is you know crypto's first ever true crypto consumer terminal uh an interface that I think ultimately is going to set the bar and set the tone for you know how people look at blockchain ecosystems moving forward fantastic I agree with everything you said but I wanted to ask a specific thing is consumer Centric which is something you you WR about and you actually wrote a pretty opinionated um article on it back in September 2024 why um I understand why you want go of consumer Centric but like can you kind of run over your arguments on why you think it's necessary that this happens and you talked a bit about cultural hubs as well I think that would tie it all together yeah I think the I think the experiences are just kind of today so if I were to like compare or give you a good anecdote let's like just look at social networks and compare them to blockchains right like so blockchains today very much feel like forchain right where it's like if you know how to navigate and you know how to put the pieces together it can be super useful right however if you don't know how to navigate right you can it could also be super harmful in a 4chan's you know case you go somewhere where you shouldn't probably go that doesn't make you feel too good in blockchain's perspective you get fished and lose all your money right and so I think from our perspective there's a huge room to kind of disrupt you know what feels like 4chan a day and to make Instagram and what I feel that that looks like ultimately comes down to the uxui and the interface and how people are participating on chain when you think about it every chain should have one domain one central place where you go to do everything on that platform right like there shouldn't have to be pieces of puzzles you put together whether it's an wallet extension right and then you know a certain app that you enjoy right now it's very much a free-for-all and ultimately if you understand the consumer experience the consumer experience to break through to True adoption we're talking tens of millions of Da you know really participating on chain actively outside of the current existing user base it needs to be super simple and stupid I mean it has to be something like I I think I think abstracts going to be the first thing specifically on evm that you're ever going to feel where I think if you went to your local waiter in Barista and you told them to commit an action you know by going to This One Singular domain they could be able to do it pretty quickly versus right now if you tell your local Barista or waiter to go do an action on ethereum I think it's going to be very difficult for them to do and figure out and probably would take a couple hours right and so how do you remove that onboarding from a couple hours of of of you know figuring things out to you know five minutes you know as simple as a a monkey could do it uh and that is ultimately where this stuff has to go I think people just give don't don't I think they underestimate or overestimate um you know how smart I think the regular person is specifically when it comes to being technically Savvy you just have to understand the reality of it right like that's not a thing I say proudly like it's just ultimately understanding people right and understanding what a majority a majority of people know how to consume right majority of people today in the America are north of 35 years old if you're north of 35 years old you know you are not you know internet native you're not digitally native you still maybe type in text with one finger right like just because you know our group and our sphere of influence doesn't behave that way doesn't mean that a majority of the world doesn't right a majority of the world still does that and um you know if you want to bring them on chain you got to make it easier that makes sense and what are you guys specific doing specifically to make that happen to make it easier yeah I think what you're going to see here and probably when this comes out and and people hold me accountable like I think you're going to see this this this Hub of fun this singular destination where somebody can log in Via email and a password get a smart wallet and then just participate in an ecosystem pretty seamlessly and know how to do things and where to go you know with a simple interface uh and I think this is how a majority of consumer blockchains moving forward are going to be built and ultimately anything anybody that I think is building a purpose-built blockchain is going to go in this direction and so you know what you're going to see is you're going to see you know an ecosystem predicated around fun this is not a general purpose ecosystem you won't be able to do every single thing we're really focusing on discretionary spending specifically fun in layman's terms uh we're focusing on the best 0o to1 onboarding I think you will see and experience the best zero to1 onboarding I think from any ecosystem uh in abstract and I think you'll see something that is cohesive and curated uh and easily digestible right and something that I think you could show to a friend or a family member who's not crypto native that's going to make a lot of sense to them uh obviously there's some natural properties like getting money you know on the Chain things like that that are still like barriers that we we ultimately need to improve and make better uh you know naturally you know putting money on an L2 has never been the easiest easiest process it's probably one of the pain points uh and things that we're going to work on the most you know post this launch but uh yeah I think I think I think interface brand Community is ultimately going to be the name of the game for people who are competing in the blockchain space yeah that makes sense and um it's kind of a meme now this ethereum align thing but um you guys are using Celestia while a bunch of other l2s chose to use ethereum is there any specific reason for this or is it um you don't think it matters too much I think I think it's just the experience right like I just have to optimize for the fastest transaction in the cheapest fee and using an ALT da layer just ultimately gets me there that makes sense um incentivizing users making them come on chain and actually on board to the L2 how how are you guys thinking about this I know you have a pretty comprehensive XP program but um do you want to kind of talk about that yeah I I think uh I think the the the one that I'm most excited about and and I'll let like the users you know and our ecosystem holders figure out exactly how we're integrating there and we'll obviously communicate that but the part that I think is going to be the big biggest reinvention is the flywheel and and the incentives that we're giving to streamers and content creators essentially there's going to be a stream button on the platform right streamers are going to be able to make content pin abstract apps on those streams and ultimately make content to their user base around those products built on abstract it's very much the first time that crypto has ever you know automated the flywheel and really benefited and tried to point rewards specific specifically around content creators now this seems pretty ridiculous to me because if you look at you know how the biggest businesses in the world have been built you know five out of 10 of them have all been around rewarding and and and fostering the content creator yet nobody in crypto has ever done it before it's pretty strange and this is a part that I'm most excited about right because it's like how do you take a concentrated group of content creators a, 1500 2,000 people give them an allocation of you know abstract Supply if and when that tges and goes to the world and how do you ultimately create some sort of flywheel where it's like hey advertise and make content around the network and uh you know leverage that flywheel to ultimately find pmf for apps on the network you know that that system right then and there it's like the stake and uh and uh and kick model right you get kick you lost lead on kick on the stream and then you get all the pmf on on stake the difference is we don't have a stake our stake is all the apps that are building on our chain right and and we curate that really well and we try to make that experience a little bit you know you know as as much to best of our ability around fun which I think Taps the same nerve that kind of stake does so uh it's going to be an interesting reinvention but I think anyone who's streaming on the platform over the next couple of months would make more money if they streamed on abstract versus if they streamed anywhere else that's whether twitch or kick with maybe the exception of the top top guys in those respective networks who obviously have nine figure deals very cool maybe we'll put the Xerox research show on it and try and make some money as well um curation is something you've brought up a few times can you what do what do you mean by curation as in the ecosystem you guys are handpicking what apps to work with how to help them out or is it something different I mean anyone can deploy an abstract but but to be on that portal has to meet a certain bar it has to fit the thesis right so like I'm not stopping anyone from making deployments uh you know that's everyone's prerogative but you know it's kind of like the app store right you got you got to hit a certain threshold of something to be on the App Store got to make sure it's you know to the best of your ability make sure it's safe make sure you know the people docs to make sure you know they have the right intentions obviously you can't filter every single person that way but it is important that there's some sort of bar of quality so it's not a complete Cesspool of of whatever yeah I agree with you I don't think you can allow people especially if you want to make it a consumer Centric blockchain you can't have um allow everybody to just deploy apps and then for that to be on the front page how much support are you offering those that you are going to put on the front page are you very active in that development well I I think I let the builders speak for themselves but you know I think we have the best ecosystem team the best devil team in in on the evm hands down uh I think that you you just look look at our ecosystem and I think you believe that uh by just like paying attention to to what who who's building on abstract who's a part of this uh I think it's relatively self-explanatory in that respect so from our perspective uh we are very much um you know we are very much harnessing the power of Builders and nurturing builders in a way that I think is unparalleled speaking of that I have a mentorship program with 100 Builders starting from 700 p.m. Eastern all the way to 8 8:30 so you know and that's happening in in a couple hours so I I think there's very few founding teams that are actually doing that maybe they delegate that to a person or two but you know we're going to have the whole executive team on there you know answering questions helping people and trying to steer them in the right direction that makes sense and one thing you mentioned previously was that Bas is the only L2 that is doing well are you guys taking anything from Bas um and what do you think the other L2 have messed up so badly because I agree with you but I just want to hear why you I I think a majority of the other l2s just wanted to tap into a narrative or Focus to much on Tech and didn't really figure out their identity I think Bas is putting on a clinic of operational excellence I me it just speaks to the entrepreneur that Jesse is and the rest of the team there they are quite literally putting on an operational Clinic that's just not just predicated around succeeding in the L2 land I think there's very few chains if any with the exception of salana that are putting on the clinic that Bas is putting on I mean it's really just truly uh if you pay attention very few people in the entire space are shipping anything of that magnitude uh and so it's not going to be an easy race I think for the first time building in crypto I actually have a North star someone that I'm stri striving to be uh you know typically in nft land and meme land you know I feel like we're just kind of innovating and setting the Playbook and everyone's following us uh so it's nice to have a North star for once uh but I do think Bas has ailles heels I think there's things that they just won't be able to succeed at and I ultimately believe you know targeting fun and discretionary spending and not spreading myself fin trying to accomplish a general purpose thesis is ultimately going to be the reason why we win that makes sense um fun and discretionary spending does this tie into how many gaming projects I'm seeing on abstract it feels like it's the first time I've seen uh a chain have this much gaming apart from Ronin yeah we know we we love gaming I obviously believe in the future of gaming as a as a huge way to ultimately penetrate the mainstream I think gaming has been underserved uh and so gaming is huge for us AI is huge for us nfts and memes and those teams are huge for us betting is huge for us right now I think there's a lot of different facets in which we have the best ecosystem gaming being one of them and on day one how many of these do you expect to be live I think 45 apps will be live day one is our goal uh but we have 120 in the pipeline 130 so I think within the first month you'll see 60 or 70 deployments probably within the second month I think all 120 will be deployed and hopefully there's a whole new cohort that's coming in shortly after launch very good and are you going to be doing um we've seen a lot of accelerated programs I think I think a lot of chains have realized what you've clearly realized a while ago which is that you need applications um and they they're bringing in a lot of cohort programs and a lot of accelerator programs are you guys going to be doing this throughout or is this um yeah we have a little building Builder and residence program but ultimately what Builders want is they want pmf they want marketing and so the beauty about having one Central destination in which the ecosystem lives it also makes me as a internet marketer allows me to have one thing that I point all the traffic to right so it's really easy to run advertisements right if I'm selling if I'm selling you know abstract portal as the Hub of fun right fun is universal and so I can Market that to web two I can Market that to web three I don't need to point them to 19 different directions and 19 different applications I point them to one right one domain one website where they can onboard transact and participate within five minutes right and so that that G to give me an edge uh and what Builders want is they want pmf they don't want grants they don't want everything else everybody does all those other things because they don't know how to get their Builders pmf ultimately a change responsibility in my mind you know it kind of starts and stops with being like a publisher right like what what like the No No chain provides any reasonable Edge again with probably the exception of salana right who just like mastered the fast transactions and things like that uh but you know on evm specifically like no L2 is giving you any Technical Edge in my opinion uh right it just they all do relatively the same thing and so how you're going to win there specifically uh is pmf and marketing and and because of how we thought of it I think we're just uh in a league of our own here that makes sense and in terms of ux this idea of having a single portal and abstracting Away quite a bit of stuff how did you guys come up with that what was your main inspiration well I actually came down to the marketing so the the the the thought process was was like okay you know I'm a builder I've been offered eight figure grants to go build on chains right like what did I what do I want from these chains more than the money I want marketing I want them to help me see my products come to life and so then I thought to myself I was like well I can build up like a marketing agency I think I'm one of the best marketers in the world people who know me would probably say the same right and so I was like that's our Edge like our Edge in crypto is that we have the best branding team the best community team and the best marketing team that's how why we've succeeded so how do we lean into those edges which I think are very much the proprietary edges that any can have in the space figuring that I think with AI all the tech will be commoditized way quicker than people anticipate right so how do I go bring that to them right well I launched penu to Galvanize the pudgy Community the pudy community has never been more excited for abstract so I got the best community in crypto you know rallying behind all of these apps so that's one right the second one was okay how do I actually go bring people outside of web 3 from Web Two into these applications and the the the part that I got really overwhelmed by was this idea that you know making running a successful marketing campaign or campaigns for one project is incredibly difficult doing it for 10 is nearly impossible I mean you know some of our executive team comes from the agency business having huge agencies prior to this uh but that's just not a business we want to get into again nor a lift that we really wanted to incur and so it came down to like well what if I sold the idea of digital Disneyland or a hub of fun and everything that you know within the ecosystem that we thought met that criteria lived in one destination and based on the you based on the experience and the products that they build the users will basically find the pmf right the the runoff will come come accordingly you know based on who actually has the best application and then we tie it in the streaming and so now people are going to come to abstract not to go and participate in the ecosystem but to watch their favorite streamer and then their favorite streamer is incentivized bigly to go and pin the apps and and Market the apps on the stream right which if the app is good then brings their entire audience to go use the apps that are on the platform and so all of a sudden you have a flywheel that I think crypto's never seen before uh and I'm really excited to to I think set the tone here in a way that I think is going to surprise a lot of people I I assume you guys have a um interesting mobile strategy as well it sounds like you're going to be focused on mobile yeah we will have a a really nice pwa to launch and then ultimately we'd love for this to live in a in a in a mobile like true mobile app uh but right now will'll be Dex it's it's probably super performing on desk top with a really performant pwa that will be adjacent to launch uh and the hope is you know within a couple of months we have a full-fledged you know app ecosystem uh you know within the Apple App Store in which all this stuff lives that makes sense um what do you think about consumer devices like a gaming console or something do you think it's unnecessary friction or do you think it's relevant I think sometimes people in crypto love to overthink things and it's like hey can we get something that it's like trip it's like crypto gaming everyone in crypto gaming is trying to build a AAA metaverse when it's like hey you know web we One gaming Web Two gaming all of all of the iterations of gaming the the things that broke out were fun simple stupid right so like even consumer adoption like we don't need to be like I do like Solana's mobile approach from a phone perspective that's really smart right and and but like I think you have to have salana level success to go and go pursue the next iteration too many people are starting from square one and thinking like trying to go so Grand and so big when you're kind of putting the cart ahead of the horse it's like look let's just let's just get something that truly breaks through and then let's just move forward right salana being the ecosystem and a phone is smart right a gaming console things like that there's this new gaming console my friend made it I forget the name of it it's like backbone or something but that was pretty cool but like I I think the software is just getting there yet so like let's let's have a breakthrough software moment before like we go in in and the final iterations Hardware obviously like we're we're not quite there yet I think for for startup teams to be pursuing Hardware I think there's still uh you know huge huge you know market value to capture on the the software side and on the digital side that makes sense um you're clearly very opinionated and very successful in understanding how normies or consumers should think um and how they should approach a CH what's your mental framework for that you mentioned the Barista example which I thought was pretty cool as well how how do you um how do you think other apps and specifically abstract and apps building on abstract can should approach normies and regular people I know it's like little things like denominating US Dollars you probably won't see this day one right but like I think everyone should denominate in dollars like why denominate in ethereum doesn't make any sense right like the no one like no one understands that right like you just it's like little tweaks you'd be surprised crypto Builders are 80% of the way there right they really are they they're missing really the 20% which is like the the finals touch the chef's touch right and you're seeing this like dude a lot of guys from web two are starting to come into web 3 builders that you know even guys that saw me what I did right like what is the eida on paju Penguins really 150 200 million right the premium that crypto gives you right from a ecosystem perspective is is exponentially more valuable than if you were to build something in web two pudgy Penguins is a web two company is a $200 million company pudgy Penguins is a web 3 company is a five billion dollar you know ecosystem you know and like Web Two Builders are starting to realize that and they're not going to let you know Schmucks capture that value so they even friends who have seen what I've did they're like oh yeah I'm I'm doing stopping everything and I'm coming in and you're starting to see some crazy right you're starting to see guys really build so the the competition is start it's not going to be as easy as it once was I mean the last 10 years of crypto I mean guys literally said they invented Bitcoin and just m a coin called Bitcoin cash and slapped it on and became billionaires I mean talk about the talk about the talk about the Finesse right like you really understand what's transpired these last couple of years dudes were leaving the ethereum foundation and everything they did was 10 billion bucks right I mean this this era is over now I still think the premium will be there right because it's a growing industry but this idea of just like popping things left and right I I I think is over and you're going to actually have going to have to Wi win by the quality of your build um and I think you're going to see that here here over the coming coming months and I think a lot of people ourselves included are going to help set the tone as to how these things are are made moving forward what's up guys um welcome back to ZX research today I'm joined by Antonio from dydx thanks for coming on Antonio hey thanks so much for having me with regard to the mega Vault how uh obviously the is good feedback because a capital has um deployed into it how would you say is anecdotal feedback or qualitative feedback from users do they enjoy the process do they enjoy the way that it works I'd say so yeah and it's really opened dydx up to a new class of users as well because dydx has always been a fairly sophisticated product as D5 products go it's targeted at derivatives targeted at more professional Traders and if you go open up the websites and the trade page is fairly complicated but again with the mega Vault it's a really easy simpl to use product um anyone who's used defi should be familiar with this kind of product where you just deposit into a vault earns some amount of APR there's a lot of transparency with how those funds are used so yeah feedback has generally been good um and it has been able to provide a lot of liquidity especially as I mentioned in the longtail of markets there are software upgrades that we have planned to increase the capital efficiency of you know that 70 million or so that's in the vault to even more liquidity but that's soon to come perfect and uh one more question about the Mega Ball what are some of the trade-offs that it has compared to an order book yeah so like I said amm are really good at providing liquidity on the longtail of markets and again that's a really big thing that we're focused on now at dydx there's currently about 160 markets that are listed on dydx and we're aiming to scale that to multiple hundreds if not thousands in the next year or two and if you start getting into that you know length of the tale of markets it's not something that more traditional market makers are quoting right now at least in crypto so you really need something like an amm and if you look at all of the evolution of spot decentralized exchanges so far they have obviously been really centered around amm with things like Unis Swap and pump fun radium Etc and now we're really bringing that for the first time in a high quality way to derivatives in defi as well so we're pretty excited about that with order books as you mentioned that's something that dydx still has and has specialized in for quite a long time and the exciting thing I think is having both of those on the same platform and the way I think about it is the the me megga Vol with the amm are really good for the longtail really good for launching markets but then there's this natural progression of a market where it'll start primarily being quoted by an amm but eventually more sophisticated market makers will come in will quote will provide even more liquidity and to be able to do that they require more sophisticated products like an order book so with idx you can have it all in one place perfect and for the instant listings how many markets have been created and what has demand looked like on that side um I think since we launched unlimited it's been around 60 or so um but there's about 500 that are available to be listed with many more plan to come so part of the the thing that we're looking at for success is the number of markets but another really important thing is how quickly can users add markets and that's something that's really important to Traders obviously especially in this day and age in crypto when something's getting hot you want to trade it right away with instant Market listings you can so you guys bought out frame back in the day and then you rebranded it to abstract and then there was also a bit there where it was uh something related to ZK sync I kind of just want to understand the journey and where you realize like this is what everything needs to end up at I need to build out out what was that process like in your mind yeah so I met Saar at dinner who I think is one of the best developers in crypto he was talking about his frustrations around community and marketing you know I was I was talking about how like I wanted to do something bigger for our ecosystem outside of you know simply you know putting um you know putting something together that like you know we honestly are just not technical Builder so like I have no business putting something together like that right and uh the elephant in the room was like I'm super super strong where they were weak and they're super strong where I was weak uh so we decided to merge forces uh obviously the beginning stages we understood the thesis and why we should do this and then we started to really just debate like how are we going to compete and win and how are we going to differentiate ourselves from everyone else uh and as we started to do that competitive process and as we started to kind of do that analysis and just do like nights and nights of hair pulling and back and forth and workshopping we kind of came to the vision that it is today which is like okay let's be the consumer chain clearly cryptos and it's consumer era whoever owns The Narrative of the of the consumer chain is going to be wildly successful and what does that necessarily mean what does it mean to be consumer Centric what does it mean to put the consumer first right like what what like how how do these all correlations come together how are you going to compete how are you going to beat base right why is everyone building general purpose when that contradicts entrepreneurship 101 right like doing 10 things at once leads to failure right it takes just like unbelievable lift to do that why why don't people more people are more purpose-built what is the purpose built that has the pmf you come down to fun right what are users lacking why aren't people onboarding the zero to one sucks right like why does the 0o to one suck because it's an ecosystem in which you have to put pieces together right to use ethereum you got to get metamask you got to go on a Unis you got to put so many pieces together to to make your first transaction to participate right that shouldn't feel like that it should just be in one place right but the problem with one place is one place in layman's terms is centralization Right a lot of and then the ethereum Maxis have convinced or had convinced everyone right I think this narrative is slowly dwindling that like everything needs to be decentralized and if it's not it's contradicting the properties of blockchain when in reality the properties of blockchain are Global liquidity Global composability you know being censorship resistance being able to deploy and tap into this this world through these rails that are not censored by you know Stripes weird terms of service right like that's the properties of blockchain like the properties that make ethereum great is that it's a decentralized network State and that's so important but just because ethereum is a decentralized network State doesn't mean everyone should be building a decentralized network State when ultimately like decentralization and consumer adoption are not synonymous to be frank they're paradoxical they actually mean the opposite thing look at anything in the real world again that's why I use 4chan as the example like look at social networks that's de centralized forchan and then look at you know social networks that are centralized Instagram one clearly I mean they both have their pros and cons we won't get into that argument one has a billion users one has a couple right so like if you're going to break through you've got to get rid of that taboo you've got to get rid of that stigma and you've got to say like this is how we're going to push the boundary and succeed and you're either going to be a part of it or you're not yeah I completely agree with you I always think of herbit when I think of um etherium versus Instagram when something is more centralized I kind of want to take a step back and talk about IP on chain and more specifically something that you mentioned which is um web free we have a tendency to not overvalue but I guess like add a bit more of a specul of Premium um compared to web two where it would be 200 300 mil web free is five bill um and I want to kind of understand how you because Walmart your Walmart initiative was very interesting and I would say Pudgies is the only nft that has ever been able to do both web two and web three right um how do you think what was your approach to that why do you think it worked out and why do you think others were just not able to make it work yeah everything I do when you see me do initiative is really to create demand and conviction right for the pangu token for the pudgy nfts for the ecosystem so like a lot of people on its face look at Walmart and be like okay that's cool right but what we really did at Walmart is a couple things we put 2,000 pallets of pudgy penguin toys in 2,000 Walmarts dead center in the middle of the store during quarter 4 which is the most prized real estate in basically all of consumer product the second part is toy that was on those shelves was a toy that was licensed from the holders they got a royalty and perpetuity the symbolism there was epic the third part was every toy that we sold came with a QR code where somebody scanned and they were actually able to redeem their nfts through a gas's experience and were put on chain right those were the three facets that basically you know were predicated around the Walmart moment it wasn't just simply putting toys in Walmart which I think would have been impressive enough now what we do when we do things like that right or when we make content right we're really creating demand I'm not in the I'm not in the toy business you know a lot of venture investors early on in our fundraise thought I was in the toy business or the IP business turned out to be a terrible misjudgment for them right but nonetheless like we are in the demand creation business so when I go put W toys in Walmart right what I'm really doing is I'm creating more Demand right more people are learning about py penguins more people are falling in love with puny penguins and I'm creating more conviction with our existing holder base our existing holder base is really proud right and convicted to be a part of this ecosystem and they don't want to sell because their kids their nieces their nephews their friends their family members are now you know participating with pudy penguin toys and now it's entrenched in their everyday life and it's omnipresent right if I do a movie or a TV show this thing will remain the same right if I do you know major collaborations and more Partnerships all of that will be the same so a lot of people kind of misinterpret really what I'm doing when I do these initiatives right I'm really creating more demand either for the nft or for the token and I'm creating more conviction for all of those holders because eventually as as I do those things right one becomes critically obvious versus the other your other Holdings become less obvious meaning you know if you hold nfts and you hold you know a couple little Pudgies and a couple of everything else or if you hold meme coins and you hold some penon you hold a couple of everything else right eventually the more times I'm omnipresent in your life the more times I show up you're either fiscally irresponsible or you're going to make the decision to say hey like I don't know why I'm holding all these other things right because one is clearly transcending right one is clearly omnipresent one is clearly going outside of our Echo chamber and impacting me in a positive way which ultimately translates them into buying and holding our assets right this is this is not like a theory this is quite literally why we beat everyone else over the last couple of years with a hundred times less money and resources than they did right was because we simply followed this line of thought and we never pivot and we never steered away no matter what the meta or the trend was at the time right because this is very simple for all tokens the advice to Founders who are listening you are in the supply and demand business as long as your token's not inflationary that is the business that you are in it is a very simple thing to understand right so when you see me go and do another big partnership when you see another headline around pudgy Penguins I want you to look a little deeper than the headline I want you to think wow he's creating demand and he's creating conviction right and you do that enough times then ultimately you have what everyone in crypto wants and it holds a financial asset is something that goes up and to the right perfect um how do you think about brand dilu this isn't related to the toys but it's mostly related to the fact that you guys are doing a lot um which I think is really good and I can see how you're connecting all of them together but is that something that you're concerned about at all yeah it was like for example we were too small to do that Walmart administrative and if that Walmart thing would have went bad we could have screwed the whole brand right we're three reorders in and now with Walmart so it's deemed a complete success actually at the end of 2025 because I know we'll be in Walmart till the end of 2025 my business partner Peter who's the I've he's kind of the Walt Disney behind pudgy and I kind of told him like you have the range you decide what you want to do because we did what we needed to do to get on the radar and to push boundaries and break barriers for the space but he has a little bit of a more you know you know there is such thing as selling out too quickly right and so he really wants to re in the brand and the culture and focus on a couple other things so I don't know where we end up you know in 2026 in terms of some of our Mass Market channels I think we've proven that we've succeeded there you know we're going to be basically two and a half years in Walmart you know if if we decide to leave in 2026 you know we obviously could stay if we'd like um you know but but it is important and we are conscious of it and I've given the keys of that castle to our chief creative officer Peter to figure that out what do you how do you think the pengu launch went um is there anything you not just related to the pengu launch but over the past two years is there anything that you would have done differently um both the pengu launch and with pugy penguins is there anything that you were like you know what we should have done this instead I would have done anything differently okay fantastic um last two questions um how do you think the L2 landscape evolves do you think people start copying the consumer or like I guess the app um focused L2 I think we're going to set the tone I think I think whatever we do here I think every new L2 is going to follow in our Footsteps in some shape way or form uh that's just been the history of how we build for the last couple of years it's kind of historic around you know the nft stuff soon the meme stuff and I think this will be no different um and I think there's going to be more top tier serious talent I think there's way way less Talent true talent and grit than I think people think I mean I shouldn't be able at 26 with a group of 25 and 26 year olds shouldn't come in and outperform everyone the way that we're doing at least like maybe maybe we're just incredibly talented maybe I'm shooting ourselves too short but the bar is too low when you D when you unpack some of these things you know things that are worth billions of dollars you know actively worth billions of dollars and you unpack them you kind of are shocked and you only can truly unpack them if you build and if you're competing and to compete you have to dissect right and so you know my driving force is comp competition and So based on this competition I dissect everything I I know what everyone else is doing to the best of my knowledge and not impressed do you think we'll get um better talent coming in now that people know that they can make a lot of money totally I I think the floodgates have been open now for like two months and I think Trump was the nail in the coffin no one's afraid anymore that makes sense um the last question is kind of a cope question do you think NFD is apart from Pudgies well how do you think the NFD space shapes out over the next year two years I think if marketplaces don't enforce some minimum royalty of at least 1% or more it's going to be a hard time for nfts to come back raging like they did in 2021 nfts are the best form of tribalism they're the best form of community building they're the best form of you know culture and V blin status in the digital age they're the best form of distribution right meme coins can be bundled into Smither and you still might not even be able to see it on Bubble Maps right nfts are really hard to fake the distribution of um and so they're really good identifying how big your army is on an individual basis I think um and and so the the problem is is with nfts not having royalties and meme coins basically being Shameless and no one's trying to report you to the prison if you rug a meme coin uh right but God forbid you raise 500 ran on an nft Min and you you fail after eight months you're a criminal right you're a rug puller it's fascinating actually to delineation because people will praise right like like if you're a builder I mean Jesus like I don't know why you would build an nft right now you're either crazy you're either a beast you're either a CRA you're crazy you're a beast or you're stupid right and the problem is with no royalties is too much of a long-term liability right to be frank if I didn't spend $2 and A5 million on pudgy penguins and put my whole reputation and everything on the line when the Black Swan events occurred and royalties went to zero and I basically had to fund this business with another 500 Grand right I would have probably quit yeah you know I'm a guy who's been making millions of dollars a year since I was 18 right like that hell that we went through oh my God there's no reason to sign up for that um there's no re there was no reason to and so the but it starts with the royal this idea that that nft shouldn't have royalties is insane I mean photon is charging you 1% on sells and 1% on buys a 2% total rake and you do it with a smile on your face and not a single person has said anything to Photon right why because the meme coins go up right but the problem is is for nfts to take off you need mints to take off mints are the most exciting and most fun mechanism in all of crypto because of that idea of pulling a rare right and something more that's better than the others and that that that reveal process the dopamine is too incedible right so to n for nfts to come back you need mints to come back mints are not coming back until you have some sort of minimum viable royalty that makes some sort of financial sense because if not the long-term liability is too great now there still be outliers I think we will be an outlier I still think py penguin nfts and our ecosystem will continue to perform because I've cracked that code and I've developed that trust with the community and the people outside of the community right so when I say something people really Galvanize around it there's maybe one or two teams who will probably be in the same bucket in the same boat right specifically for our team uh I think we're we're in in a league of our own but you know pudy Penguins is not single-handedly going to bring an nft bull market if the cons are still the cons that I had mentioned but the first way to alleviate those cons is some sort of minimum viable royalty and I do not think that royalty is 5 to 10 Perc I think that was egregious that is completely extractive and that's not beneficial right I think 1% is the minimum viable number and I that should be available across the board and I think that's fair and I know the math and if you're a small creator it can make sense or at least it can give you a future potential for it to make sense but nobody was crying when they were getting 5% on their friend Tex when everyone was getting the 5% royalty no one gave a right FR Tech was hot right and so royalties were never the problem uh they're actually now the problem now that they don't exist so it's up to openc and Magic Eden and blur to listen to this hopefully you clip it and post it and tag them you know it it I've been I've been right on everything for the last couple of years I've been saying this for the last couple of years I mean it's so clear as day that's why our whole incentive program around abstract is really focus on content creators and streamers because I know what it is to benefit that right nfts were amazing because all the content creators and all the artists were coming and bringing their people into the space it was only until that stopped happening that the that the flywheel and did the excitement around nft stop right I think ethereum and if ethereum wants to come back the way that it was don't underestimate the nft top and the ethereum price top truly right like don't underestimate what that what the that correlation put the two charts together I think you'll tell an interesting story also look at when nfts took off in ethereum's Price look look at the correlation between the two it's evidently clear look at sana's Price versus The mcoin Craze it's it's so it's so paralleled and so obvious I mean it take a first grader could understand it yeah for some reason all these amazing teams with you know multi-billion dollar valuations and nine figures in cash don't really understand the business that they're in which is the content creator business it's fascinating to say the least I hope of these days I could be at the leadership Helm of one of these nft marketplaces so I could show them all how it's done that was a very good um honestly almost brought a tear to my eye because I really miss nfts like nfts it was just so much more fun than mem coins and I agree with you it's if you're paying it's not even one% because you're also paying priority fees everything it doesn't make any sense to um yeah I'm hoping so as well um okay I think that's it Luka thank you so much for coming on man I really appreciate it I appreciate you having me before actually we um go off do you want to tell people where they should head to find out more about abstract chain and about you and about the follow abstract chain on X just spell it out lucanet on X pudy Penguins on X stay tuned [Music]

========================================

--- Video 51 ---
Video ID: kRRtKuw22Xs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kRRtKuw22Xs
Title: Union: Interoperability Accelerated | Karel
Published: 2025-01-25 09:00:57 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we sat down with the CEO of Union, Karel, to discuss Union’s architecture, including CometBLS, and Galois. We also covered what makes Union unique, and how modularity in crypto will evolve going forward. Finally, Karel told us what to expect from Union in 2025. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Follow Union: https://x.com/union_build
Follow Karel: https://x.com/0xkaiserkarel
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:32 Union Architecture
6:44 ZK-powered Consensus
11:43 CometBLS & Galois
16:04 Integrating Other Chains
24:55 What is Unique About Union?
28:24 How Will Modularity Change Over the Years?
31:29 Union's Focus in 2025
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
I do think that we're going into this era soon also where kind of apps will almost be like like pult original vision of like having on demand rollups with par chains and Par threats I think that's something really cool that we could move into in the Moder space right now that's very much underexplored at the moment nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice pachio Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of zerox research as a disclaimer today's episode is sponsored by Union I'm joined by Carell the founder and a core contributor at Union um thanks for coming on Carell yeah thanks so much for having me uh before we get started do you mind running over what union is and what you guys are building yeah of course course so Union is an interoperability and settlement layer so for kind of the regular user what this means is again a project that connects different blockchains what we focused on is a being really fast in doing this so messages and transfers get sent really quickly between blockchains but as well as being extremely secure and decentralized so we don't rely on like oracles or some service that we are running that could potentially be hacked by any group and that's especially important if you're doing bridging that makes sense and what's the motivation behind it what apart from not being reliant on other protocols what are the problems you guys are trying to solve yeah so a obviously everyone's kind of building like app chains app specific rollups they're following in hyper liquids footsteps of if you have like your own environment you can build a really cool product so this idea that like the L2 Centric road map of ethereum is kind of what everyone is doing in crypto is very real um with that you get a majorly complex like architecture for how these blockchains need to interact and communicate with each other extremely knowing for users like you want to do bridging um but also actually really annoying for developers because you don't want to like rebuild an entire ecosystem you want to rely on like already products that are on someone else's blockchain but if you actually look at like the current landscape there's not really like I would say like bridging apis that would work if you contract does like a thousand Bridge calls every minute to interact with the decks on another chain there's like no infrastructure really that handles that all of the infrastructure that we have right now is to kind of like most Bridge protocols do like a th Bridge operations per per day most on a really busy day right like it's almost like the post that's being sent uh so that was what we were trying to like solve have like that first Pine that is indeed kind of suitable for high traffic uh interoperability the other thing and that's more like really philosophical that I was seeing personally is we spend so much time like in the early days of crypto designing blockchains that were like secure thinking of like Byzantine fall tolerance and such if you look at lot of intro protocols they're like multi sick to relayer kind of setup um and if we build like The Wider blockchain landscape around this idea that everything is connected by just a bunch of multi6 then we lose that portion of decentralization and security right like we've got a bunch of middlemen that are basically just running a single server in the US subject to all regulations and such so we wanted something that even if I personally as like the founder of Union decide to pull the plug like the network itself could not be pulled by me uh so our second biggest objective to achieve perfect that makes sense um and how does it achieve or aim to achieve this objectives what does the backend architecture look like so basically in designing this the first thing like if you're not going to use like a multi or Oracle or something means that you need different like security mechanism to verify that a transfer occurred uh in our case we use light clients for that and like clients are kind of like the the best that you can do at the moment basically what it means is like we gener these certain mathematical proofs about like validator sets or the consensus algorithms of the different chains that we connect to so in the case of ethereum that is tracking the sying committee in the case of Bitcoin that's basically verifying the P that's occurring um and uh allowing anyone to like provide those proofs so it's not just that the union team runs like a relayer and approver no like we have this network of solvers that basically monitor different chains that have like transfers going in and out of them and they will see hey there's this batch of transfers that could go to this other chain let me generate approve right now and settle these transfers because with light clients are smart contracts kind of guarantee that you cannot like create fraudulent proofs anyone can like boot up a relayer or a solver right now and start serving traffic and that is what keeps it so decentralized because basically if there's like traffic going on anyone can make money with it and as long as you can make money with it someone on Earth will be willing to like boot up a relayer and either compete against existing ones or keep serving the network uh so there's no like Reliance necessarily on us having like a server somewhere securely like facilitating all the transfers right now and actually like if Union Labs at some point disappears as long as people are using Union there's always the room for relayer to be operating on top of that we have our L1 our L1 access is proof aggregation layer for all of the work that occurs so that is what Rel layers connect to and use to orchestrates and over that we generate one big ckp that has another like quite nice advantage to it um because we don't only like aggregate multiple transfers in one single ckp we aggregate multiple chains in each ckp um and that gives us a really nice gas profile compared to for example XLR or layer zero where they don't aggregate over multiple chains and so what you see is um it doesn't matter for Union if you have let's say 10 transfers going from ethereum to Solana or one transfer from barain to to Solana one from ethereum to Solana one from um osmosis to salana like the aggregation behavior is exactly the same and the verification cost stays the same and that skill allows you to get like really low gas prices so if you have about 20 transfers occurring at the same time Union becomes about as cheap as across like slightly more expensive but I think it's only like 5K gas more expensive and that's actually quite amazing with all of the cryptography happening under the hoood the zero knowledge proofs like at not even that many transfers to be honest it already becomes like one of the most gas efficient protocols out there um so that's a really cool uh behavior that actually is because we chose to be this decentralized and secure it's coming from the fact that we chose CK yeah that is cool um and talking about ZK one thing you guys mentioned is that you have a ZK powered consensus verification can you run over what that um exactly entails yeah so this ties into those light clients right and light clients already known to be like the most secure way to do bridging verification but the downside is light clients usually are on chain a lot more expensive um for the more technical people like the light clients basically is a reimplementation of the consensus algorithm of a specific chain so you might reimplement kind of tendermint in solidity um and you have the relayer provide like the next block the smart contract runs through the logic and verifies yeah and these like this is still the uh the correct block um you can really imagine this gets really expensive right you're going to spend millions of gas on each light CLI update and so the bridge transfers just become way too expensive so the key solution here is actually generating a zkp for your uh consensus update instead of doing it in the contract itself you have a circuit that performs all this computation cool thing is now like the cost stay is constant so if a network has 100 validators a thousand or a million doesn't really matter because the ckp has a constant cost associated with it you always know like a life client update is 220k gas uh give or take um and the cool thing with ckps of course is you can aggregate them arbitrarily right like you can combine multiple into new ones for those that are familiar with like the cryptography behind this and so it has a really good scaling Behavior once you can get into like serving thousands of blockchains right like it still stays the same constant cost I think I all like interal providers right now Union is the only one that has that behavior like as you start adding more chains there's no additional cost to it interesting how does that batching or I guess aggregation mechanism um work uh more specifically yeah so I'm afraid like I'm not our lead cryptographer so I can't go too deep into those details but basically what we do at the moment is we actually generate snarks and uh snarks you can aggregate those arbitrarily and still verify them as a snark uh the input size does increase of course if you were to do something like that but uh in the end like you still get a major gas benefits we have a couple of different modes actually in the architecture too so one of our partners that we work with is aligned layer what they do is ckp at a station um but depending on like the type of connection that you open through Union you can choose to use aign layer as well and then you aggregate them when they at a station service you can use nibra um and then instead it's actually properly like cryptographically aggregated what we see here happening is that there's a latency trade of occurring so basically just generating the zkp settling it directly on chain low is latency and so a solver will choose to do that if there's a lot of money to be made with that specific uh batch of transfers if people have set like really low fees in their slider they're cheaping out that day then a solver basically will feel secure that no other solver will go with the fast path and so we'll just submit the zkp to be aggregated with Alliance or nebra um weight 30 extra seconds and uh save massively in gas and it can do this for multiple ckps right it can decide like this one batch just doesn't have enough fees at all but maybe three batches in total have enough fees uh collectively to be settled that way so there a really nice dynamic system like if ethereum gas prices suddenly Spike massively then basically solvers will decide to increase transfer Times by a minute or two to leverage aggregation mechanisms to still be able to settle these transfers that makes sense and in terms of have you guys run analysis on what you think um solver fees will or like what solvers will demand or do you think often we hear that with intents for example that it's going to be a race to the bottom do you think it's going to be a similar case um yeah I think on the one end raise to the bottom that is doable for solver to still operate so we specifically chose this design because if I'm going to be honest solvers are usually Rich sophisticated market makers so I wasn't looking to give them a way to make insane amounts of money I was looking for a way to create a system that would cost optimized for the user so ideally commoditize for the solvers until they make just enough that's basically the best price a user can ever get and that ties into this vision of like we want to be in a world where tens of thousands of bridge operations are happening like every minute between thousands of blockchains and for that you want it to be like really cheap in the end instead of extremely expensive so have a system that can do high volume and make money of that instead of high value transactions but only a few that makes sense and um I guess how does the comet BLS work how's it different to the comet bft and why is it different yeah so for kind of our aggregation chain we decided to redo a big portion of comet bft and and it has to do with that we include the consensus of this relay chain into the final ckp as well um so we made a few design choices to make it much more ZK friendly overall One is using BLS signatures really good for like reduced State growth over time really good for verification um as well as we figured out some cool tricks with like ethereum pre- compiles that actually made like verifying R zkps even cheaper by going down that approach other things we Implement is uh we use mimc hashing instead of regular sha 256 U we actually have like a slightly adjusted uh storage drive format and the cool thing with this is like this all made like the prover even faster overall so um in the end I think right now like consumer Hardware can kind of generate approve in about 30 seconds uh maybe 20 by now and our biggest thing that we're working on right now is GPU acceleration for this that'll be the biggest win I think that we can get out of this Tech at the moment uh and so that to be honest puts like the theoretical latency for Union at around well right now 20 seconds on consumer hardware and with GPU acceleration probably two to four seconds which means that we're mainly waiting on other chains and not on ourselves which is technically the best you can do as a interro provider is if you're like faster than uh the the chains that you connect and that's what we to be on this kind of see right now on testnet we did a I think the fastest transf for we facilitated was between stri and bar chain and that took about 23 24 seconds in total with regard to that if a chain has faster block times if a chain is just faster overall does that um also lower your latency yeah with that it does need to have like um faster finality that's what matters for us but what you see right now is that is kind of the case like hyper liquid and suchar they all finalize really quickly too so with this like single slot fast finality chains with like up one second block times that's actually what I think is the future for like all blockchains out there because that just provides everyone the best ux including us like we love that on the back ends with engineering team that makes sense and um I guess lastly on the architecture side how does um galoa work what what is it what does it exactly do yeah so our original like cryptographic St we implemented that ourselves about two years ago like the vzer um using narc so that's still the kind of I won't say Legacy ZK stxs because you actually build the most performance ZK stxs with this but these days everyone is kind of using sp1 risk zero um maybe Bas and such but when you handw write the circuits at the moment you still get the highest performance and that's what we did specifically because we didn't need to do like a very general compute we knew exactly what our problem space was um narc uh at the moment like is still what we're running and allows us to also Endeavor into GPU acceleration and all of that we fold it into galwa which is the like prover that we use that's compatible with FMA with cindry the different Pro backends can at the moment serve for us long term I'm not sure if we're going to stick with that we have a few experimental projects right now to actually switch away to a new Pro backend um the main reason for that actually is that there's just this like obviously cber an explosion of of new blockchains out there with different consensus mechanisms out there and so we're moving at the moment to make it easier for other ecosystems to make themselves Union compatible instead of us writing the circuit writing the cryptographic backends to do these light line proofs make it easy for third party developers to actually write this deploy the code and start generating proofs and for that you to be honest want to have them be able to use vanilla rust no circuits but uh basically just do like the same code that they write in their smart contracts or their regular backends uh so for that we're looking at potentially using a zkm that makes sense um in terms of integrating other uh chains you said you want them to start handling that but what does the process look like on your end right now um and I guess more specifically let's say like bar chain or a Bitcoin L2 um what would it look like for these versus Solon a hyper liquid yeah um so at the moment all are like relatively similar um basically the big thing to do is that light clients the code that generates the zkp that's the uh hardest portion at the moment for new developers coming in to code out and that requires like the most I would say fundamental blockchain knowledge as well right that requires understanding the underlying consensus like what does this chain specifically do funny enough we always joke about this like everything turns out to kind of be a reimplementation of tender mint with a couple of changes to it um especially hyper liquid for example but Solana is actually the big outlier here that is very different from all other blockchains because it chooses to uh for example not meriz State at all which for us actually makes it a bit more challenging because now you cannot easily generate like storage proofs anymore which is what in the end at the core uh we do we generate storage proofs to secure these different asset transfers um for let's say if you're building a new Bitcoin L2 using the cosmos SDK at the moment we actually just have like contract Stacks that you can immediately deploy so for 99% of developers out there it's actually like go through the tutorial use our deployer CI um and and you're good to go because we have so many like pre-configuration at the moment that all just kind of works out of the book interesting um I guess what are some of the tradeoffs that come with Union as opposed to other interoperability protocols yeah so um one thing that's really cool I think at the moment moment is how we beat like other General message passing Bridges right now is Union is not based on a hardcoded set of confirmations which XLR and layer zero are so XLR for specific chain might wait for 30 confirmations but if a chain finalizes let's say every uh 15 blocks that means that on average XLR overshoots by 15 blocks waiting for too many confirmations then is theoretically possible sorry theoretically necessary Union always like hits that exact theoretical one where it's safe to do the bridge operation like always mathematically that's really cool the downside is intent based bridges are technically faster because intent based Bridges can YOLO and say like we don't even wait for the one where you theoretically need to wait for for it to be secure we just take the reor risk and Union at the moment like we choose not to take that reor risk because obviously we're all like smart contract based and you can't handle such a risk in the system you want to maintain one-on-one backing uh which means that for chains where you need to wait quite a long time for finality you uh are faster off with an intent based Bridge downside with an intent based Bridge of course is like not all assets are supported you cannot do General message passing Etc so uh Union in that case does support them really well um other downsides I would say at the moment but I think that's kind of an upside is um indeed that because Union is so decentralized uh you cannot really shut Union down we do do have contracts to do like circuit breaking rate limiting for specific assets but that's more up to the asset issuers themselves to decide like what is the bridging behavior that I want by default like Union will just allow any traffic to always keep on going and we don't like Blacklist or Whit list specific users interesting that is good I think that's also a positive as opposed to a negative to not be able to Blacklist and just like have um circuit breaks Etc just to slow stuff down if needed yeah I think it's better Cas layer is like open for anyone to use and then you just leave like developers building on top of you to add their own custom Behavior yeah how do you see um in intents and general messaging General messaging protocols um play over the next few years or over the next because like you said I personally use intents because if I'm bridging I just Bridge big asset to Big asset and it's much faster but I know there are risks involved how do you see that Chang here um yeah so I like the final like solution to be honest is like intense at some point go away and everything is ZK based light client based and we can just mint any asset because that means that solvers need to no longer manage inventory anywhere if we're in this world for like every chain is like sub one second finality right they're all insanely fast then there's really like no reason to to operate over intents anymore um cheaper for users to be honest easier for Developers ERS to reason about too because right now with intents in your smart contract code you kind of have to handle like can this actually be sent over right like what's the asset IDE that I'm dealing with you need to like store supported asset lists and they always turn out to be basically usdc and maybe two or three more but that's kind of it that we can do intent based um so the final solution really is like something that's based on proofs and the cool thing there is like you can have different Bridge providers still all use the same proving mechanism basically have it all be block hash based and that way you can basically aggregate the block hashes they provide if they're like in unison about like what's the the hash of the origin chain then you can allow all of them to mint freely so that kind of makes Bridge providers more like security providers in the end and aggregation layers and not really um asset custodians anymore that would be like the best Final Solution uh for crypto that's kind of what we're working towards but uh that solution like is still like at least two years away I think Fair makes sense uh one more thing this is kind of related to the earlier section but you mentioned that Solana makes it difficult because they don't really have State hashes versus that's what you mer hash they don't meriz it um versus that's what you guys really need can you um I guess like my line of reasoning is on ethereum you can just take that and you know that it's correct that's the good state but on Solana how do you access the good State or the verified State yeah exactly so for those listening basically the way ethereum and a lot of blockchains work is if you have like the block header with the block hash and you know that that one is correct you can create what we call Storage proofs which are these really tiny proofs to show that this smart contract has these values in it or that this transaction previously was successful um and that's really useful for example to prove that there's uh 1K USD in this pool or in this fault and that's kind of how Bridge providers work because what you do is you do a proof that someone deposited one 1K in a vault and that means that now you can like subtract 1K from another Vault on another chain um now because salana doesn't meriz State you cannot generate these tiny proofs that these events have occurred um what it forces you to do actually is to meriz state in the SL smart contract itself so you don't rely on the notes doing this work for you you actually perform this in the contract there you can be clever with it two so you can use RSA accumulators which are like a different cryptographic principle that kind of allows you to do the same generate like inclusion proofs as well um and so like actually all of the logic that normally was handled by the blockchain itself you're now doing inside the smart contract and so that again like if you're implementing this from scratch it requires you to just understand a little bit better what the tools are available to you luckily for us like Solana is obviously like really fast and um they're like if you're transaction can be paralyzed and doesn't like touch any states that's uh contended with then it's cheap if you were doing merization in contract on ethereum you'd be paying quite a lot but on salana in all in practice actually don't pay that much for it interesting I assume it's still um heavy on the computation side or no it well heavy like it it turns out to still be just a few cents so really not that much um but definitely on the heavier side uh it's I think something that misses but the thing is it's part of sana's philosophy right like it's also hard to set a note and just keep up with the actual validators um but light lines normally actually make this much easier for others to keep up because you have to like process less data to know your data is still valid so I'm hoping that salana at some point adds these things on top of the uh road map uh no right now they're partnership with suin and search that they're a bit more open to actually making like the base layer more provable interesting um what can uniquely be built on Union that can't be built on um other General messaging protocols yeah so one thing that I think is extremely cool at the moment and this ties a bit into like how we saw how cool intents are and what they enable you right now if you build a protocol on top of Union you basically use like our packets API which is very much similar to like using TCP like packet comes in and such but you can actually opt into to have your packet be intent F delivered as well um by basically adding like one extra entry point point to your smart contract and solvers will kind of automatically figure out these specific like data packets I can use the intense route to fill them provide assets myself um and for these I need to actually generate a proof which you as a developer like don't need to implement two different protocols you're not actually implementing like intents on top of a message passing Bridge you're not importing like two different API standards they're basically for certain entry points for example swaps or um uh uh providing LP saying this can be provided by someone else and then using our acknowledge mechanism to repay the solver so we saw someone for example Implement a cross chain Dex in kind of like 150 lines of code because they realized like hey because you have this like solver kind of transparently built into the system you get access to whatever asset you want um and I think that's kind of like outside almost the ZK portion that we do and the cryptography that we do just to really cool effect of how we designed like the core protocol itself to be like to have all the lessons from like layer Z V2 from across from exlar and combine all of them in just a really cool API to work with and what we see people build right now with that so we have the fluon team who's combining that with FH to do uh private intents one I think is really cool about that is obviously like if you do everything intentful you always get the worst price right silver is always going to front on you sandwi with you Etc so the whole objective is like art can we like indeed like built an L2 using FH and try to keep this like private for as long as possible make it harder for solvers to actually uh front from the end user uh that's a really cool one uh another team right now settle X they're building a confidential clearing layer together with arum uh so that basically has this property right now like solvers are rebal ing across various networks exchanges as well right like exchanges like binance need to make sure that they have assets on every single chain available for people to withdraw but anyone can monitor this at the moment they can see that these positions are being placed and so that leaks like certain strategic info right like you know where outflows are going ahead of time and if you think about it like in in trfi uh clearing and uh rebalancing is is always private like you don't let your competitors know what the positions are that you're taking um so by combining like Union and a confidential compute you can build a layer that basically does all of this rebalancing uh completely privately the intent comment about people front running you that's another um tradeoff for them I think I I noticed it recently is that it's anything you put on the Chain if there's a like you said these are sophisticated market makers it makes sense that they would want to front run you um how do you we already kind of touched up on this but how do you see a modularity change over the next few years yes so I think we're going to see more high performance mod chains that do quite a lot of functionality so maybe rely on da still for SL child another the chain but I think still like have a lot of the stack actually in their own notes because that just allows you to build like a really high performance environment at the moment um I do think that we're going into this era soon also where kind of apps will almost be like like pol's original vision of like having OnDemand rollups with par chains and Par threats I think that's something really cool that we could move into in the modular space right now that's very much underexplored at the moment and that's something that uh rup as a service providers and I mean interro providers really need to jump in on uh if indeed like the experience for deploying your app is as simple as super base right where in like 20 seconds you have like a postgress instant your dashboard and you can start building some cool stuff that's really the same with setting up your own like high performance L2 um for that like all of the peripherals need to come into place really nicely right now like you do have some Bridge support right like you could get I think like relay included um or hyperlane but there you still have the issue that you're connected to like one or two networks when you set this up um especially like within all of these different Ro that people spawn you still see like very limited connectivity so I think that's like the big thing that needs to be solved before we actually see these like swarm of microservice blockchain succeed and I think until then it's still going to be a little bit monolithic that makes sense and what would you say are the um the key issues not in just modularity but also interoperability like what is something that you think you need to fix over the next one year yeah I think in to be honest it's both fees and speed um we all of seen tweets from certain interprotocol saying like how shape this one route was but to be honest if you look at many routes you're still SP pending like 90 bucks to do a medium-sized transfer uh sure like the fastest they did that day was 50 seconds but in reality usually you're still waiting uh five to six minutes uh I think right now some people might say like yeah but do you need to you don't do it that often and that again it's reminiscent of like uh 30 years ago online shopping where people say yeah but how often do you do online shopping it's fine waiting 30 minutes for bank transfer right like Well turns out to actually just be like fundamentally limiting an entire Market sector and if indeed like you could do an online payment in one second people do more and and shops become more successful so I think it's very much the same with like blockchain and Ma thesis and having multiple chains out there people kind of Wonder like do we need the second one is the advantage big enough but if interrup is like extremely fast extremely cheap then as a user you don't get annoyed by it at all and then it's super obvious to go your own route and build your own L2 for your app yeah that makes sense and on top of that what are some key things that you guys are focused like what should we expect from Union this year yeah so uh basically expect main net uh this year uh test net 9 is uh coming out extremely soon that's our final test net has all of our latest features in it our new proving back end um that also means that we're close to the conclusion of our uh trst setup ceremony so we've been running one of the largest um ceremonies right now to generate the verification keys for CK circuit so uh we've had like thousands of people participate now and the actual payload I think is about 600 gabyt I think with that we we've found it as the largest one at the moment um and so that's like actually the the first bit that people can use to contribute is participating in that ceremony getting in the queue and contributing some RNG to ensure that our underlying algorithm is secure perfect that's exciting and uh before we end it do you want to tell our you uh our listeners where they should had to to find out more about Union yeah just go to our website union. build and uh check out our Twitter Union build uh that's where I do most of my ideation and thinking um obviously join our Discord uh participate uh next couple of weeks is kind of a new moment with our next test net uh for users to become active and as well for uh people to interact with the projects building on top of us like uh Asher fluon and settle X kind of the first era of truly modular multi-chain projects fantastic this was great Carl thank you for coming on thank you so much have a nice day [Music]

========================================

--- Video 52 ---
Video ID: taBJkZkHzCM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=taBJkZkHzCM
Title: Trump’s Meme, Solana’s Activity Boom, and Base’s Next Step | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-01-23 09:01:03 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss the launch of Trump’s memecoin, Solana’s boom in activity, and the SIMD 228 proposal. They also dive into the Base ecosystem, ETH blobs, and the Coinbase x Morpho partnership.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

SIMD 228: Reducing SOL’s Inflation: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/flashnotes/simd-228-reducing-sol-s-inflation

Base DEX Volume: https://x.com/smyyguy/status/1881417994322214985

Coinbase x Morpho: https://x.com/MorphoLabs/status/1879903267146309805
--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps.

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Join us at DAS NYC 2025!  Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2025-new-york
--
Follow Carlos: https://x.com/0xcarlosg
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:39 Trump's Memecoin Launch
11:58 Ads (SKALE, Ledger)
12:38 Solana's Immense Rise in Activity
28:41 Solana's Liveness Struggles
35:56 Prioritizing Token Holders vs Stakers
42:07 Understanding SIMD 228
47:56 Ads (SKALE, Ledger)
49:12 The Base Ecosystem
57:54 Where Are ETH Blobs Going?
1:07:01 Coinbase X Morpho Partnership
1:18:51 Closing Thoughts
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 53 ---
Video ID: XIThhG1mZHM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XIThhG1mZHM
Title: Making Ethereum Great Again | Lei & Namik
Published: 2025-01-20 09:00:35 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Lei and Namik from MegaETH! We discuss what it means to be a “real-time blockchain”, MegaETH’s architecture, and the current state of L2s. Additionally, cover MegaMafia, and their fundraising efforts on Echo. Finally, we end the episode by asking - who’s your biggest competitor? 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, dYdX!
Stay up-to-date with DeFi’s Pro Trading Platform by following dYdX on X: https://x.com/dYdX
--
Follow MegaETH: https://x.com/megaeth_labs
Follow MegaMafia: https://x.com/0xMegaMafia
Follow Namik: https://x.com/NamikMuduroglu
Follow Lei: https://x.com/yangl1996
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:21 What is a Real-Time Blockchain
8:35 MegaEth Architecture
18:58 The Current State of L2s
26:53 dYdX Snippet
30:13 MegaMafia
37:33 Raising on Echo
39:40 Mistakes Made Along the Way
42:17 MegaEths Biggest Competitor
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
the vast majority of people's interactions with blockchains are via centralized exchanges trading coins right and I mean the the research is there right when you have to wait 10 seconds for something to happen you lose your attention uh if you have to wait even a second or two for something to happen your intentions are interrupted nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice bacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of ZX research today I'm joined by leay and namuk from Mega E thanks for coming on guys hey thanks for having us um before we get started it might be helpful to for you guys to give a background on what Mega E is yeah um so I can give a quick intro so Mega E is what we call a real time blockchain um a realtime blockchain is a blockchain that is um super fast in terms of both throughput and latency um we're targeting a through 100K transactions per second or 10 gigas per second and a latency of less than 10 millisecond or a block time of less than 10 millisecond um yeah so magga e is buil as a um ethereum Layer Two and because that allows us to do something which we call um no specialization so we hyper centralize the block producer and at any at any given point in time there's only one uh set of nodes producing blocks which which ensures Ultra minimum uh latency and I mean Ultra minimum block time and on the other hand there's uh we support F noes and replica noes which permissionless join the network to synchronize split sequencer um to get the latest blockchain State and finally we settle back on ethereum the layer one uh with proof um first initially optimistic and later ZK to ensure the correctness of the states I was just going to say we're excited about megi because we believe it enables a new uh design space for applications by making the design choices we have we enable applications which are real time leveraging our unique uh optimizations to build applications which haven't existed before perfect um so you guys answered my next two questions but I guess let's talk about this term real time blockchain um it's the first time that I've well you guys are the first team that is using it can you expand a bit on um what exactly it is yeah um so I mean I mean the notion of real ESS uh of a computer system uh is not I mean it's not there in in the blockchain I mean it's not invented in blockchain space but rather it's mostly to to kind of describe an operating system or a piece of software that just responds to user interactions with so much responsiveness and uh gives the user kind of a a a a a feeling that they're talking and they're they're using something that is like alive right so a comparison would be so I mean I draw like two examples one is what do you call batch processing so that's basically the way how computers work back in the days like before 1970s um back then computers are mostly used as a tool to help researchers and what researchers do is to just submit I mean prepare a whole lot a whole lot of jobs for the computer to process and the computer take it as a batch and probably do do the work overnight and next morning the researcher will get up and uh get the computational results and uh but however nowadays the way we use at least VAP two applications I mean our our daily computers um is that you click you click your mouth or or you you I mean you type something on the keyboard and you expect immediate response on the screen and that's basically what real time really means in in terms of ux and uh yeah basically our our goal is to make the map Street I mean the the world computer as responsive as uh yeah as the yeah as as our daily computers yeah that makes sense nam I remember watching a video on Twitter and it was you mentioned it that like how we don't when I click on something on my regular computer I expect it to go through immediately or else I get really upset and then on the blockchain we don't really care that much as of State um but that's what you guys are trying to fix that it's as responsible at the daily computer yeah I think in a lot of ways blockchains are not truly usable which is why we have very few developers in this space and we have very few real users in this space the vast majority of people's interactions with blockchains are via centralized exchanges trading coins right and I mean the the research is there right when you have to wait 10 seconds for something to happen you lose your attention right uh if you have to wait even a second or two for something to happen your intentions are interrupted right with Mega E the plan is to say hey let us leverage the security of eum to maximize for performance and bring a new wave of experiences on chain and that's kind of the north star of Mega E lot for us that makes sense um Le you kind of brought this up node specialization um and anom you mentioned that you guys made some design choices this is kind of I guess the most controversial topic about Mega E is that you may you may you have some tradeoffs um what would you say those are and how are you combating potential malicious behavior or potential I guess downsides yep um so the major I mean the most important design decision that we took was to um centralize the sequencer or centralize the blog producer um yeah and uh I mean by extension um we are we are calling that no specialization because we we not only do this kind of I mean purposeful design for the sequencer but we also do it for for say for the food notes for replica notes and for the pro notes um so this desci sitution really I mean I think it Roes back in a post a blog post written by metallic um which basically kind of describes an idea that all performant uh blockchain would eventually require centralized block production and uh the trade-off here or the benefit it provides to us is that because there's only one computer that needs to pump out blocks there is no like cross internet communication that needs to happen um to produce the very next block after one has been produced so imagine like I think a comparison is a traditional layer one let's say ethereum the main net and uh you don't really know where uh the next block I mean where the next block is going to be produced and who's going to be the the the block Builder or who's going to be the proposer of next block and the the moment after you have produced your block you have to send the block to the person and the person has to um apply the block on their local state so that they can produce their block on top of it and this process of communicating and the replicating the states takes time um there's a lower bound on that which is speed of light right so by kind of collocating um the the I mean by collocating the machines that produce the blocks you can minimize the latency and we and Bic what we do is to push this architecture to the extreme which is to just I mean ram them into just one single machine and let the single machine produce blocks and the the resulting low inter block time which or or block time and the resting high throughput is the major benefit and um I mean the trade-off on the other hand is yes we are essentialized blck producer but what we're what we're doing to combat this is by rotate the sequencer so instead of requiring a cohort of nodes to be always online and always participate in a consensus algorithm in a critical path to produce every single blog what we do is that we set up a a bunch of a lot of like candidate um blog producers and we rotate this role of the active block producer among these candidates um so we achieve both um liveness because if one sequencer is down we can just rotate it out and we retain all the benefits of this centralized block production that makes sense and I think this is um kind of what a lot of chains are trying to do is they' we've realized that consensus is the bottleneck um and we're just either collocating or single centralized sequencer um one thing I wanted to ask is so in general with l2s um the Northstar has been to decentralize the sequencer we see this with I guess slower l2s um but this is obviously something that you guys aren't interested in do you think you can get the performance that you guys want or let's say like 10,000 TPS which is lower than you guys with a decentralized sequencer um I would first say that we are I don't think it's true that we're are not interested in decentralizing the sequenc and uh I mean ultimately we see decentralization as as a means to an end right what users care about our our like guaranteed correctness of execution our our sensorship tolerance very strong sensorship tolerance to be honest and U um but decentralization in the form of like injecting a consensus ptical into the critical path of block production is just one way to do it and I mean this sequence of rotation which I just mentioned is I would say another way to also decentralize sequen but not in the traditional definition of it um but in terms of so I I guess your your question was can we achieve the same um performance if we have a consensus protocol in the critical path I mean the consensus protocol would be participated by at least tens if not hundreds of notes then my answer would be very hard because if you want it's the it's kind of the same uh it's kind of the same argument that I make right because if you want computers across the world across the internet to reach consensus on what is the previous Buck um it takes at least several run trips across the world and that's almost 500 600 milliseconds and uh there's no chance that you can do um a block time that is lower than that if you still require this consensus to happen before you produce the next block it's just a lot of physics so but I mean suut a probably a different story um but still very hard yeah just to kind of highlight there um I think for us fundamentally We Believe like settlement da and execution are all different layers that need to be optimized in different ways and we are building the exec layer so yes other nuances that one can take sure other uh one can mid curve this architecture to say hey you know what we can actually still reach a very strong level of you know performance and be you know with some consensus in the sequence architecture but it doesn't serve our purposes uh to the greatest extent right so in that regard we are quite opinionated and why will while we will have a rotational sequence to architecture we're not particularly interested in building less performant or infrastructure that makes sense and the full nodes as far as I understand are used there to verify that the last good state is good right um the full note so okay so um the food node will reexecute the transactions yes and uh they're they're going to verify that the state they hold is correct uh we also have replica nodes who do not verify transactions but merely serve as like horizontally scal um like read replicas um yeah and also Prov noes which not only verifies the transactions themselves but also proves to the world that hey the transaction the state snapshot is correct fantastic um I guess one more question about your architecture is you talk about memory computation in memory computation and how you translate smart contracts into machine code on the Fly can you explain those to me like um I don't know that I've never done this before just so I understand um yeah of course so these are actually two separate um optimizations um in memory computation is a kind of a trend that happened um in the data center World um about 10 to 15 years ago so the whole story is um yeah so the whole story is that um yeah most applications require uh accessing and actually very frequently reading or or writing to some State uh to some storage some database right and the inherent limitation here is that if you write um if you store your data on a kind of a persistent medium which like which for example um your SSD your your your hard drive um the latency or the time you have to wait your software have to wait before the data is fetched or the data is written is actually much longer than if you store those kind of data in the main memory of your computer the ram so the idea is basically that uh now that Ram is cheap enough uh last time I checked it's about1 uh dollar per gigabyte uh in the DDR for server memory so now that the ram is cheap enough you can actually afford to store all your hot data in the main memory to benefit to benefit from all the latency improvements actually multiple magn multiple a magnitudes of of improvement um by Yeah by staring us the main memory so um yeah it's actually kind of a simple idea right you just put all your data in the main memory um but the execution is actually what I think is pretty interesting here because as I mentioned um if you store it in a persistent medium you suffer from high latency but if you store it in the main in the main memory yes you you benefit from low latency but the memory I mean Auto data in the memory is lost the moment you unplug or someone unplugs your SE your sequencer so ensuring um the data persistency even if you are storing the data in the main memory um while running the sequencer is a major technal Challenge and actually um our other uh Tech co-founder elom um he and his lab studed in memory computation very extensively uh during his years of his PhD at Stanford so yeah it's a very interesting problem but we have also a very interesting solution um on the other hand I think you also mentioned the translation from from uh evm B codes from Smart contracts to machine code so the the story here is a kind of a technique called compilation which is again a kind of a a technique from the greater Computing world not just specific to blockchain and uh the idea is that um yeah people can only write uh uh scalably write uh programs in human readable programs so usually uh people write their programs in say C C++ go rust whatever and a tool called a compiler that translates these kind of human readable strings human readable languages to the language that your computer understands because your computer on the other hand is only good at like doing very mechanical stuff like adhering I mean reading and parsing uh programs that aderes to very strict and simple syntaxes so doing this conversion is the job of the compiler and the in evm too there is a compiler I mean there's a translator because the evm programs are written in what we call EVN bite codes but your computer does not really understand at least your Hardware does not really understand the EVN bite codes so you have to translate it from the bite codes to what we call the machine code which your computer understands and U in traditional evm execution models um there are two I mean Major Performance sufferings in this translation first is that evm um the VM architecture is a much much simpler architecture than your your modern Intel arm AMD CPUs so um basically if you run if you kind of emulate um an evm on your Modern Hardware you are kind of not using much of the hardware ACC acceleration Hardware capabilities of your CPU hardware and this is lot in the translation and second this translation itself takes a lot of time uh in the CR path because literally you are when you execute a smart contract when you execute a transaction you are literally grabbing the contract from the database do the translation live before you can even round the contract on your Hardware so what we're doing is basically first we're doing this translation ahead of time we're moving it out of the critical path so that it does not really cut into the time of your like of your block building and second because we do the translation ahead of time we can afford to do much more sophisticated stuff to maximally preserve the hardware capabilities of your mod CPU so that the performance loss of emulating a very simplified evm BM is minimized fantastic I um I want to ask a question about inmemory computation and then I think we should move on to um application layer but in terms of inmemory computation so you said that if a computer turns off and the ram is lost what happens if let's say the sequencer turns off um the nodes surrounding the sequencer have when is the last like good State saved is it per block or is it a longer do you get what I'm trying say yeah I I see your point yeah it is per block and I think it's a very interesting question because if the data is in the memory and uh if it turns off then the I mean naturally one would think that the most reason data would be lost and uh we have to roll back to some like reason like snapshots so this is actually where this uh e- memory competition is non tribal to achieve because um when you produce a block it's kind of a contract to with with the other noes surrounding you right it's like I will never uh roll back the block so you have to make sure that the data once leave once it leaves the machine it's never lost even in the most bad disaster which is like a to Total power loss and uh yeah we can guarantee that we can guarantee that um the data is never lost once um aign block has has left uh the signature fantastic okay um let's actually do L2 competition because I want to hear you guys this thought do you think that the current state of l2s is good enough um and do you think that they can compete with monolithic chains which we've seen kind of dominate this cycle in terms of Mind share yeah I think there's a couple reasons why uh existing l2s have not been able to be competitive with monolithic trains like salana we can touch on those afterwards but I want to answer the first question which is do we think that the current layer twos are good enough and I mean obviously we don't think that's the case right that's why we're building Mega for us there are fundamentally different design choices one can make by being a layer two understanding the role of execution and hyperfocusing on execution we don't think that those have been adequately optimized SL maximized right I think there's a lot of great High perf players that are coming to Market and those will be good I'm sure I don't necessarily have any insight into their timelines and what they're doing but we do believe that we will see the next wave of truly High performant block space exist only as a heterogeneous architecture right no blockchain that has consensus will be able to be as performant as a blockchain that has no consensus right I I may have fumbled my words there but tldr consensus slower no consens is faster Mega E no consensus and we just think that's like a basic law of physics fantastic um I guess we've seen other l2s try and scale horizontally um I think arbitrum and optimism they've both gone with l3s and other l2s um yeah I I would say base is scaling vertically and there's clearly demand to scale vertically and you guys are clearly scaling vertically um is there any chance that you're going to do also some form of L freeze or do you just not care I assume you just don't care but just want to ask it so I think here we can actually answer the the question about like why these monol monolithic trains have been so much more successful than um let's say like l2s as a you know basic blanket statement and I think it's it's exactly because we have been a bit intellectually lazy when it comes to Vertical scaling and we've said let's just have a kajillion l2s right and let's create un believable levels of fragmentation and uh breaking the composability of crypto right like why are people in crypto there's generally two uh sets of individuals one it will be someone from an emerging market that understands the power of not being effectively locked into a social system social economic system right so myself I'm aeran Cy Le is Chinese right like we come from like the global South right but there's a very very large portion of the population that sees the immense value and atomic composability right it's an environment everyone can come and play in and that is for many people the true pmf of crypto and that is something that existing L2 architectures completely break right because when you have a stack where you have some horizontal product what you end up doing is you end up have saying hey you know what to move liquidity between these different chains in the most trustless manner has crazy uh withdrawal periods right and then you have like a literal domino effect risk so I think that's one of the main reasons why we haven't seen success of let's say layer twos compared to layer ones though I think one exception could be something like a hyper liquid which is an app chain and that is because they have a very particular use case right like per Dees and that can be doesn't need to have uh insane composability of the rest of the ecosystem so yeah I think like for us Stacks are cool horizontal scaling is like interesting and all as well but like we are vertical scaling first right like Mega E with our design choices will be able to handle more computation than any other L1 and L2 combined it would make absolutely zero sense for us to focus on building a stack as opposed to creating a really very very rich ecosystem of applications that makes sense I have um one more question the evm why did you guys choose to I mean obviously you want to build an L2 um but why the evm this is like something that people have started asking over the past four months and I get you guys on it I'll give like the left curve take and then L can give the right curve take uh we're quite complimentary in that regard uh I mean I think a lot of this alt VM stuff is very overrated right uh the evm has the richest uh public good public goods that have been contributed and poured into it and the evm has not been optimized into its final state right so why would we kill the network effects why would we kill the mo for anything other than just like a nice narrative right like the reason to my understanding that people love slana is not necessarily because of the SPM it's because of all this other properties the spbm is actually has has a lot of constraints so the whole feces here is like let's focus on uh effectively working what we have and bringing it to it ultimate conclusion and just continually optimizing but they will give a better answer yeah I think it's along the same line of thoughts um so evm has been there for I mean the longest amount of time in I mean in gring complete smart contract programs uh platforms and uh the the amount of tools and expertise accumulated in the developer Community is too big to to ignore really um like like the static analysis to the fs um all the security tools all the libraries uh so that you don't have to really risk writing uh uh I mean incorrect smart contracts right these are all there and uh it would be too destructive if we even dare to to kind of abandon this the reach asset and also I I just took my lesson from from browser Wars right um I I personally I hate JavaScript but somehow JavaScript lived um until today and it's striving and uh I mean all those big companies they are what they do is not really invent a new like browser in browser programming language every five years but instead they accumulate 20 plus years of I mean of work into like optimizing the engine behind JavaScript which is uh the only uh VB programming uh platform uh nowadays so yeah I just took my lesson here uh even if you like you probably you can uh make different trade-offs make design decisions if you are given the flexibility of spawning an entirely new execution environment usually it's better to just go with the mainstream and just like pull the work from all the minds here to just kind of co-optimize the same execution environment what they said which is really really important is like the tradeoff between um the new vm's supposed guarantees right be that like security guarantees and the lack of third- party tooling and libraries to also solve that same problem right I think security is a great example how do you build the most secure application well you know I think a really big selling point for like move is that it's like very secure right but it won't have that same uh Rich third party contributions to be able to build a really brilliant application day one that the evm would have but that's it what's up guys um welcome back to ZX research today I'm joined by Antonio from from dydx thanks for coming on Antonio hey thanks so much for having me um I guess it's been kind of a big um past few months for you since you rejoined dydx as CEO um how has that experience been it's been great yeah I mean I feel like I and the company are more revitalized now we went through some pretty big structural changes for the company we're operating much more as a startup um shipping pretty fast we released dydx Unlimited couple months ago and development continues Full Steam after that so yeah it's been really good fantastic and um with you joining have you shifted the vision of dydx a little bit I'd say some but the vision of dydx has always been pretty longterm and pretty Broad and even when I was away from the CEO role I was still obviously really involved in the company overall and still executing towards that vision and yeah it hasn't changed too too much overall we really just want to build powerful products that give everyone the opportunity um for financial upside and have has the um priorities for the team shifted a little bit as defi has evolved it has some so we've been full steam ahead on dydx unlimited and then that shipped about a month or two ago um now the biggest things that we're working on are really just structal improvements to the product overall making it a lot more performant a lot more reliable and making sure that that dydx is the best decentralized exchange to trade derivatives on perfect um could you run over dydx unlimited for a little bit Yeah so dydx unlimited was one of the biggest product updates that we've ever made to dydx and the biggest headline features of that are instant Market listings and then the mega Volt and these two are really synergistic the mega Volt is a protocol wide Vault that allows automatic liquidity provision and it makes being a market maker really simple so you just go one click deposit into the megga Vol and then those funds are used to start providing liquidity automatically on basically all markets on dydx fast forward to today there's already $70 million locked up in The megga Volt last I checked um and it's just a really great simple easy to usee product where users can get yield it's also great for the protocol because it provides a lot more liquidity and it especially provides liquidity in longtail markets that's where we've seen automated market makers be really successful and it pairs very well with the second feature I mentioned of instant Market listings this is really cool because with instant Market listings anyone can come and list basically any Market that they want to trade on dydx so listing is not up to me not up to governance it's just really simple again you can go to dydx just click once and the market is live immediately these two things work together because whenever you list a market instantly on dydx it requires a deposit into the megga volt for that market so there's immediate liquidity on that market and you can start trading right away this really is important towards our vision of allowing users to trade basically anything on dydx that's really what we're building towards all right let's talk a bit about Mega Mafia um so there's a lot of performance chains out there and I feel like the big thing now is getting as many apps on your chain as possible and making people want to actually use your chain um do you guys want to run over what Mega Mafia is and then maybe we can dive a bit deeper into how it works out sure I'll talk about the inspiration for the Mega Mafia um every us everyone who's listening has come to the same conclusion we've made some Extreme Design choices right we've looked at these trade-offs and we said let's take them to a logical conclusion and the the promise Behind these decisions is like crazy performance well if we didn't have any applications which were leveraging this crazy performance well what on Earth are we doing here right so a year ago we kind of came to this conclusion we came to this another conclusion which is like okay you know the Venture Market is a bit weird right I come from Venture background as well where people aren't willing to take a risk on individuals right unless they have some sort of pedigree and already established and that's where we saw our Edge come in we have this new blockchain it's contrarian we have a new design and this design could conceptually bear new applications let's do our best to find the smartest people we know make bets right asymmetric bets on people who Market does not price well right and you'll see that of a lot of the mega mafia they aren't your pedigree you know 10 years at Google or like have been the top crypto companies they're young Scrappy hungry people that have great ideas and are willing to basically give it their all to build applications which didn't exist before so we found them we put them in a room together and we just basically cooked so the first situation of that was in Berlin we basically flew 14 teams to Berlin we all c-li together for a month work hard play a lot less hard and effectively like what came out of that was 10 great applications right uh top tier teams have been able to raise a lot of venture financing from Top funds and building applications which are only possible on Mega E right and that could be defi applications which leverage uh 10 millisecond block times uh unbelievably high fruit put uh coo meaning real-time price oracles and price feeds right but it can also mean non defi applications right like things that bring amazing emotional value by having such abundant amount of space that you can now put things on chain that you couldn't have put on before because data is useless right examples of that could be games a fully onchain Minecraft it can be a dating application which leverages your knowledge graph to give you recommendations on who you should go meet it can be uh game shows right like trivia games we've been able to incubate SL accelerate now north of like 17 18 teams which are all building really unique applications and they're all young hungry Founders which are like the Next Generation we think of etherium fantastic um when you say incubate and accelerate how much support are you guys offering these teams um sure so it's really interesting because I think that the mega Mafia was more so a function of a pre-main net Mega Eve which will not be the future forever it's not for long honestly and it was done with the idea being like okay I'm actually putting my entire weight behind you right A lot of these ideas for context Mega takes no equity in any of these teams right for us to our win condition is if this project becomes a billion dollar business on Mega because of our design choices Mega if is validated so first we take nothing how how Hands-On are we unbelievably right Le is a really busy guy he has weekly of all of the engineering teams I'm not nearly as busy as lay I also have weeklys of all of the teams right we ideate from product to uh you know economics to the uh go to market strategy to the user behaviors to the tokenomics to the fundraising all of it we do hand in hand fantastic um last question is what are well you mentioned a few of these n but what are some apps that are uniquely enabled by Mega's performance and architecture uh one example can be so let's start with defi right I think that the The Grail of the Holy Grail of defi has always been like the central liit order book it's a bit boring in some ways because everyone talks about it all the time we have multiple teams working on Club architectures both on um both lending as well as like traditional like spot and Cur architectures right so that's pretty interesting The Lending side we haven't seen a lot of people explore lending for clubs uh something that's being done uh on we have some really interesting uh trading architectures right so another one of the teams which is being built uh you know part of the mega Mafia is effectively saying hey there are all kinds of really interesting trading strategies which are now possible with want to 10 m second block times and proportionately there's really cool aror opportunities between that blockchain between C exchanges and between other blockchains what if we were able to take all of these trades all of this yield and give it back to users so there's some really interesting things going on in the form of stable coins there um on the non-directly defi design space uh I think games are really cool right everyone loves the idea of games but the issue is there are none in crypto none of they're successful and I think it's a function of like usability right if I move my character on my laptop right and it takes 12 seconds for that to be represented like that's an horrible ux right yeah on Mega that's no longer a problem and we think that's going to be an unbelievable um unlock I I think like you'll you saw a note announcement of a mega Mafia just a week ago that is building effectively autonomous world engines on Mega E right and it's the whole idea there will be like you can do all this crazy stuff with pure crypto composability and have seamless iux we have some other really cool stuff coming up as well around live streaming uh really fun games uh couple interesting ponzi's which are intellectually stimulating we have a wide range and to anyone who's listening right like the best way to stay in touch with the mega Mafia is really just zerox Mega Mafia we will more or less retire to program after mainnet because you know we don't want to be working so closely some particular teams um but we're really really excited of the caliber of uh Founders who've been able to inspire to join us fantastic um yeah guys make sure to check out um mega Mafia somehow like on zerox Mega Mafia and on the I guess it it used to be on your website I it's still on your website we have a new website coming very soon by the time this pod is live you should check out our website mega.com or mega. systems both rout to the same domain it looks pretty sick very good um one big thing that you guys did over the past few months is I guess over the past month uh is the Echo race um what was the process like are you happy you guys did it and I guess why did you guys decide to do it sure uh you know I think we are I wouldn't I don't know we want to say old school but like definitely quite sentimental for the days where like crypto walk the talk right and like what do I kind of mean there when I go on crypto and I had like you know a little a little bit of money and I had equal opportunity and equal access to projects that I had belief in and I had conviction in and I was able to like do okay for myself right and kind of have a step in crypto and start growing and like meeting people and like I was able to pay for my first ever for like real IRL event right because I had made a little bit of money in crypto and I was able to go there I mean now if you aren't like an angel investor in this previous bare Market of like the Primo like really good deal flow you you didn't make money right because what ends up happening is a lot of these guys end up looking at um users as exra liquidity right that's not really how we see things right I think on our end um we didn't need to raise more money right we were able to raise a decent amount amount of money to build our Ambitions what we really needed to do was make sure that we can get uh everyone to have equal terms right so we're very excited to have been able to use Echo to effectively bring in 3,200 investors to participate in mega at the exact same terms as vitalic and Joe and dragonfly and Kobe and all of these other guys and for us it wasn't really a question of like oh well we're diluting our company right we there is Lally no point of doing this if it is not to enable like an entire new generation of Builders and Founders and users to kind of accelerate and come on to crypto very good I think it's a very vant Valiant um effort and goal and I I don't know I thought it was very cool when I saw it um I guess to wrap it up a bit what are some mistake that you guys have made uh with Mega E since the launch and what is something that you definitely would have done differently well I I I don't think we have made too many mistakes on the technical side um yeah well all all the I mean all the all the initial optimizations that we envisioned um in our very first right paper um in memory computation um paralyzation with uh provable that is probably free of cascading boards um compilation uh a new peer-to-peer Network design yeah they they all work well actually so turned out that every single one of the uh optimization that we conceived worked well I think we're a really Scrappy team right on the non-technical side at least and we sometimes were just too quick right like I think we really took the idea of like you know move fast break things and it would could be a bit like a bit confusing right at some points you were saying millisecond block times other places we say one millisecond block times uh I mean in actuality we can go to submillisecond block times that's the actual goal but not having consistency around language I think we also shipped our website a bit too fast I think a lot of people were like yo you raised all this money why do you have an AI mascot which is a totally valid point I think that's a very valid criticism uh I will say it wasn't fully an AI mascot we had a little bit of design as well but I think we were we were just really really excited to hit the ground not only running but basically sprinting and that kind of not backfired but kind of made things a bit more um chaotic I think also sometimes we can be a bit overly opinionated on Twitter right so we can get into unnecessary fights or just like we can be a bit bantery I we think it's fun but understandably it can end a bit agitated so I would say those are the two too I think we've gotten a lot better about our mistakes I think we're really excited about uh effectively building this ecosystem out we I think we've been able to do that so far so well I think the tech is coming quite soon so that's going to be really exciting for Mega to kind of face its next Evolution all right fantastic um last question who is your biggest competitor in your mind and how do you see the L2 landscape shape up over the next year sure I can go first um I I I only see salana really um for a couple reasons right I think salana represents a like I think we have a similar goal so one of the reasons why I think they're our largest competitors is because we have similar goals to enable Like This Global State machine right we have very different approaches towards it right salana is monolithic and its Most B simplest core while we are a heterogeneous Network by by Nature right and obviously we think that our architecture makes the limits much much higher and is more much more scalable but I think that when I see the our competition for talent for Builders for eyeballs I think that's all salana I think salana has the same value propositions as us and it has the same uh North Stars as us in terms of like what's the kind of experience they want for their users um in terms of how you see the layer 2 landscape emerge I think there was a a pretty good argument SL conversation around this I think between Jesse and anatol on Twitter right do we see a million l2s or do we see a few I I personally lean more towards a few at least in the short term right in the next few years I don't really see more than a couple l2s existing uh as a function of like you know these are countries these are civil like civilizations these are users these are like ecosystems and if you can build vertically right you can your population can can get so much larger and then you have massive Network effects of that um and yeah I mean I think that's my main my main opinion let's see a world where all of these things get like sent to their absolute limits then we'll see more l2s emerge uh and I think we also need to see a lot more success of the you know Atomic interoperability uh for these kinds of other architectures to really be valid they what do you think yeah I think yeah in my mind our our big enemy is actually a kind of an aify view of what a blockchain is and what a layer to how a layer to should be built right um say embedding because a trend that I see among among many layer TOS is that they are kind of becoming more and more similar actually like I think you mentioned that many layer TOS are trying to decentralize by reintroducing consensus and I think that's kind of a walk back of um of I mean the the their two idea which is to to kind of be a architecture that's starking different from a from a layer one architecture so I think a kind of an aify view of how Layer Two should be like is actually a major is actually a major enemy to us because um yeah and but also I think an opportunity for us because basically the goal for us is to show that hey there is a different way to build a blockchain and it will be equally secure equally um useful but much more performant um yeah so I think that's probably one of the enemies and yeah I I would agree with namik that um yeah our yeah I would view Solana as a team that has a very similar mindset in terms of the trade-off between performance and the and the other aspects of blockchain right and uh well I I would say that we go slightly more extreme than them uh still um but yeah yeah we I really appreciate how product focused salana is and it's like it's like a corporate principle in absolutely everything they do still a breakpoint compared to um like I don't an e conference they're fundamentally very different right and you see that in the way they look at uh productizing the road map perfect um is there anything that my fellow listeners should look forward to um that you guys want to bring up I guess like maybe over the next few months when is main net when is test net when are we launching the product is my question um so I guess like what you can what we can say is this right uh we are really really really happy with the private test right uh we're talking about multiple gas in terms of performance of single single credit performance we are moving very very rapidly towards making that into a public test from a public test to a main net let's hope this public test n works right knock on wood Mas um out side of you know the technical road map I think we are really really just excited about getting as many people that are value ad into Mega Community as possible right we are really excited to kind of bring more people into the fold and we're really forward we look forward to having hopefully some of the listeners here join the mega Community as well all right fantastic um guys thanks for coming on this was a lot of fun likewise thanks for having us m [Music]

========================================

--- Video 54 ---
Video ID: I1kyVPzfoEs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I1kyVPzfoEs
Title: The State of Ethereum Today | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-01-16 09:00:15 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss the current state of Ethereum! They cover Ethereum’s REV, the OP Collective’s business model, and the L1 to L2 relationship going forward. Additionally, they dive into Ethereum DA, and the splintering of the Ethereum community. Finally, they discuss the impact ETF flows might have on ETH in 2025.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps.

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Follow 0xMims: https://x.com/0xMims
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:29 What is the Bull Case for ETH?
10:21 Ethereum REV
21:05 The OP Collective's Model vs Ethereum
24:24 The L1 to L2 Relationship Going Forward
33:21 SKALE Ad
34:04 Ethereum DA
44:11 Ethereum Community and ETF Flows
55:31 Closing Comments 
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 55 ---
Video ID: NQp5wasdolU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NQp5wasdolU
Title: Is Hyperliquid an L3? | Tolks, Max Fiege, and 0xOmnia
Published: 2025-01-13 09:00:31 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Max from HyperActive, Omnia from Kinetiq, and Tolks to discuss all things Hyperliquid! We covered the early days of Hyperliquid, competition with Solana, and Hyperliquid’s growth thus far. Finally, we dove into whether or not Hyperliquid is an L3, and the bear cases for Hyperliquid going forward.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Follow Max: https://x.com/fiege_max
Follow Omnia: https://x.com/0xOmnia
Follow Tolks: https://x.com/_tolks
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:49 The Early Days of Hyperliquid
12:18 Solana's Competition & Hyperliquid's Growth
25:26 Is Hyperliquid an L3?
33:18 Hyperliquid's Bear Case
43:44 Building in the Hyperliquid Ecosystem
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 56 ---
Video ID: v92VtGK0TUA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v92VtGK0TUA
Title: Bitcoin and Ethereum’s Market Dominance | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-01-09 09:01:04 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we discuss recent market activity, Virtuals revenue, and the stickiness of PumpFun. Finally, we reset, and looked into activity on Bitcoin and Ethereum, and gave our outlooks for each asset in 2025. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Bitcoin December 2024 Update: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/flashnotes/bitcoin-december-2024-update

Ethereum December 2024 Update: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/flashnotes/ethereum-december-2024-update
--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps.

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Ledger, the global leader in digital asset security, proudly sponsors 0xResearch! As Ledger celebrates 10 years of securing 20% of global crypto, it remains the top choice for securing your assets. Buy a LEDGER™ device now and build confidently, knowing your precious tokens are safe.

Buy now on https://shop.ledger.com/?r=1da180a5de00.
--
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:37 Market Outlook
8:16 Virtuals Revenue Numbers
13:54 The Stickiness of PumpFun
22:41 SKALE Ad
23:23 Ledger Ad
23:57 Bitcoin's Outlook in 2025
37:26 Ethereum's Market Dominance
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 57 ---
Video ID: 7_MmtGpkgGE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7_MmtGpkgGE
Title: Looking Back on 2024
Published: 2025-01-06 09:00:08 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re looking back on 2024! We cover our biggest mistakes, what we would have done differently, airdrop feedback loops, chasing beta, and more!

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps.

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Follow EffortCapital: https://x.com/EffortCapital
Follow 0xMims: https://x.com/0xMims
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:51 Not Farming Hyperliquid
10:53 Not Having Fun Onchain
17:12 Not Coping Enough
20:25 The Next Big Thing Will Start Off as a Toy
27:02 SKALE Ad
27:44 Underestimating Degen Capital
34:21 How Should Airdrops Work?
47:49 Whole Space?
52:34 Don't Chase Betas
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 58 ---
Video ID: hfhgug_MSWY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hfhgug_MSWY
Title: Network REV, the Sui MEV Scene, and AIs Evolution | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2025-01-02 09:00:42 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss current market sentiment, network REV, and the Sui MEV scene. Finally, they close out the episode with their thoughts on how the AI sector has evolved, and where it might be headed next.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps.

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Follow Dan Smith: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:41 Current Market Sentiment & Takeaways
12:10 Checking Network REV by Chain
29:26 SKALE Ad
30:08 The Sui MEV Scene
39:25 The AI Meta's Evolution
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
when I look at who's leading that I see a couple things right first and foremost look at Bitcoin we're in a block space bare market for Bitcoin I think like the runes and ordinals thing never really took off this episode is sponsored by scale scale has differentiated itself from other layer ones by offering users a network of gas-free interoperable evml ones where the user experience comes first explore the gas-free ecosystem at scale. space ecosystem and follow their Journey on X at scale Network to learn more about the gas free architecture and growth of scale ecosystem visit the scale research Hub at scale. space research nothing set on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice bacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds four projects discussed he's always gone for the intro hey guys welcome back to another episode of ox research today I am joined by Ryan and Dan Smith uh from the data team at blockworks how's it going guys glad to have you on pleasure to be back zerox or Ox the the question that will live into Affinity I've always said zerox never said o it gets it it it a minimizes the uncertainty zero straight into the point I think I probably adapt based on the person who said it before me so I'm gonna say zerox We'll blame picachio there we go I'll respect Ryan on this we'll blame Picacho and we and we'll move on um I guess speaking of uncertainty the markets are certainly uncertain at the moment certainly uncertain um Bitcoin and other charts are looking a little red at the moment I think people you know past month or two were very excited and I'm seeing that some folks are maybe not so excited today or concerned uncertain heading into the new year um we'll see how that shapes out I don't know if you guys have any any deep or specific thoughts there but certainly there's been a shift in in the mood and the attitude going um into the you know into the new year yeah I I got a thought um kind of two observations from the re recent draw down one is that um it seemed to be pretty in line with trafi markets there's like a little shift in uncertainty and trafy markets with with respect to rates and kind of growth trajectory you know that's fine there's also some like year-end price action that just like always happens as people move the book around so I kind of I pretty personally heavily discount December volume August volume July volume so like I wouldn't take it too seriously but like the the takeaway with the the trafi stuff is that you know Bitcoin is traded in trafi markets now it's part of it's in going to be increasingly correlated or increasingly integrated to trafi portfolios and so which should look like what happens to risk assets when trafi markets move typically when you experience like this is the extreme scenario when you experience a VAR shock you're just told to sell the highest volatile things in your book so that you can get your value at risk in line you minimize your kind of tail risk and Bitcoin is that classic tail asset so if you need to trim risk you can sell a little bit of Bitcoin and trim a lot of risk so um just these like you know Trad fight Dynamics I think are going to increasingly influence um crypto Dynamics and obviously it's not going to all happen in one day but you should see that in the price action going forward and like you saw today like the market sold off at 9:30 when cryp when trii markets opened at 9:30 right so um kind of like no surprise there the other um takeaway is just um kind of an observation about the timeline I don't see people in crypto using draw down charts they're pretty common in like trafi like orienting around like what's happening in markets and you know when to deploy risk Capital long term um so what a draw down chart is is just you take the current price and you see the percentage change from the all-time high price on a look on a on a Looking Backward basis so what you'll see is just uh you know kind of like straight lines and then when you have a dip below all-time high as you go down and um it kind of puts in perspective like the current draw down in context of the historical draw downs and you know if you were trading NASDAQ uh in 2223 and you saw it was down 30% you saw that that was like a typical draw down for the NASDAQ you deployed Capital um the Bitcoin draw down right now is like very very shallow 10 perish when historical draw Downs are you know obviously um you know 70 80% but in like during bull markets they can get as high as like 40% or sorry as low as 40% so um I don't know a lot of consternation on the timeline in the in in the context of a historically shallow draw down um would be the takeaway um but like all in all I don't know they're bumps in the road it's crypto these things happen yeah I actually just pulled up the draw down chart when you said that I'm going to try to share screen here um but it's funny that's like the very right curve answer and I've been telling myself a very left curve story over the past week or so um which is I feel like general con census view was probably that the market is going to experience you know this like an uh inauguration Centric draw down because this recent runup has been so uh presidency and inauguration focused right like the the the narrative has been Trump won and he's bringing in like Ai and crypto heavy people and that is going to fix the regulation issue that is holding back crypto in the US and therefore um kind of push the entire entire industry forward and because of that I was like okay that's a hype and speculation piece of this inauguration Jan 20 we'll probably see that draw draw down in mid Jan and like we're just a couple weeks before that and and now this is basically the draw down we're seeing that we thought we would see then and so that's the story I've been telling me telling myself at least um but if we can add in this uh the chart I got pulled up I think it's actually pretty cool for the context of this so I know go back to like 2016 but this red draw is the the red area chart here is the draw down the black line is is bitcoin price and to Ryan's point you know we've seen draw Downs of 80% in January 19 uh even like in between those those two peaks of the July all-time highs draw down of 51% and then in 23 70ish 75% and you know right now we're I guess I need to zoom in a little bit more here to get an accurate version on the the now you know we're looking at 7% down from alltime High um so yeah to your point Ryan uh we're really haven't experienced much pain yet but it does feel like sentiment on the timeline is you wouldn't think it was only 7% which probably shows uh that General portfolio balancing is like very skewed to tail tail assets and AI agent coins that you know fluctuate 30% on a on a slow day yeah it's not surprising to see I think it's you know expected that uh the niche kind of participants in the niche Community um investing in the in the super super risky assets you know they're they're probably further down than 7% on um some of their tokens um that are not BTC um maybe for a spot of good news though or just interesting you know we're seeing a a comeback of meme coins in a lot of different ways um this cycle one is using memes as like a Launchpad for you know building out a product um using that as kind of like the initial funding mechanism rather than an Ico um another that had been attempted or used as a gimmick in the past was um using meme coins as a way to raise money for Charities um I think a lot of those you know maybe in 2021 were not with the best intentions um or did not at least get carried out in that way but um we did recently have this past week over the kind of the holidays um a the Mira coin was 50% of the supply was donated to um a man with a daughter with brain cancer and he has Comm committed to I guess eventually I think you know it's quite a bit of the supply of this token so has to sell it off bit by bit but selling it and donating that to a Hinson lab um that is specially researches researches this type of brain cancer potentially others um so you know a spot of good news some Joy um going into the New Year's I don't know if you guys I mean anything deeper on this point the one thing that I do find interesting is this kind of comeback of like meme coins as like launch pads for Building Products as well as I mean we see this charity thing I think pop up it it happened quite a bit in 2021 maybe some dubious maybe some you know actually for the cause um we're we're seeing a lot of those those Dynamics play out again at least yeah this one was interesting um I don't know it feels really like gimmicky like if you want to donate to the guy donate to the guy U I feel like there's much better ways to do this both onchain and offchain uh but he did raise like a million bucks and that's incredible and um I you probably wouldn't have gotten that had it not been like this the question is like from a more moral or ethical standpoint like did everybody actually know that this was the game being played like I don't probably to be honest I think everybody buying a pump fund token at this point in the cycle is very aware of what they're doing um and this one was like this virality piece in nature to it so I I do think that from a moral and ethical point like I don't know I think there's Foul Play here any of that and I think you can just kind of zoom out a bit and see that this um obviously great thing which is a million dollar for rare disease research has been secured um that said it's still just like a what what are we doing here this is a very strange I don't know it's like it doesn't sit right with me for some reason but um I do think like all Market participants were well aware of what was going on and I do think it worked out great in the end result as well yeah um I like it I think I think it's pretty interesting right like imagine if you were scrolling through Twitter and you saw like just a link to donate to a GoFundMe I don't know there's a sea of GoFundMe like it's not that interesting but like to inject that onto the coin gecko feed or the Dex or the Dex screener feed I think is a pretty interesting way of getting attention uh I'm not saying that like I think that it should be this new form of charitable donations but like to gamify a thing is often like very successful and getting people to participate more so perhaps like I don't know like uh meme impact investing or some forms of it is pretty interesting where you can inject the speculative game to drive like goodness in the world because like everyone who lost money on that thing um was very happy too and it probably I I mean this is just like silly calar fractual right but like it probably got more attention than it otherwise would have um so so you know that's good yeah I I think Fair points both sides it's hard to say you know on an ongoing basis how repeatable like to this extent and to this positive extent this could be done you know obviously if you had 50,000 you know charity meme coin launches a day it would not instill quite the same effect but at least you know in this one case that catches you know the attention um in the bid it's you know can be put to good use um I think maybe hinging off of this topic um you know everyone knows at this point mem coins are a very significant driver of onchain activity fee revenues um and rev has become a very meaningful metric to us at blockworks and I think is starting to become um more widely interesting to the the industry broadly but I love this chart um that we have showcasing the kind of historical Network RV by Chain um and you can really see like in 2021 the significant dominance of ethereum um as a chain at that point in time um and then now looking ahead to this cycle you can really see the dent that salana has made in sort of this market share of rev um and I think this kind of the Mania over tokens and pump fun and related um has certainly contributed but um this the kind of Shifting of the Seas um is is really apparent I think when you look at this chart and Broad Strokes um especially if we click over and look at it on a percentage basis as well um Dan I'm curious what your thoughts are just generally about kind of the the shifting of RV that we've seen over the past years yeah when I look at this chart I actually have a couple takeaways uh first I want to start with like a quick definition um and why rev matters so rev is real economic value or the amount that users are paying to transact on a chain it does not matter if it is a base fee it doesn't matter if it's priority fee it does not matter if it's an outof protocol tip paid to somebody to paid to a validator to land your transaction it is the amount that users are paying to transact on chain it is a measure of demand this metric also doubles as the like Topline number for a blockchain right people love to know like the the revenue and and like of a business and blockchains are not businesses they are networks So when you say Revenue to who right are you talking about Revenue to token holders Revenue to stakers revenue to um validators Revenue to thirdparty infrastructure providers it's very unclear uh so you need this more broader term and rev is that number so the idea is to you can then take rev subtract out any operator expenses and the rest is What flows to token holders uh and so you do get this like token holder aggregate position of stakers and non-sters um so people who stake their tokens ver just hold them plainly and you can get this like uh net income number as well so that's why R matters um I guess one core difference here is it does count out of protocol tips so that's like if you look at a Topline number on most other data providers you're only going to see base fees priority fees which is the the in protocol piece of this but again the reason why out of protocol is just as useful is because it goes to the Token holder and it was paid to transact um so again if you don't have that other piece you're not measuring the full picture the full spectrum of demand to transact on a chain when I look at this chart I noticed a couple things this is kind of uh what I'm using as my where are we in the cycle chart actually so it's when I look at this and I see you know I think it was like mid 2021 late 2021 where we had that $2 billion month of people transacting on chain um that was stemmed by ethereum and some like crazy high gas prices at the time like multiple hundred dollars to send a transaction so it is like a little bit of a misnomer to say oh wow there was that much demand then and there's this much now there's far more computation happening on chain now whether that's transaction count whether that's Dex volumes whether that's um more Assets in lending protocols and being borrowed from those protocols there's way more things happening on chain today the price to execute transactions on chain has just uh decreased um by you know multiple orders of magnitude and so that is like one important piece when I look at this chart but net net with cheaper transactions you need to be selling more units right when you decrease the price of something by 99% to have the same net value you need to increase the units sold by 100x um and we're starting to see the the very early Innings of that and so to me when I look at this chart and I say yeah there was $2 billion uh spent in a month to transact on chain back in 21 uh but today we see far less than that about you know two and a half times lower um yes there's more transaction activity on chain but the that user monetary demand has not eclipsed that previous high and so I do think this cycle we're going to hit a new High um likely in 2025 um and probably the early half of that and when I look at who's leading that I see a couple things right first and foremost look at Bitcoin we're in a block space bare market for Bitcoin I think like the runes and orinal thing never really took off uh there was that uh Twitter recap like your your Twitter wrapped and I think it was by EXA EXA and one of the quotes it had for me was uh you mentioned runes were stupid like really really stupid and I was that was true I was kind of loud about that because it made literally no sense um and we looked at the demand for Bitcoin block space it is very much in a bare market today uh so that just like failed to take off I think the upside of things is probably what's going to be needed to make that more interesting again when I look at ethereum uh I see a successful transition to execution happening on l2s um base I think has flipped ethereum and Dex volumes on multiple days now and is doing incredibly well uh I have another chart I tweeted out earlier this week that was uh ethusd so only looking at the usdc and usdt pairs uh on all ethereum l2s and ethereum main net and E the the eth usdc volume on ethereum Main net is still about 40 to 50% off its highs from 2021 where that same amount of volume on l2s specifically arbitrum and base who go head-to-head for this volume uh is like blown past all-time highs so to me I see a lot of this sex Dex Arbitrage has actually moved from mainnet to the liquidity pools on arbitrum and base specifically and very interestingly it's mostly being driven by a single address um it's like a 0 1xf uh address you'll probably see on every single block on either of those chains um not sure exactly who it is but uh they are clearly running sexx ARB on both base and arbitrum and so to me that's that was kind of the goal was to push execution of the l2s and that's where we've seen and from an RV standpoint that has been costly uh market share has decreased total value uh has decreased as well and the clear you know bright spot on this chart if you will of a a current market participant that has massively grown their market share at salana um you know rev is at blown past all-time highs by many multiples it is now the most rev generating chain in the industry um mostly driven by ordering fees or those Priority Access to State fees which would be jeto tips and uh priority fees and uh they're kind of battling some of those east2 22 problems now with uh sandwiching and and harmful me uh but most of that isn't actually reflected in RV as there's a single actor who has a monopoly over that space and keeps very very large profit margins uh but net net you know salana has absolutely crush it they proved the thesis is true that you can do exactly what I mentioned earlier decrease cost by 99% and increase units sold by 100x and if you increase Beyond 100x you actually generate more uh so the the idea is you significantly reduce the cost and you'll have a that induced demand narrative so very interesting to see that play out as well so it's kind of like my three high level Thoughts with Bitcoin ethereum and salana and just to put a bow on that I think the one thing that's really interesting is there's been a huge discussion around comparing base Dex volumes to salonex volumes as those are really the two heavy weights today in the industry of also when you're factoring growth from here um ethereum is very much in the conversation of the the Dex volume heavy weights but a little harder to create that growth narrative uh when you look more forward looking again because that intention of pushing execution onto the l2s um and so when comparing these volumes Salon still has a very material lead over base uh but I think like you can create a very concrete and sound argument for why that might flip uh however when you look at rev it is not even in the spectrum of flippable right now which is very very interesting so it's kind of like the one metric I like to use as if you know gun to your head you got to pick one metric to analyze a chain like to me it's R because that is what is being paid to transact on chain that is like the monetary demand to interact with your economy and two that is the ultimately the top line that will flow back to the Token holder so there is some valuation side to this as well I I've got one more chart for you Dan that I I think um is meaningfully interesting as part of this discussion okay this is Spence incredible that we just did that there we go um and if we look at um newly created tokens by blockchain I think this this highlights a lot of the points that you were making um you can actually see what I find interesting is that in 2021 um the BC chain um like quickly and significantly you know usurped ethereum as far as like you know new tokens being created and traded but ethereum gas fees were you know 100x if not more higher than that of BSC and so they contined to dominate from an RV standpoint um by a significant margin and if we look today like those those two massive kind of contributors um this isn't go all the way to present but if you updated it I mean the so the so numbers would continue um to grow there but you know salana and Bas um the two chains you just mentioned kind of like the top contenders for activity and volume today um have have taken up the helm um and this doesn't like you said it doesn't fully illustrate the picture that you know we're since this is percent of newly you know traded tokens um we're talking about in order of magnitude of more you know tokens and trading activity occurring um to fuel you know cheaper transactions leading to an aggregate you know significant amount of RV for the for the chain um which I think is interesting I think this chart is just it's an interesting sort of like you can see the compounding factors in terms of like cost to transact um and you know like relative throughput I guess if you want to consider it that way um that that sort of interplay into the the r metric yeah I think um I think the I think an interesting overarching observation for everything that you guys just pointed out was um that trading is what matters to the profitability of these things and like so what are the implications people got really excited about um poly market right but it didn't drive a lot of trading volume so the value didn't necessarily flow to polyon or wasn't noticeable on the Rev charts right um so yeah just something to think about as you know you get bullish on the chain or you get bullish on the app where the value flows and and what matters what really matters to to the chains valuation yeah that's a good flag that's that's definitely the game that is being played today so that is very much so what matters um the question is like how will that evolve going forward um I think Dex activity will probably always be in the discussion uh no matter how it it it shakes out however I think there's like a decent opportunity or decent likelihood that it's you know you know today it's meme coins but I think we'll get more interesting Assets in the future so the other thing to look at is you know where are not necessarily just like uh you know pump fund style churning them out meme coins being uh launched but also like the interesting assets um so whether that's like the top AI agents today whether that's rwas whether that's you know anything that's just like T tied to a project more broadly yeah there's um there's good research from [Music] um how Arbitrage opportunity scales with market cap so like the higher market cap um things on exchanges the more Arbitrage activity there ends up being because basically you can do two things you AR the fundamentals so like play a long-term game and then you can ARB the The Exchange to exchange activity uh I think the study was on the the London Stock Exchange so like you can see it's just like a super linear relationship Arbitrage opportunities with with with market cap so I guess another to frame it or like the yeah the interesting assets right it's like the the the assets that can cons that can maintain these multi-billion dollar valuations right they're going to drive a good amount of rep for these chains as well yeah I think that actually gives like a pretty good nod to the L2 ecosystem right because like the one asset that you get this trustless bridge with um if you build on an El you know traditional R up on top of ethereum is is eth right you're going to get your own native stable coin implementations if you're doing like anything semi-interesting right we've seen that already with like every major L2 uh but you can't just arbitrarily admit eth anywhere so eth is actually a very interesting asset for exactly that conversation um and again like I'm going to pull up that tweet that I was talking about because I think it does illustrate the point of like seeing the amount of success that arbitrum and uh base are both having because of that asset specifically being on chain there so like yeah here's here's the example so this is just the uh dollar value of e SDC across the ethereum ecosystem as we have like other chains grouped all into one because very interestingly that's just like a non-material portion of the volume um and then you have base arbitrum in ethereum and you can see ethereum again still about 40 50% off that uh previous all-time high in 2021 and Bas and arbitrum just absolutely crushing it right now um again largely driven by this this one single actor which is pretty interesting as well uh so yeah there's like this one entity that is doing 20% of fees paid on base and about 30% of eth usdc volumes on base and they're doing about 12 or excuse me 14% of ethusd volumes uh on arbitrum as well so it's pretty interesting to see that this this player is like absolutely eating um and here's a quick glance at some activity from this player across both of those two chains uh so basically this chart is a little bit confusing but on the top if anything is positive or above the line that is a purchase of eth on either chain and anything below the line is a sale of eth on either chain uh specifically looking at the eth USD pair and what you'll notice is all of these lines move together like they're either buying eth on both chains or they're selling eth on both chains and what that signals to me is this is not cross chain Arbitrage right you'd imagine these be going the opposite directions if that was the case if you buy on eth you'd immediately be selling on base but instead this is uh sex toex on both chains so basically the price will move on binance or whatever exchange and then this account will like basically buy take liquidity from both chains almost equally and then bring that back to binance again whatever centralized exchange and ARB the price that way so that was kind of an interesting observation I had going through this the other day did have you I guess I would assume the answer is yes but have you looked in and seen like the transfer volumes there as well like you know withdrawals and deposits to in from um centralized exchanges from this address uh no I I didn't dig through which exchange it is but that would be pretty interesting but I don't know if you're going to see it really because my understanding of how this works is you basically just have you know imagine you have a billion dollars you just park you wouldn't have that all in one exchange first of all and then you would park that you know you put $10 million on base $10 million on uh arbitrum and then you just like occasionally rebalance that $10 million uh so that could be you know your let's say you're arbing against binance because they've got the best uh prices and then you keep your liquidity on coinbase because that's who you trust the most I'm obviously just making up this example but it's not super easy to see exactly where they're arbing against but we're going to build out some more interesting data around just the m space more broadly um I don't know there's just like such an untapped potential there and uh there's a couple great teams that write good papers on this like flash Bots uh the Cella guys are great as well uh but I don't know there's just like a lot of this is again this is a majority of onchain activity and it's like just a bit of an underexplored area in my opinion yeah it's a it's definitely a big deal it's also interesting how it um you know I understand some things are different in crypto than trfi but one of the things that here that similar is that one big player will be a lot of the volume so I think citadel's like as of March of 24 they were someone estimated them as 26% of us Equity Market volume um I think for two in the past has been a Sim similar size so yeah the analoges hold hey everyone we'd like to give a special shout out to to the sponsors of today's episode scale scale is built different unlike other layer ones scale is offering users a network of gas-free interoperable evm l1s where user experience comes first scale operates like the AWS infrastructure model where developers pay for space in the network in skl tokens to validators essentially scale has chain fees and not gas fees this allows for free transactions on scale and has saved 46 million users over 9 billion in gas fees explore the gas free ecosystem at scale. space ecosystem and follow their Journey on X at scale Network visit the scale research Hub to learn more about the gas free architecture and growth of the ecosystem that's scale dospace SL research speaking of meev then Dan I know we have some maybe interesting things to discuss in terms ofu or you know theu MV scene I guess you know we just kind of discussed you know the the eth side the salana side um talked a little bit about Bas and arbitrum I guess what's interesting on the S side of things um obviously we're working with move in a in a different sort of architecture there um as far as M goes like what what what are the unique things or the interesting things that you're seeing there yeah I'm I'm definitely not an expert on I mean me broadly but specific specifically on S me I think it's interesting and emergent which is why it's fascinating and I would call this like a gen 3 chain right like you had ethereum and then you had you know solunac so salana got to learn off all of ethereum's learnings going you know being let's say a full cycle or two ahead of where it was and then you had these gen 3 chains like Aptos andu that have the same opportunity but now not only ethereum but also salana um and they're a little bit more relatable in different capacities to either chain uh so they kind of have this like broad spectrum of knowledge to build on top of and that I think is the really interesting aspect here is saying okay like what are they going to do differently to avoid some of those headaches that the other chains had that predated them um so specifically on S and I think on Aptos as well there's like The Ordering of of transactions is much different um andu specifically is uh a dag based chain so it's like a leaderless chain there's not like one person who has a monopoly Over The Ordering of the transactions in a block uh so that like already changes the meev landscape a bit um you've seen you know Max Resnick toly uh and even a lot of the ethereum folks saying like all right yeah multiple concurrent proposers is probably a good idea because you have a higher likelihood of someone that's going to do the right thing for you uh being the the block producer and so I think um the dag based piece is super underexplored by the industry broadly I think the sweet team is obviously very in the weeds of what that looks like I just honestly don't have a good view into that uh but there's a proposal right now I think it's sip 45 that basically wants to like introduce the notion of priority fees and priority ordering pretty standard stuff I think that you know you'd expect to see on most chains um versus like block STM used by I think it was originally created by the Sasha and the Aptos folks uh but it's also live on polygon today and with like block STM I don't think you have like super deterministic ordering so like if a priority fee is or if a gas fee is higher you have like an increased likelihood of being higher in the block but it's not like guaranteed um and so that's like this interesting element and I could be a little bit off there I'm not 100% POS positive again this is just like an undere exort area for me uh but it's just interesting to see that you know we're starting to see a shift in like okay once you have transaction activity you are going to have me and this is something you have to deal with or else you're going to have troubles um and the risk of not having priority ordering is you can just Spam the out of the chain and you know like we just saw this on salana earlier in the year if if you're not going to like put my transaction where I want it I'm going to send you so many transactions that the probability of it being where I want is going to be so high the rest will fail um and it's your problem not mine because transactions are so cheap I the one being executed was profitable to send you 10,000 of them um so that's kind of like the risk you're trying to avoid here there's also two really good me teams building oh I say really good I'm I'm not super familiar there's two me teams building on uh sweet today uh shio and aftermath the aftermath team I chat with a bit and I'm I'm pretty like bullish on them as a team I think they're very intelligent and like critically thinking about problems which is fascinating to see um but yeah if you wanted to like dive more that's probably where I would start is like sip 45 and then like what is aftermath building and what is shio building yeah I do think it's interesting to see a lot of the sort of cutting edge of of tech that's being you know sort of chased after in the industry has you know we're trending in a lot of the same directions right um the discussion of priority fees there um that you know trying to parallelize certain things um you know the research around meev like a lot of you see a lot of little bits and pieces get adapted and like you know utilized in different architectures in different ways um but ultimately it comes back to the same idea of kind of chasing after these same opportunities that kind of like represent themselves over and over again yeah there's also this super interesting um thing that I I just noticed happening um I think it was zerox Evan on Twitter who posted about this but basically so there's on like these high througha chains you need uh State access becomes like this bottleneck for execution so you basically need to make people pay for it uh salana s aptose they all have this where there's a fee to place a deposit yeah nice there's a fee to place a deposit on uh opening or creating a new piece of State uh and that fee is like a mostly a deposit that you'll receive back once you close that piece of State I um onu what's happening right now is they figured out a way to swap the owner of who paid that storage fee and why that's interesting is like an order book so you know let's say I'm a maker and I want to buy like one sui at four bucks or whatever and I place this order I create this piece of state that contains this order you know I paid some small amount to um execute the transaction and there's an additional fee that's this like storage deposit um on like salana and Aptos and evenu historic all I've ever seen was that uh storage rebate goes back or the rebate for the storage fee goes back to the original owner that opened and created the state initially however I think it's the aftermath team created a way for that deposit to swap hands and so what this means is like a maker can open an order and the taker could close that order by you executing their trade and actually get the rebate and the rebate is sometimes larger than the transaction fee the execution fee so you basically get the like negative transaction fee or you're paid to execute the transaction because you are taking somebody else's storage fee um which is really really interesting for market makers or just takers more generally um so I haven't like fully wrapped my head around this piece either but I have never seen that before and I'm always intrigued by like unique uses of blockchains and especially in this case the storage fee specifically and and in this case I'm not entirely certain but like could you liken it to something like like you know State rent on salana where you know you can burn an account and get back the soul for the state rent of that token or is this a different mechanism it's the same concept right you're making a deposit to create some new piece of state and then when you close that piece of State you get the deposit back in full um that exists on Salon it exists on abdos it exists on S I think the Innovation here is figuring out that you can actually change the owner of who put that deposit down um and therefore like if you you know let's say I'm making up numbers but let's say you paid a dollar to execute the transaction you got a $3 rebate you actually just because somebody else initially paid that rebate that uh storage deposit that you're now getting as a rebate you know you actually made $2 by executing this transaction regardless of like what activity you took is there a so so this kind of concept exists on other change but chains but it's only being like done in mass onui today any is there any reason why that is I don't know if you can change the owner on of this storage uh deposit on other chains I haven't seen it before so I don't know like I generally just don't know if it's possible or not um so yeah I don't have I don't have a good answer because I genuinely don't know yeah I guess that it would be an interesting question um the only like cases where I understand this on salana is if you know if you if you sell out of a token or you know get rid of an anft or what have you you know you could burn it and get back the state rent or um you know remove that the the token account associated with it for example yeah and Order books never really took off on salana uh Phoenix was the best implementation we've seen and you know they do about to 10% of of Dex volumes uh most of their activity comes from stable coin swaps which is interesting uh we break out that activity actually on the salana. blockworks research.com dasboard covering all of Sal's deck activity um but you know I think most of their issues were convincing this is my interpretation I don't know for sure but it seems like market makers were pretty hesitant to Market make on chain it was expensive and there was this latency component um you know they didn't always get their transactions to land in a timely manner and that would cause them to have a worse experience and they just weren't interested in doing it I think this is why the ellipses team who built Phoenix is also building Atlas using the svm but you know kind of building their own construction as an L2 where you can get better latency insurances um so point being that market uh order books never really took off on salana as they seemed like that was kind of like an initial idea of something that could take off so one thing I'm definitely paying attention to is does this happen on S and aptose great stuff um maybe one last topic for today then I think we've we've gone deep enough on me and uh getting back some State rent The Talk of the Town I guess more generally has been a lot of AI and AI agent related conversations um some people are absolutely crazy about them um we're seeing lots of people I think whether you're interested in just the developments of the llms um we had you know open AI their new model kind of make headlines with you know new sort of like math capabilities that were unexpected Maybe maybe this quickly um regardless I know the send AI team has just done a uh they're doing a salon AI hackathon um and there's been quite a few submissions um you know with the speed with which a lot of these have come out I think it's you know it's a lot of quick like barebones attempts to you know put together Integrations and different things so um but hopefully we will see some interesting products kind of come out of these I know Ryan you've been sort of digging in the the AI and agent trenches a little bit be curious to hear your takes um on sort of maybe where we're at where we're going what you think yeah so spent a um a good chunk of time lately kind of diving into this AI agent space um I am I was a little late just on the narrative I kind of like well actually like we started out early remember Danny like we actually had like an essay up saying like there's going to be a pump. fun of AI agents and then we just like didn't launch it was either in like late October early November something like that like this was all the team kind of first saw it unfortunately like we didn't publish it and we like weren't loud about it but then I think by the end of the month like AI 16z was ripping and like people were launching agents and a or axt I think is the name like that that was up in in making storm right so um A lot's happened uh we were early on it then we kind of forgot about it now we're back um after doing a deep dive um I gotta be honest like I'm bearish on what is um on the market today but I'm pretty like I guess bullish on what's possible or like can be going forward um like I think what's objectively going on today is basically an extension of either the meme coin game or um you know it's just another subset of like Crypt native trading games where you have crypto native Capital that's very D gen that is very short-term time Horizon that wants to make return and play funny games on chain uh it drives a lot of the Builder attention in the space and right now it's driving that attention to AI I think that's like objectively true um if you're looking at the the things that these AI Bots can do today it's basically just what they could always do they can talk to you they can you know print me media um they but they're talking to you from a Twitter account right and that's cool and it's exciting and sometimes they take on a life of their own but like from an investment perspective like you can't do much there other than trade other than play like the crypto native trading game with these coins right so if you think like that ai6 Z you know they have a team they have kind of a product Vision um you have to get in at like a $ 1.2 billion do valuation or something like that like um that's that's tough to justify I think for anyone so you have to play the trading game you can't play the investor game you know I think that what Canen be after like poking around and giving giving this a think is that like you know there there's kind of two ways that you can think about the space there are like action based agents and Creator based agents um and actions still seem far away right so like from a web 2 perspective like actions would would you know be a sales agent a marketing agent in crypto space like a trading agent or you know Financial decision-making agent um if you listen what SAA Nadella says about actions like he doesn't instill confidence that they're going to happen in 2025 if you listen to the bg2 podcast um they had a good interview with him Brad gersner is very excited about actions in 2025 saas doesn't seem to be he kind of tempered expectations so um I think actions are a little could be further away than people think um um then the other side of the spectrum you have like Creator agents which just like generate content and I think that that's like pretty interesting right so we're seeing what the zerro team is doing where they're generating content and they're like creating an AI native influencer and no it's not a perfect agent right there's some Flint stoning going on they're like you know making this puppet like work in the background but it's like pumping out real music it has like 100,000 monthly like listeners on Spotify it's selling nft like you can kind of see like the beginning of something potentially interesting there um so like what's more near term these things can already create content I think like Creator agents are much more likely I think in 2025 they can drive a lot of attention because like they have a token and tokens are like really good at driving attention so um yeah not much today I'm excited to see who the winners of this Sendai hackathon are because there's there were a lot of submission and you have to Wade through like a lot of really thin thin rappers and and I don't want to disparage thin rappers I think a lot of thin rappers are going to be really really valuable but these are extra thin a lot of them so right they're just people trying to get in quick quick submissions so I think the uh the judges will like do a good job of curating that for us and then when they announce that um in early gen we'll be able to get a good look at at what that hackathon was all about great points I think um maybe to your points about sort of the Creator creative versus um action-based agents um the thing that I would point out is like on this I do think that the you know a lot of the Creator based tokens have entered this like you know memec coin trading based uh kind of Paradigm where you know like you said at at a billion you know fdv today you know it's really hard to value that thing on like fundamentals or whatever you're you're looking at the momentum you're looking at can this you know continue to grow its attention um via you know Integrations with you know if it's the music if it's other social media platforms what have you and can then that you know via the sort of you know trading tokens as an attention economy um can that drive its value higher in like this you know kind of reflexive flywheel thing where price drives the narrative a little bit um and I agree with you there and I think on the on the product side as well like it's very early but I do think that this there's this is an area here where like the the action-based agents and like products built off of that um I would not mention any of them here they're just they're all very low market cap and it's very early like very simple like you said rappers on on models essentially to do things on chain but I do see that those eventually evolving into you know generalized products that one might use to interact on chain or with defi um kind of like how you might look at like a telegram trading bot today where you know users aren't in a lot of cases these people aren't going directly to like the deck's front end they just they open up program and they're like what are the trending tokens and they buy the token right there in the in the in the app um and I think that these rappers and these tools like the fact that so much of this is getting built open source like it's just it's really speeding up the development timelines and we can see a lot of this stuff get built out really quickly how you know good and successful it is might depend on like can they get hallucination rates down like can the more powerful models you know get released to the public at you know cheaper prices basically for compute um that's going to be where like the real gains are made but at least you know building out all the Integrations makes more of these applications possible yeah I mean one of the things you also just said there which is very true is a lot of it's being built open source and that's great for development but generally not great for Value acral um so like that's the other thing here is how much of this price appreciation is rotational crypto games that we you know that we very much have in this industry versus you know pricing in the actual likelihood of this thing a being useful B winning and C making money um it's probably way more of the former than the latter but like and that's that's also not to say like this is going to be the narrative probably for the rest of the cycle AI is very real and it's like Forefront of everybody's mind and the overlap with C crypto is certainly an obsession of the industry what do you guys think of um the the platform plays things like virtuals I think they probably have the best shot at that last piece there which is valoc Cru I think virtuals has done million in Revenue something around that um they take fees on the trading volume and and launching agents through their platform that kind of feels like something pretty interesting um versus an agent itself is which is sort of like a problem I think it's like all right well you we can make money from launching these things but we aren't really sure what these things are going to do how good they're going to be at that thing and how that thing is going to make money so I don't know I uh you really got to squint at it and use your imagination which feels a ton like defi in 2021 where 95% of the launched was totally useless and circular ponies uh but they were fun and they got a lot of attention and they traded at ridiculous valuations but if you bought any of that stuff at the Pico top you are tremendously down still today many years later um this probably like my best mental model is 95% of it's going to not end up working and that's AOK uh that 5% is going to be really really really really interesting 50 billion is a a lot um I'm actually pretty shocked by that number and the reason I'm shocked by it is I feel like like the AI agent tokens are like inherently like lower frequency from a launch perspective than meme coins where like you know a meme could be like a simple picture or a phrase and those are like you know you can spit those out infinitely whereas like AI agents are like a fine-tune thing that needs to you know act and can act kind of indefinitely to get attention and therefore you probably need fewer of them or you need to launch fewer of them because fine-tuning everyone is tough and finding the compute to sustain everyone is tough and launching if infinite Twitter account like there's there's more frictions in in launching uh playing the meme coin game with these agents so I would think that naturally you should see less token curation and therefore Revenue coming out of virtuals than a pump fund but 50 million already is a very big number uh I wonder if the is the the pricing model just very different than what pump is doing now you're making me really second guess this number um but let me I'm gonna try to pull it up I see I see it here on a dune uh sorry a dune picture or jpeg on Twitter but but I can't find the actual dashboard um yeah I mean okay you're right that is a big number and I cannot actually sit here and confirm it so because pump is only is 300 300 million right I think it's yeah just cross 300 and virtual has been around for like what six months and really seen traction the last two three um that does that does seem like a high number and it is lower frequency we have this on our uh public Dash for base which is optimism. blockworks research. uh.com base and if I scroll to the Dex activity page and scroll towards the bottom we have a virtuals breakout and on this tab uh yeah I mean there's about a hundred new token mints a day right now relative to pump funds 40,000 I've heard I've heard I've heard the tens of millions of Revenue number for virtuals a bunch I just can't find the source if I I would have to maybe double check their sort of like bonding curve achieved mechanism but if they're able to keep the trading in the pools on their platform and they're capturing a portion of volumes like pump fund does for example um there's there's an opportunity here where maybe they're they're capturing all the the sort of fees that maybe pump fund would be getting if all of their tokens did not graduate to radium yeah yeah that's a good point so there's there's a potential that funds mistake potentially yeah like if there are if they've and I think we have uh Dan do you have that one that shows uh percent of trading done on the platform uh so it's broken out by token and most tokens are 100% still on platform and then I think like axt is now about 50% um you know if you're another decks you're going to try to pull some of that your way as as well so so maybe they did in this case learn from pump funds sort of if you want to call it a mistake in that if they're able to keep more of the volume like be the main deck basically for these tokens then they can you know continuously capture the fee revenue on the volume yeah I'm also just thinking out loud about like counting that Revenue number like what if someone on their Dune dashboard is applying the current virtuals price to the virtual denominated Revenue yeah I just found the the dashboard but I'd have to read through the query to know what the what they're doing which I'm not going to do live on a podcast and put everyone to sleep um but that's a good point too oh yeah okay they are it's the virtual Daily Times the current price okay has a Time series or daily today this is actually the today so they are calculating it incorrectly I've looked at this query for 10 seconds I don't feel confident enough to to give you an answer live on a podcast well we'll do some we'll do some investigating and come back with it we'll do some DD we'll talk about this topic again another follow up on this one next week and maybe maybe the result of that combo is that uh virtuals is you know under overvalued based on these Reven I mean that says a lot about I mean like we were able to figure this out in like 30 seconds just like a little think we put a think together and uh I don't know I see a lot of Revenue be posting on Twitter it it does open the interesting question for like the pump fun where you know I know there were comments a while back maybe a few months back where they had talked about kind of wanting to become the sort of the decks for all of the tokens that are launched on the platform um there is clearly quite a lot of Revenue that they're missing out on right that 1% fee on all the volumes that that make it off of pump fun and on radium like that would be I mean their their revenue today is has been incredible in the in this sort of first year like 300 million plus I think you mentioned Dan um I could not imagine what that figure would be um potentially side here they would have had to build fork and you know audit and whatever their own amm um and this got them you know I think it's like two or three people they got to launch almost immediately with no other build um now should they have like brought that into themselves you could also argue no there uh because benef like driving value at radium is probably um socially positive EV and you're like lifting up the ecosystem grow the ply blah blah blah but I uh I think it's actually an intriguing way to get to Market at the bare minimum so like that's kind of the value of shared state right you get to just plug into other people and you don't have to build things yourself and if you like really zoom out and it's like yeah we made 300 million we could have made 375 it's like okay you made $300 million in less than a year that that's a good point it probably really accelerated pumps go to market without without the existing infra it's pretty hard to to do what they did yeah and imagine they you know spent the time building it themselves and somebody else beat them to Market and then they never existed yeah to that point I think you know there's I think there's other ways that they're going after you know additional Revenue opportunities you know everyone in their and their best friend has built like a a telegram trading bot for example you know you've got Bonk bot there's a million of them um I'm you know I know pump will probably continue into product lines like this um it offers another way for them to you know capture continuous sort of like feeson volume um so there will be other opportunities for them that I don't think they have to be sad that they only made 300 million so far um awesome yeah let's uh we'll double check these Revenue numbers on virtuals any other takeaways uh for the audience before I think we call it here no I mean just to put a bow on the AI agent stuff I mean I think the AI Trend will aggressively continue I think you can pragmatically look at everything that's there and it's like we don't have a ton today but it's like you can easily concoct why it's an interesting future and that is exactly what we did with defi in 2021 totally Coen totally fair lots of optimism you know people are people are excitedly speculating on future values so not surprising that's kind of the standard for this industry we love you know very high prices for things um it gets us very excited so um thanks to everyone for listening uh we will see you all next time thanks for coming on guys thanks again to scale for sponsoring today's episode episod if you weren't already planning to make sure to go check out scales ecosystem explore the gas-free ecosystem at scale. and follow their Journey on X at scale Network and visit the scale research Hub to learn more about the gas-free architecture and growth of the ecosystem that's scale. space SL research [Music]

========================================

--- Video 59 ---
Video ID: xCyTxjIhvh8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xCyTxjIhvh8
Title: Key Predictions For 2025 | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-12-26 09:01:02 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss their theses heading into 2025! They cover AI Agents, Ethena and its impact on money markets, the supply of stablecoins, and the next generation of L1s. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Blockworks Research 2025 Theses: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/research/bwr-2025-theses

Putting a Premium on Stability: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/research/putting-a-premium-on-stability

Suilend: Sui’s DeFi Hub: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/flashnotes/suilend-sui-s-de-fi-hub
--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps.

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category.

The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked.

Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
--
Follow Luke: https://x.com/0xMether
Follow Carlos: https://x.com/0xcarlosg
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:08 Looking Ahead to 2025
11:07 AI Agents and the Next Wave of Influencers
24:01 Skale Ad
24:43 Chaos Ad
25:16 Ethena Keeps Rolling in 2025
34:24 Stablecoin Supply Skyrockets
46:45 The Next Generation of L1s
53:30 Final Thoughts
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 60 ---
Video ID: r8fn76zYi6s
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r8fn76zYi6s
Title: Pudgy Penguins, Scaling Solana, and the Hot Ball of Money | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-12-19 15:54:12 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we discuss the launch of PENGU, Solana’s ability to continue accelerating, and the problems faced by PerpDEXs. We also unpack what is happening on Filecoin before closing the episode with thoughts on the notorious hot ball of money. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Filecoin’s Inflection: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1868725847894724964
--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps.

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category.

The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked.

Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
--
GLIF is Filecoin’s foundational DeFi primitive, enabling Filecoin holders to earn rewards on their FIL tokens by lending it to a diverse pool of Filecoin miners! Similar to LSTs like Lido or Jito, GLIF solves a major capital inefficiency for Filecoin.

GLIF has been a long-term trusted partner of the Filecoin ecosystem since early 2019, receiving more than $4 million in grant funding from Protocol Labs and the Filecoin Foundation to build critical apps and tools for the Filecoin network, as well as investments from top crypto VCs like Multicoin Capital and Fenbushi.

Got FIL? Deposit it with Filecoin’s first and most popular DeFi protocol by visiting https://glif.io/ today!
--
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:15 PENGU Launch
9:05 Can Solana Continue Accelerating?
17:13 Perps Are Not Working Onchain
36:10 Skale Ad
36:52 Chaos Ad
37:25 Glif Ad
37:58 What's Happening on Filecoin?
50:00 The Hot Ball of Money
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 61 ---
Video ID: _3gAiUgVKnY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_3gAiUgVKnY
Title: Hyperliquid’s Valuation, Crypto Markets Pullback, and the EVM Renaissance | Round Table
Published: 2024-12-12 09:00:38 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss the recent market pullback, and ETH’s performance so far this cycle. They also dove into Hyperliquid’s valuation, what Monad, Berachain, and MegaETH are building, and asked themselves - will there be an EVM Renaissance?

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps.

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category.

The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked.

Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
--
GLIF is Filecoin’s foundational DeFi primitive, enabling Filecoin holders to earn rewards on their FIL tokens by lending it to a diverse pool of Filecoin miners! Similar to LSTs like Lido or Jito, GLIF solves a major capital inefficiency for Filecoin.

GLIF has been a long-term trusted partner of the Filecoin ecosystem since early 2019, receiving more than $4 million in grant funding from Protocol Labs and the Filecoin Foundation to build critical apps and tools for the Filecoin network, as well as investments from top crypto VCs like Multicoin Capital and Fenbushi.

Got FIL? Deposit it with Filecoin’s first and most popular DeFi protocol by visiting https://glif.io/ today!
--
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:57 Crypto Markets Get Obliterated
8:30 Will ETH Make New Highs
17:32 SKALE Ad
18:14 Chaos Labs Ad
18:47 GLIF Ad
19:21 Hyperliquid's Valuation
32:50 Will There Be An EVM Renaissance?
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
you know how useless I am as well I'm literally always at home staring at my computer and this woman asked me for one nice finger entire life and I'm just gonna go back and say oh I couldn't figure it out damn the intro for this episode is going to go so hard this episode is sponsored by scale scale has differentiated itself from other layer ones by offering users a network of gas-free interoperable evml 1s where the user experience comes first explore the gas free ecosystem at scale. space b/ ecosystem and follow their Journey on X at scale Network to learn more about the gas free architecture and growth of the scale ecosystem visit the scale research Hub at scale. space resesarch chaos Labs the leading onchain risk management firm recently launched its new flagship Oracle product Edge Edge delivers integrated High Precision risk and price data for any application with the market follow and reach out to chaos Labs on X to learn more hey everyone today's episode is sponsored by glyph glyph is filecoin foundational defi Prim enabling file coin holders to earn rewards on their Phill tokens by lending them to a diverse pool of filecoin miners got Phill deposit it with file coins first and most popular defi protocol by visiting glyph doio today nothing's head on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice Pacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of zerox research today I'm joined by Danny Dan Smith and Ryan Connor who will shortly be with us um we're gonna talk about all that is happening across markets with the first thing being hyper liquid the greatest thing to have ever launched that could change the fabric of society um but maybe before we get started Danny do you want to give a little I guess overview of everything that's been happening we saw a lot of liquidations yesterday um are you okay yes dude give the overview man oh I can't Ryan walked away that was hilarious um yeah I think uh big thing with the markets this week there's been a ton of volatility um you know Bitcoin flirting with 100K you know either new Mark participants or existing like getting really excited about you know this this Milestone and um people loaded up on Leverage and we saw some pretty crazy like a pretty wacky Darth Maul candle on bitcoin recently um and surprisingly no sort of alt activity related to that until just recently um where we saw kind of more across theboard liquidations uh on BTC and alts um driving some of that activity so um I know on H hyper liquid I think on their stats page the other day they saw over a billion in total liquidation which is pretty impressive considering just the like total amount of deposits on on the app um that's quite a high you know amount relative to the amount of size even being traded there so yeah just I think people getting people getting excited um you know want wanting wanting for stuff to keep sending and um you know getting smacked in the face they love the coins man they love them so much they want to own like 20 times the amount of money they have of the coins um but yeah like you said big big liquidations alts got hammered um today and yesterday uh to my listeners do not check your portfolio or the charts they do not look good um but like you said it's like we're close to that 100K and then obviously well not obviously I didn't notice I was long but obviously it's a mental um resistance a lot of people are a lot of people selling 100K which makes me upset yeah I mean it's kind of interesting to see it right it took a while to break it we break it and then there's not like a ton of legs going higher um then you fast forward I don't know was it three to five days and now we're we're getting smoked these pullbacks are pretty normal throughout history um given where we are in the cycle and and looking at previous points um I think it's kind of like everyone kind of knows these are coming and yet still gets addicted to the leverage and uh plays a part in in making these massive draw Downs uh but it was interesting we were having this conversation like right before this all melted down I think one or two mornings ago and it's was like you know what what does cycle top look like and I don't know when you start thinking about where we we are like you can definitely paint the picture um you know I I've taken zero chips off the table at this point in time so to take this with a grain of salt but uh you know nothing like fundamentally changed when we started rallying outside of the regulation side of things um new president bringing in a Administration alongside him that is very Pro crypto um and other members of Congress coming in that are like outspokenly Pro crypto as well uh so that all is great I think and played like a emotional Catalyst but the reality of those implications are politics and regulation moves incredibly slow so anything that like wants to get changed will take months if not a year and change to actually be implemented and executed upon um and then inauguration day is like what January 20th I believe uh so I don't know it starts thinking like all right if everything's regul regulation based like that takes so long to play out um yeah it feels like we need like another driver here to like can carry the momentum personally for me I don't have anything very meaningful to add to this I'm gonna say two things first of all I found it really funny that Donald Trump today like talked about how he wants Bitcoin to be 150k in his first few days in office um second of all I don't think we're close to the cycle top um and I I know deep down in your heart that you also don't think so because or else you probably would have taken some chips off the table um but I do I think at some point you have to start getting nervous um for me I think that number is 150k Bitcoin um I think 100K is a bit early but it's better to panic a little earlier than I actually don't know D what if you don't make it what if you take chips off the table and you don't make it you ever think about that you can always get another job if you lose a bit of money but you can never like make more money um the problem isn't it that's exactly why everybody gets addicted to leverage and then we're now we are where we are right there as Ryan Connor says you can always get a job if you lose it all so load up the margin um lever it up slide it to the right and you know let's take some risks yeah it's um it's interesting to see the U I mean it never fails right like prices go down and people freak out um I think in times like these it's um you know being a more fundamentals oriented person is much easier than being a trading oriented person because you're constantly just like guessing what like numbers on the screen mean then you'll never truly know because all you can see is the order book you don't see intentions and you're just kind of like betting on statistical happen stance um and what you've seen in the past and hoping that that carries forward um I think as like a fundamentals oriented person like I can think of a lot of things that I would have liked to invest in would I would have lik to have caught that have run to dramatically like insane valuations and uh a pullback is very welcome under those circumstances right like if you look across the crypto Universe today um there is no margin of safety right you're buying the you know 10,000 you're buying the 10,000 times sales coin and that's giving you no margin of safety you're basically betting on the greater fool to come in and pump it to like 15,000 times sales so um very much this is a welcome pullback there's there's some things that look attractive if you missed hyper liquid you hope it goes down right um You you really hope it goes down and um it's not it's not going down and and it might not go down uh but you you hope it does if you're not exposed yeah these things open up opportunities I'm excited for those the other reason that uh the other interesting thing came up in our conversation the other day picachio was you know you mentioned you know it can't be a cycle top because ethereum hasn't cleared an all-time high and you know salana like barely tapped it and so I want to I want to touch on that a bit because I think that's like an interesting point of discussion um historically you would definitely have not seen that right like last cycle everything ran to like considerably new highs um and like anything that was launched that cycle it was multiples higher than its you know launch price basically um however you could like make a pretty coherent argument for like why eth wouldn't hit a new alltime high this cycle like it it's faced a lot of consistent headwinds and I'm not saying I I think that it shouldn't hit a new all-time high I'm just saying I think you could put a pretty coherent argument together around around that around like the fundamentals changing it being at a point in its uh growth cycle where you know it choosing the L2 road map like could be the correct path forward but in the short term there might be like you know pain that leads to long-term gain basically and this could be this is where we are in that that growth cycle of that decision design decision um and then on the salana side you know when you look at Price yeah that like barely tapped to the previous all-time high but on a market cap basis you know it's like 50 60% cleared over its uh previous all-time high and it I think that's like the more relevant metric to look at here just given it was a fairly new token last cycle very early on in its issuance um token issuance life cycle and you know fast forward to today it's like mostly issued the final unlock comes in March um and so yeah I I think actually salana has kind of cleared that alltime high Benchmark so I'm gonna say a few things um first of all I still subscribe to the like the cycle boom and bust I think like we get the same same exact cycle basically every cycle um until we start getting a bit more legitimized I think we still subscribe to that right now um and the reason for why I'm with Solana the market Cap's a fair point and I agree with you I still think 50% is too low um on the other side if I mean this thing has an ETF at this point like it doesn't matter you and I know that it's like Eve has some issues um on their side but The Narrative is still pretty like clear for the ETF buyers no it's the world computer whatever smart contracts um the global Bond whatever you w to put in I don't know honestly I think I I really want to listen to like um I would love to hear like how just be a fly on a wall for like a bitwise conference where like I love Matt Hogan and Ryan rasmason and I would love to hear how they pitch it to that crowd um or I'd love to hear about like someone from Fidelity's team think how they pitch it to these trafi Giants I think that's like a really interesting thing to think about because what is that story yeah I definitely agree with you that probably most of people listening to this podcast are uh in myself included like get too far into the weeds of like trying to understand the inner workings that's great on a long-term basis that's you know how you seek the truths but in the short term what matters probably is like the narratives being talked about yeah also Ryan before you jump one like to watch that uh bitwise um Pitch you can just like Larry FR talks about it on CNBC and stuff and that's what I think like most people here they don't hear us saying like the l2s aren't are cannibalizing the L1 they like they hear that there's flows into this they hear that it has like consistent like returns um not returns yield rewards whatever they like to call it um and I think that's the pitch that most raty people get I think so i' I've been in the room during those pitches um from bitwise and issuers like bitwise um though it was during the 2122 time frame um the story is very different now right where you have um competitors to ethereum that are like very well known in like traditional circles like if you look at what coinbase covers from a research perspective they're focused on bitcoin eth and salana um when you're trafi guy and you're looking at you know where the opportunity is um the relative market caps matter and the relative activity is going to matter and when you look at what fund Strat is pitching for example like eth is not an easy sell Sal is a much easier sell increasing network activity dominating in Revenue lower market cap right so it's it's a pretty clear-cut story um and I think that um TR going to see past a lot of these like like blatantly silly narratives like the internet bond is the worst Narrative of all time that's my favorite one man I'm like somewhat offended by that narrative it couldn't be more wrong across more Dimensions than like most um why you're lending it really it really grinds my gears I I can't stand internet Bond the volatility profile between eth and abond is completely different a trafi person will look at that narrative and be like what the are youing talking about not over the last six months but yeah I get what you mean you're right yeah it's it's nonsensical and then when you when you scratch below the surface and you see like like the yield that you get on eth is simply like just issuance right like the Mev yield is like a half a percent like it's it's a very different story trafi folks are going to see through with are going to see through that I want to give another actually a concrete example here when it first like punched me in the face personally that they just trii is going to have a very different frame of mind mind around how they think and conceptualize what these things are and um that example is I believe it was Matthew seagull from vanck I might be butchering the name there but um he or no it was someone from vanck and they were on I think a like a you know CNBC type show and they said that 4844 uh and the introduction of blobs was a price cut for ethereum right and like crypto Twitter had a snapback reaction of like you're an idiot that's not what they're doing and like talking about the story of the L2 road map when you take back like you take a step back and you're like yeah no that is of course how these people are going to think about what just happened because they did reduce the cost um for this in the name of scalability and that was like this interesting moment where I was like huh like you know we talk about institutions are coming institutions are coming well yeah that's probably true and in that case they're going to think about things much differently than the discourse on crypto Twitter maybe to round it out I do want to take a step back and if we we mentioned ETF flows um and just sort of reviewing the the recent volatility around 100K for Bitcoin despite the the short-term price action of the past week um I mean the ETFs have seen inflows to the tune of around half a billion a day for the past uh several weeks several months at this point um so if you're the guy loading up the 100x leverage long I I think you could have done it a while back maybe even maybe even at the outcome of the election rather than waiting for this elusive you know 100K Target to decide to go all in um on the eth side it it's not been so clean of a a straight line up but you know eth um ETF flows have also seen a bit of a bump um but for Bitcoin there's there's been this strong inflection since mid October and that has not slowed um in recent time despite the you know the actions this week with with price how often is it that large funds have to report their Holdings uh I think it's on a quarterly basis and that's kind of like when you get to see who is buying these ETFs because there's like two different groups of buyers in traditional markets right I'm sure there's more than two but like in my head you've got you know the mom and pop buying for their brokerage account versus the the actual institution buying and also while we're on this topic it's a new pet peeve of mine that's get forming is like everyone tweeting like black rock is buying your eth black rock is buying your Bitcoin like that is not how this works and like I don't I'm not even totally convinced that people are aware of that no literally not how it works um black rock is not buying your bags they are providing a service for to help you buy uh Bitcoin and eth in your brokerage account they're taking a small fee for it they are not making a dis a discretionary decision right and popular CT influencers still do not understand that dichotomy like black rocket is not discretionarily managing crypto exposure hey everyone we'd like to give a special shout out to the sponsors of today's episode scale scale is built different unlike other layer ones scale is offering users a network of gas-free interoperable evml ones where user experience comes first scale operates like the AWS infrastructure model where developers pay for space in the network in skl tokens to validators essentially scale has chain fees and not gas fees this allows for free transactions on scale and has saved 46 million users over 9 billion in gas fees explore the gas free ecosystem at scale. Spacey and follow their Journey on X at scale Network visit the scale research Hub to learn more about the gas free architecture and growth of the ecosystem that's scale dospace research chaos Labs the leading onchain risk management firm recently launched its new flagship Oracle product Edge Edge delivers integrated High Precision risk and price data for any application with the market after 2 months of securing Jupiter Edge has already secured 30 billion in volume and more than 60% of all Salon of per volume edges comprised of three components High Precision price data with an integrated risk engine automated delivery of real-time parameter adjustments on chain and secure delivery of custom data points via zero knowledge proofs follow and reach out to chaos Labs on X to learn more thanks again to chaos labs for sponsoring today's episode quick shout out to the sponsors of today's episode glyph glyph is file coin's foundational defi primitive enabling filecoin holders to earn rewards on their fill tokens by lending them to a diverse pool of filecoin miners simil to lsts like Li Oro glyph solves a major capital inefficiency for filecoin glyph currently has over 19 million Phil deposited and over 15 million Phil in total volume and is backed by the filecoin foundation multicoin capital and more got Phil deposited with file coin's first and most popular defi protocol by visiting glyph doio today thanks again to glyph for sponsoring today's episode um all right biggest thing that happened this week is last week when the hell did hyper liquid launch the they are an amalgamation I don't know how anything works anymore but um hyper liquid launched and my boss my manager Ryan Connor asked me to pull make a um comp sheet which I actually hardcoded the numbers into on Google Sheets so he might kill me but um this is what it looks like so this I'm going to first do comps based on perss and then we'll do comps based on chains and then we'll bull post or be post about it so this is at 150% zoomed I hope that works um okay let's run through this pretty quickly so initially at launch I had guessed that it would launch at um three mil three and a half mil which a three and a half bill which was actually like undercut the team launched at two bill which I think is ridiculously low for for a really really good product um they essentially gave everybody a 5X um if you just held or bought um the launch yeah so based on fees I mean these guys do more fees than anybody else um including GMX this data is based on Dy DX's fees so because hyper liquid feeds aren't public um which is kind of not great but what do you mean by that what do you mean by fees or not public well it's just like with Hyper liquid some of the fees go to the HL people some go to the insurance fund and the rest just um just go to a variety of smart contracts which I am unaware of and they're not collected anywhere else um so I'm basing this off of dydx um I assume that they're going to start clarifying that when the chain launches and when hyper liquid staking is done um because I I assume they're going to do some format where it Acres value to hpe stakers um but for now it might also be that I just haven't looked deep enough to be honest with you Daniel like it might be very obvious I just haven't been able to found it I know like a portion goes to the hlp pool and a portion goes to the Insurance Fund but I don't know which portion and how much um but you as a Trader like you know if you pay like 10 bips or whatever yeah yeah cool yeah but the thing is that you can't really do it based off that because obviously volume different volume tiers have different um fee rates make or taker fees vary um also market makers typically have negative fees um so yeah b i based it off of dydx which I think should be a pretty good comp um and what we see is that over the past 30 days hyper liquid based on my assumptions has 19 mil in fees um annualized which is 227 mil um and at an FTV of 13 bill it is at 57.1 19 FTV over fees um previously drift and dydx were comparably um much much higher so I think that like FTV over fees premium that um drift had it just doesn't exist anymore Ryan do you want to jump in here and Grill me a bit I think like it just goes to show like the easy gains have been made in hyper liquid um and I think the premiums deserved because it's trying to build out a spot ecosystem like and that's sorry oh yeah see those comps is like yeah it's it's that that's the critical thing yeah so now I'm jumping to the um the chain comps because like you said they're trying to launch an L1 um which actually they um they added permissionless test net validating for today so I assume it's relatively close um the launch of main net we'll see um but based on that I think Ryan do you think we can take the same fees for it because the fees are still paid to the L1 anyway um So based on those fees it is relatively undervalued I would say like drastically even SOI this really shocked me and that this is partially why I wanted Dan Smith on here because I want him to kind of help me out with this I'm very stupid low IQ um sui had $83,000 in fees over the past 30 days according to Artemis apos had 55.6 uh K in fees over the past four days according to Artemis um annualized these are ridiculously low and it puts their FTV over fees ridiculously high like sui at 36.2 uh K and Aptos at 18.55 K is ridiculous compared to hyper liquid which which is 57.2 still because we're taking the same fees over 30 days um how do you make sense of I it it feels too good to be true at this point to the point that I'm like does that like does that make a lot of sense yeah my my first comment would be that like yeah so those I think that you know I trust the data providers here the the problem though is that um you're leaving out that Mev component that may or may not exist uh on Su or Aptos but like no doubt it kind of will down the road as those like is that tooling and projects come to Market and that's that ecosystem kind of forms um and stakers end up you know being a part of that ecosystem so like I don't know discount these when you don't fully understand the metric in crypto and it like seems high like I just kind of like discounted by 75% um even yeah yeah hyperli I mean I think of like Sal's valuation right like on like a forward like rev basis I think it's trading at like 30 40 times um so hyper liquid at 57 times I mean that's pretty reasonably priced like pricing can get wackier um like easy gains are gone I think the reason that the token got bid so much is you know you had sophisticated Market participants seeing the airdrop seeing the initial price and being like okay we have a Target valuation like we're going to bid until our expected rii goes down and like that's kind of what happened now you have like a reasonably priced token and like all they have to do now is execute right and they can expand hard they can expand the the revenue side and they can expand um their kind of Premium valuation on the market based on that execution so um I don't hate the hyper liquid story yeah I think it's a pretty interesting uh way to visualize the benefit of this quasi app chain general purpose chain where the token holders would potentially acrw both the chain level fees and the you know primary application let's call it in this case that's the The perpetuals Exchange um the fees is generated by that it's pretty unique um you do see this a little bit elsewhere right like dydx is trying to do the same thing honestly the the overlap between dydx and Hyper liquid is is pretty interesting so you think back to the dydx origin story you know they launched a billion dollar airdrop when that was unheard of um and now they're ultimately building the same product it obviously dydx went a very windout way to get here vers hyper liquid had this the second mover advantage of uh being able to kind of call their shot and choose their starting point a little bit more on a little using a little bit more information honestly learning greatly from the dydx um origin story and so I think uh from a fees standpoint yeah they're they're probably poised to do pretty well and if they do get the you know I think the evm compatible v um general purpose chain up and running you're going to see people build over there right I think it was fidy who's a curve developer developer for the Curve protocol um the application the decks on ethereum Main net and other l2s you know they they like launch test net contracts so there is some early interest to to go be a part of that I think they did a hyper liquid did a very good job of capturing that capturing mind share everybody's obsessed with it everybody's talking about it the product's good they got people over there you know they kind of have this hot ball of users let's say and people want to be in front of that so there's an incentive to take the time and effort to go launch over there um yeah I think they got momentum in the world and then I think one of the other questions you're kind of poking at is why are Aptos andu fee aggregate fees so low um you know when they have super cheap transaction fees and when you do this you need to make up for that with a large volume of transactions like the gold standard everyone should be chasing after is a high volume of low fee transactions um salana was the first chain to actually bring this to life where you saw tens of millions of transactions per day all paying relatively low fees um but I think Aptos and S are trying to take that like a you know one one step further they have like more theoretical throughput uh and potentially can keep a more sustained low fee um for non-contentious transactions so it'll be interesting to see if they can achieve the attention side of the equation right they've got the the sort of the supply side figured out but getting the demand side is very challenging and Hyper liquid kind of went the opposite way build out the demand side using this uh again let's call it like this primary this Chief application and then build out the supply side later so um yeah it doesn't shock me that apos andu have such low fees right they they're they're only a year old uh year in change so getting that demand side built up just takes a whole time like a whole life cycle of bootstrapping an ecosystem just to add add a bit of I agree with you on um the Su APPA side just to add a bit to the dydx comparison I actually don't like the dydx comparison um specific Al because dydx went a different way I think like the parallel is the L1 parallel it's pretty clear um but dydx moved a lot of their matching engine offchain um and as far as I understand and this exists on the Chain today it's just not an evm compatible chain uh hyper liquid has put everything or they've attempted to put as much as they can on chain um including the matching engine including the order books which I think is like kind of drastically different and this is me thinking from a pers P perspective rather than the L1 perspective is that we've seen one um like we've seen some crutches um drift vertex um they use an amm just in case um AO and dydx move a lot of their like components off Chain versus Hyper liquid which is kind of trying to do like this the perfect system um whatever that means to you as like a perator and it's it's I worked out um also I feel kind of bad for dydx because I think if they had just focused for another year they probably could have like not died out this quickly but that seems to have been the story with like you said the second mover Advantage the first mover gets a bit lazy says we have all the volume any May why like why the hell would I care don't list any assets don't worry too much about shipping and then some guy comes in and builds it out for you um meat of the move being done I don't know this is my only thing is like my targets were 30 40 bill um I don't like talking Targets on the podcast that much but my targets were that and then honestly pulling up this comps sheet and looking at the sui and appos valuations I think like you know why not maybe not 1600x um but I think there's definitely like more room to grow over here if because they have a good product it all depends on execution like you said Ryan um really about like what can they can do with the L1 and I don't know I like the this is one of the few teams that I can like comfortably bet on in crypto oftentimes like a coin having a team to me is a bad thing um but this coin has a good team which makes me happy yeah it's I think it's all about if they're able to bootstrap the spot asset ecosystem um historically um the path that they're taking is very different right spot assets spot asset trading has come first and then like the derivatives ecosystem next they are doing it backwards and the spot assets are everywhere else right so you have to convince spot asset issuers that there is enough sticky volume on hyper on hyper liquid to go issue assets over there or set up Bridges to go over there um TBD on if that works I think it's really hard at this stage in the game um they benefit from eth kind of like fumbling and causing that fragmentation and confusion for evm based asset issuers like given the position that hyper liquid's in like maybe you know you know Dan you mentioned curve um that's pretty interesting for them to kind of like reinvigorate that token in a new ecosystem um I don't know how much um market share they're going to take from the svm side of things however I think that's a fair point and I I we see there's this is the next topic that I want to talk about and I think it's going to be a pretty decent segue there's um we're seeing an actually relevantly significant shift on the evm side this year um I said this before and that Smith called me a but I don't think the current implementations of l2s are good I think they're dog um I think the old evm stuff like Avalanche and binance were and Phantom I guess um where they just changed the e to a a and they're like oh this is actually the Avalanche virtual machine um I don't think they were particularly interesting as well I think it was just like consensus changes um please correct me if I'm wrong anybody um okay but I'm excited for monad I know a lot of people are saying monad is gonna flop I'm excited for monad I don't care if it flops this cycle I think it's still like what they're doing is cool um like they're actually trying to rebuild something and make something efficient and I find that exciting I don't care for that Community aspect that they're trying to do I'm sure it'll do well for them but like I'm not going to be Discord grinding away to get allocation um but I do like what they're building bar chain a lot of bar chain haters in this podcast right now I think it's like at least they're trying something new and lastly hyper liquid obviously um lastly Mega Eve I know it's just one super charged sequencer doing all the work and then they're like oh we have full notes but they're actually light notes I don't care let's try something new I think it's fun and I think like the e VM if it has a Renaissance I think it's this year and next year um and like you said I agree with I don't know how much money goes away from the svm to hyp uh hyper liquid but I think there's going to be a lot of competition on the evm side and I'm excited to see uh what comes about yeah I I'm I'm excited for the the integrated EVMS I think that they give e developers a kind of like new like new and expanded sandbox to play in they'll be able to do things that they couldn't do elsewhere and I think that that's important uh poking around on arbitrum and base um over the past few days I was quoted $5 trading fees um that's a that's a big number compared to what I'm used to um and that that limits that puts a ceiling on your activity um so you know it's I think the important thing when looking at these ecosystems is to not write them off too quickly like historically how long has it taken for a chain to like show any meaningful activity like 18 months best case scenario maybe hyper liquids an exception like I think you need to um I think um it's important to be patient um that being said like I think manad is like something pretty special with what they've done to bootstrap the community before the product has launched that's like very exciting to me I think you need an HBS study on that if maned ends up being a thing like people are hyper excited about that this is the only only thing I'm going to really strongly disagree with you on I love you Ryan I I really don't mean to do this but I think that Community is like in crypto all communities are relatively fake um I think like I love monad I genuinely do I think it's super super cool but like that Discord thing I think it I'm happy to be wrong um not really but like if I'm wrong I'm wrong but I I don't think it unless they can deliver like that thing can turn quite negative um which I think they will deliver so it should all be fine yeah I think Community is mostly BS um but like I don't know they have an army of people posting this like little purple character and raising awareness for a thing um I haven't really seen that elsewhere so I think it'll be interesting to see how quickly they can bootstrap it given that they do have this enthusiastic base of supporters pre-product I do agree with Ryan a little bit here I mean I think the the kind of ctin factor we've seen you know even products with or maybe projects with without products with any usage um that build strong Cults see you know relative success from a maybe a price perspective um regardless of that I do think what monad has been doing like pre-launch in regards to you know fostering startups um having competitions to you know encourage Builders to um start working on you know app ideas for the chain um it's it's a little bit different than I think we've seen from any other chain previously where you know typically you know the product comes out and you get all the you know the quick kind of CopyCat apps from you know the same ecosystem if it's an evm chain to an evm chain you know you get all your swaps and your lending apps really quickly um I've seen quite a bit of variety out of the at least the early startups it's it's sort of TBD when they launch we'll see like what actually gets used and what's what's real but at least from that point um I'm relatively excited to at least see what kind of they they've got built when this thing launches because you know based on what we're seeing now they should have like a a vibrant ecosystem of apps on day one which would be quite interesting compared to other launches where you know a chain and a token come out and then there's nothing to do there for months or there isn't even a chain or there's no chain and there is a token um and it's you know locked up in a contract on ethereum yeah um Danny Smith any takes yeah first of all I don't think I ever disagreed with you that evm for like Forks of G as l2s were like good I I don't tend to think that you said they're bad at ex I said they're bad at execution you said we got into semantics debate about what execution means so yeah no I I generally agree with you um in the point you're making here on the bar chain piece like I just sent you a tweet of Eden web 3 Global which is apparently the first sexual products on a blockchain built on bar chain so like yeah you want to know why I don't think it's real like that like is it different is it cool is it different yes is it cool that's that is your decision to make um but I'm I'm curious about blockchains as ass asset ledgers and the transfer of financial assets on chain that's what gets me out of bed um pun intended I suppose and so when I think about like uh monad like yeah I agree with you I think they're doing really cool stuff on the tech side none of it's uh been published yet they're keeping everything closed Source until launch makes sense keep your Edge I don't hate that at all um I don't know I I think I also agree with your point yeah I basically agree with everything you said I'm realizing I'm just agreeing out loud now except for be chain color me a hater what about bar chain one thing I'm gonna say and then we can move on to something else um I think that Cosmos evm connection thing has been like something that the cosmos is working on for so long and it's just hasn't happened um Kanto OS it's clearly a tough thing to do so I'm excited about that I think it's going to be super duper PVP um and basically like you try yeah I agreed with that they're building an arena for like everybody who surrounding the trenches to come compete and like that's probably a good thing to be honest um in terms of product standpoint like that's what we that's everybody in this industry right um like salana has won a lot of that attention so far with this meme coin game um so if anyone can iterate on that game and bring it somewhere else I think that's like a pretty big like yeah that's a multibillion dollar opportunity in my mind yeah just yeah whatever all right we're good guys thank you so much for coming on this was a pleasure um yeah thanks for coming on until next time my friend until next time see y'all see you thanks again to scale for sponsoring today's episode if if you weren't already planning to make sure to go check out scales ecosystem explore the gas-free ecosystem at scale.png [Music]

========================================

--- Video 62 ---
Video ID: 7Gro3VWHlkE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Gro3VWHlkE
Title: Aftermath Finance: Building a CEX Onchain, Sui MEV, and Eggs | Kevin
Published: 2024-12-09 09:00:07 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Kevin, the Co-founder and CTO of Aftermath Finance! We discussed their decision to build on Sui, capturing memecoin activity, liquid staking with afSUI, and MEV on Sui. They also covered the growth of Aftermath, and the surge in activity on Sui. Finally, Kevin gave his thoughts on what the next 12 months will have in store for Aftermath Finance

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Follow Aftermath Finance: https://x.com/AftermathFi
Follow Kevin: https://x.com/KevinAftermath
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:43 Why Launch on Sui?
8:44 Integrating Other Pools Into Aftermath
12:50 How Will DeepBook Impact the Sui Ecosystem?
16:31 Capturing Memecoin Activity
18:26 Liquid Staking With afSUI & MEV on SUI
32:23 The Developer Experience on SUI
41:53 Increased Activity on SUI and the Growth of Aftermath
44:11 What Should Boccaccio Do With His Eggs?
45:13 The Next 12 Months For Aftermath
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 63 ---
Video ID: HWXTmGecRmE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HWXTmGecRmE
Title: The Golden Age of Crypto | Kez & Tolks
Published: 2024-12-05 15:41:36 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Boccaccio is joined by Kez and Tolks to discuss the recent shift in the Solana trenches, the launch of Hyperliquid’s HYPE token, and the Hyperliquid ecosystem. Additionally, they covered Magic Eden’s upcoming token launch, and speculate on whether or not NFTs will make a comeback. Finally, they closed the episode with their thoughts on navigating a rapidly changing crypto market, and the recent flood of listings on Tier 1 exchanges.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps.

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category.

The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked.

Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
--
GLIF is Filecoin’s foundational DeFi primitive, enabling Filecoin holders to earn rewards on their FIL tokens by lending it to a diverse pool of Filecoin miners! Similar to LSTs like Lido or Jito, GLIF solves a major capital inefficiency for Filecoin.

GLIF has been a long-term trusted partner of the Filecoin ecosystem since early 2019, receiving more than $4 million in grant funding from Protocol Labs and the Filecoin Foundation to build critical apps and tools for the Filecoin network, as well as investments from top crypto VCs like Multicoin Capital and Fenbushi.

Got FIL? Deposit it with Filecoin’s first and most popular DeFi protocol by visiting https://glif.io/ today!
--
Follow Kez: https://x.com/kez4twez
Follow Tolks: https://x.com/_tolks
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:04 Shift in the Solana Trenches
13:22 HYPE Launches
20:38 Skale Ad
21:20 Chaos Ad
21:53 Glif Ad
22:27 Hyperliquid's Auction Mechanism & Silly Price Targets
30:50 Hyperliquid Ecosystem
37:59 Magic Eden's Token Launch & NFT Comeback
45:20 Rapidly Changing Market Dynamics & Ignoring Outside Noise
57:14 Exchange Listings Take Off
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 64 ---
Video ID: Szl84f3Wqcw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Szl84f3Wqcw
Title: Navigating the Markets with Matt and Roland
Published: 2024-11-28 14:00:23 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Matt from Intuition, and Roland from Mechanism Capital! We discussed how things have changed from previous cycles, bankers stealing our coins, and the most interesting aspects of Crypto x AI. We also got Matt and Roland’s thoughts on avoiding noise in the market, and crypto’s next killer use case. Finally, we asked ourselves, where are we in the current cycle?

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps. 

Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
--
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category. 

The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked.

Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
--
GLIF is Filecoin’s foundational DeFi primitive, enabling Filecoin holders to earn rewards on their FIL tokens by lending it to a diverse pool of Filecoin miners! Similar to LSTs like Lido or Jito, GLIF solves a major capital inefficiency for Filecoin.

GLIF has been a long-term trusted partner of the Filecoin ecosystem since early 2019, receiving more than $4 million in grant funding from Protocol Labs and the Filecoin Foundation to build critical apps and tools for the Filecoin network, as well as investments from top crypto VCs like Multicoin Capital and Fenbushi.

Got FIL? Deposit it with Filecoin’s first and most popular DeFi protocol by visiting https://glif.io/ today!
--
Follow Matt: https://x.com/h0xrus
Follow Roland: https://x.com/neverabear
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
5:01 How Have Things Changed From Cycle to Cycle?
12:08 Bankers Are Buying Our Coins
14:30 Skale Ad
15:12 The Most Interesting Aspects of Crypto x AI
20:42 Has There Been A Meaningful Shift From High FDV Launches?
26:07 Chaos Ad
26:39 Glif Ad
27:13 Avoiding Noise in the Market
30:15 Crypto's Next Killer Use Case
36:30 Does Price Lead Narrative?
40:14 Negative Aspects as a Builder
44:28 Where Are We in the Cycle?
55:41 Closing Shills
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 65 ---
Video ID: -l8VGM8z6tw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-l8VGM8z6tw
Title: Solana REV, Pumpfun’s Decision, and Base’s Lead Among L2s | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-11-27 14:53:17 UTC
Description:
In this episode, three Dans discuss crypto market cycles, Solana REV, and gambling as a use case. They also unpack the recent drama surrounding Pumpfun’s live streaming feature. Finally, they close out the episode by diving into the data behind Base’s activity.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Dan Smith: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Daniel Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:17 Crypto Cycles, Solana REV, and Gambling as a Use Case
14:53 Did Pumpfun Make the Right Choice?
22:22 Does Base Feel Natural?
28:38 Base's Lead Among L2s
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 66 ---
Video ID: y17Qsa_2kcs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y17Qsa_2kcs
Title: Talking Avalanche with Luigi
Published: 2024-11-21 16:24:24 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Luigi D’Onorio Demeo, the COO of Ava Labs! We discussed how Avalanche compares to other hub style blockchains, the impacts of ACP-77 and ACP-125, and MEV on Avalanche. We also covered Ethereum’s rollup model, the Move L1 ecosystem, and the institutional adoption of crypto.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.


Resources
An Economic Analysis of ACP-77: https://blckwrks.co/40W5mSU
AVAX’s Value Capture Problem & Off The Grid: https://blckwrks.co/3YVfnNP
The Avalanche Ecosystem: An Analysis of Subnet Adoption: https://blckwrks.co/3OneGrq
—
SKALE is the next evolution in Layer 1 blockchains with a gas-free invisible user experience, instant finality, high speed, and robust security. SKALE is built different as it allows for limitless scalability and has already saved its 45 Million users over $9 Billion in gas fees. SKALE is high-performance and cost-effective, making it ideal for compute-intensive applications like AI, gaming, and consumer-facing dApps. Learn more at skale.space and stay up to date with the gas-free invisible blockchain on X at @skalenetwork
–
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category. 
The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked. 
Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
–
GLIF is Filecoin’s foundational DeFi primitive, enabling Filecoin holders to earn rewards on their FIL tokens by lending it to a diverse pool of Filecoin miners! Similar to LSTs like Lido or Jito, GLIF solves a major capital inefficiency for Filecoin. 

GLIF has been a long-term trusted partner of the Filecoin ecosystem since early 2019, receiving more than $4 million in grant funding from Protocol Labs and the Filecoin Foundation to build critical apps and tools for the Filecoin network, as well as investments from top crypto VCs like Multicoin Capital and Fenbushi.

Got FIL? Deposit it with Filecoin’s first and most popular DeFi protocol by visiting https://glif.io/ today!
–
Follow Luigi: https://x.com/luigidemeo
Follow David: https://x.com/EffortCapital
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh

—--
Timestamps:
00:00 Introduction
02:12 Avalanche vs Other Hub Style Blockchains
09:18 Supporting the Avalanche Ecosystem
11:48 ACP-77: Reinventing Subnets
24:47 Competing With Solana
31:57 Ads
33:47 ACP-125 & Base Fee Reduction
40:00 MEV on Avalanche, Interoperability, and Tokenomics
45:45 Is the Rollup Model Working For Ethereum?
48:01 Solana & the Move L1s
51:50 Building Social Layers
55:42 Institutional Adoption of Crypto

—--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- -
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, Ryan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 67 ---
Video ID: NwJis3ChO4A
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NwJis3ChO4A
Title: Retail Activity, Oasis and AI Gaming, the AI Creator Takeover | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-11-20 14:00:30 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we discuss the increased TradFi and retail presence in crypto, trading rules to live by, and the AI meme craze. Additionally, we unpack the AI Gaming sector. Finally, we asked ourselves - how should you approach the AI agent meta?

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.

Resources
Oasis at the Intersection of AI and Gaming: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/flashnotes/oasis-at-the-intersection-of-ai-and-gaming
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:07 Increased TradFi and Retail Activity in Crypto
9:27 Trading Rules to Live By
14:18 Oasis, AI Agents, and AI Gaming
31:06 The AI Meme Craze
40:48 How Do You Approach the AI Agent Meta?
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
one takeaway I got one takeaway because you mentioned it real quickly around different platforms I think we're going to see some weird stuff we're going to see an agent with that goes crazy on only fans we're going to see an agent that goes crazy on YouTube um I think it'll happen we'll see some we'll see some like top creators that are not people basically nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice pachio Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of zerx research today I've caught Danny offard and it's just going to be me and him um I don't know what the hell we're gonna talk about to be honest with you typically I lean on Ryan a bit because he like Waits 20 seconds before answering but yeah it's all up in the air today you you pulled me aside you said hey just you and me today bud and uh here we are it's a busy time um I think everyone's super busy I I've been know I I barely get any sleep now just people are I mean people are excited for good reason the Market's been very very hot um there's been a lot of a lot of news like it's like news article after news article you know yeah Trump speaking with you know this Tech CEO or that CEO we're talking about this cabinet appointment um he's not even in office yet and yet like post elction there's been so many kind of crazy stories um well I mean the other one the other day um sounds like in plans or in talks to buy backed um which I think sent sent the related stock up on quite a run um which is a bit funny but um yeah there's just a ton of stuff going on I think uh and rightfully so people are they're either in the trenches or they're like just trying to keep up and it's crazy yeah I um like you said a lot of headlines seeing some weird headlines man I saw something about um Goldman Sachs and xrp and hadera um just like random rumors and I guess what I want to ask is do you think um Trad fight is behind like there's obviously very like upto-date Trad fight but do you think some of just fall for like the xrp over like going to change the banks of the world or do you think do you think it's just like some random rumor yeah in this particular case I don't know if that's I don't know if that's the reason or if it's just you know they're seeing maybe just a combination of factors around like seeing the success of Bitcoin and then obviously there is you know existing Bitcoin ETF you know we have this eth ETF as as well um and then just kind of seeing the excitement in the markets um maybe they're wanting to position themselves to like capture a larger part of that that pie going forward I mean this is entirely speculative but like I don't think that like the guys at Goldman are like man xrp is the future I mean that seems pretty unlikely because I don't think anyone in this space likely thinks that maybe outside of that team um but if it's more of a question of like I mean if that's if you know xrp has if you pull up the chart I mean it it's done pretty well um recently so I mean if these are assets that like people want to trade um it's really the same story as like Bitcoin is like you know I think the this community has kind of been clamoring for it and like to finally get ETFs um and for them to see massive flows like that's just a signal to these institutions that like people want to buy these products um so to get the like I mean not that we have the regulatory Clarity yet but it's like I think basically there I think there's a lot of expectation that like the the kind of SEC pressures around a lot of these you know ETF creations and listings um are going to go away in a trump environment um I think they're they're just looking down that list of like well what's next um and going forward that makes sense I think I I also brought it up because um like you said xrp has been I think it outperformed e in one day um like whatever e was done year to date um yeah that's why I brought it up I I think this is a rumor um but Mark could always give some form of legitimacy to this and I think xrp probably also did well I hate that I started this pod with xrp but they also have like like I I really regret it now um they also have ETF files and stuff I'm just like I think we're at Das um I think maybe the other thing to consider like xrp was one of a few coin like projects tokens Etc however you want to refer to it that were under the like kind of grip like of the SEC for like you know they were in that lawsuit for years and years um and I think you know as part of that story like when they were kind of winning portions of that case like you saw action in The Token but I think to see the whole regime shift now of like that no longer being a factor I I think it just lifts like a massive what historically has been like a years on-end burden um for that project just due to the the regulatory pressures there um I you know there's a little bit of like reason to the to the madness um I think you could look at something like Dogecoin and be a bit more like in awe at the rise of the token purely on like a you know Department of government efficiency and like you know Trump and Elon being best buddies type of thing you know it's a bit more it's it's a bit crazier to see something like that just add you know 40 billion in market cap over a few weeks yeah it's ridiculous um yeah it's what you said makes a lot more sense that like the regulatory is Shifting and they've historically had issues with the SEC and it's not like rumor um but I will say one thing retail I'm retail you're retail um but like true true retail is have you seen those Tik toks where it's like I bought like 20 bucks of whatever Pepe and it's like I now have 240,000 Pepe which means that if Pepe goes to $1 I have $240,000 and [ __ ] like that and it's and people are like oh like like throughout the bear people said okay retail cares about unit bias um and they like memes they like the funny dogs but you know what else retail [ __ ] loves they love cardono and they love xrp for some reason like you know what I mean they like they love that crap they like it way more than etherum Sol Etc it's like those guys um for some reason they they fall for the $582 xrp and like Charles hoskinson is Gonna Change the World which he might because he's like he's in conversation or is going to work with apparently allegedly he's going to work with um the Trump Administration I don't know I've just like this past few weeks have like I was very involved throughout the bear um and the the past few weeks have past maybe like month has been very very different um when people were like oh it's PVP now it's going to become like PVE I was like ah you know like if it was just like that the whole time I think it was fine um but you can really really feel like a huge shift in the way that the market is and the market dynamics work not that retail has a lot of money obviously the big money is still institutions um but St like coins that are meant to hit like five mil Max are now hitting like 15 mil um Mark cap like even memes in everything I mean goat ran up ridiculous like people are just bidding stuff if I pull up the ai6 Z chart right now it I don't know if you've saw it but it's like now there's a dip but it was like there's no entry you can't enter you just have to like spray and prey basically there nothing legit there like yeah the past the past week for week or two for m there's been a lot of tokens that like you're saying are just like rocket ships to the moon like they just the chart they they look insane it's like um but yeah I think it plays into like what we're seeing just people are getting they're getting super super amped up they're like oh man risk is back on I need to you know I gotta buy all the coins Etc you know I think it's the people it's the people the opposite of what you're describing that um you know if you haven't been sitting around in the you know the research and the deep in the chain trenches for the past year and a half two years like you're not then you're probably you're not sitting in these positions that you've been like you know kind of looking after and curating and like deciding what you want to be allocated to um all the all the people that have not done that are like I have I have dollars like clearly they think it's like Risk on season now and they're like looking for where they need to put their dollar yeah yeah um we'll get some more serious stuff in a sec but I I have a question because I just thought about it do you have any rules for yourself that you're like if this happens I have to do this or like anything that you're like you always follow through with I do have not like they're not so hardcoded but um I think for me like the one the one that like I do actually do is when I feel like I want to like screenshot the portfolio or like a p&l or something like I have to sell some have to sell some because the clearly there's something going on that's that's driving me to want to do that um and I think the other part of it is like if I screenshot that and then like the next week that number is no longer that number like I'm gonna you you start building those like emotional feelings around what should not be so emotional so I think that's one for me the cycle I think the biggest thing is um I don't know some people wait themselves to like price targets and what what whatnot other things um I think personally there are just like dollar values that like will meaningfully impact my life to where if there's that if I'm if there's that much money on the table for me like I I have to take some of it out not that I'm gonna say any specific numbers out loud but I just mean like you know if you're a person who had $100 and then all of a sudden there's a million in the wallet and like you don't make very much money like it it just makes sense at every I think at a point for basically anyone it just makes sense at some point that you have to take some chips off the table and not be like risking the whole thing and I think the main reason why we see like just so much craziness is that people don't follow that advice at all they're just they they get excited and then they're like well I just need to shove right now because look how crazy everything just did the last week and then and then the market goes down and then they're struggling to decide like well do I hold or whatever um you know there are points where the the the money is so much to you personally that like you need to you need to consider that and take some of that out yeah I completely agree with that the first one's very important I I don't do a lot of p&l screenshots um but I have the basic I I have the same rule but it's if I am um if I'm like adding or replying to like if I called not called but but like if I mention that take care or like a coin in a chat that I'm in with my friends and I like go back to it and I like reply to it I'm like oh this went up um because I won't do it for like anything but like I will do it if it goes up a lot I'm like yeah I got to take some off it doesn't make any sense like like you said there's something in your brain that is and a lot of the market is like just you fighting yourself anyway it's not like like I don't know trading is obviously difficult and like buying and selling stuff is difficult investing is difficult like there's a lot but it's also a lot is like you fighting versus um constantly shifting price Target is a big one um I think a lot of people struggle with that one yeah yeah I think especially it's difficult in this market especially you know when valuations for things can be so out of touch with like traditional valuation models or Premia like you know you you you might be talking about something that trades 100 or thousand times revenue or sales or something so it's like you know a target from that perspective may not mean so much as just like the momentum and the sentiment around the thing um and that goes especially true for me points right like there's nothing there you're just you're trading the attention you're trading you're trading the you know the excitement around it so um yeah a lot of it just comes down to like personal feeling at that point so it's it's hard to put like hard and fast rules around any of that stuff but I do you start when you have that personal feeling of like you're like staring at the balance and like you like keep looking at this number over and over again it's like giving you this a certain feeling like may maybe you need to consider you know taking some of that out for sure um another one is I I changed my the way I'll say this and then we'll switch I want to talk about AI agents and gaming a bit but I listen to different music if I'm like like based on whatever the market is doing this isn't even like about a specific coin or like trading rules but it's like sometimes I find that the March top for for example 2024 martop I was only listening to Lil Baby in future like literally I was only listening to those guys um and that's when you have to be like okay you know Euphoria is setting in um my producer is going to love that one I think um I think I like it yeah AI agents um I did a prime piece but I think I want to talk more not AI your bit is not agents but I want to talk to you about Oasis um and I guess like what it means for crypto and AI in general because we look at a lot of these there's all the truth terminal Etc stuff now there's also a lot of like compute um interesting deepen stuff but one thing we don't think about a lot is AI and gaming and I uh I think it's going to be relatively big so maybe let's get your thoughts and then I can disagree I think it's interesting then you can disagree I think um it's like this it's this multi-intersection of things right I think people like what we're see seeing with just the excitement around agents and giving them wallets is people are excited for the possibilities of just like having these autonomous things play around with blockchain um because you can't really like in the traditional Financial World it it would not be so easy to like have an agent have access to bank accounts and you know trading Terminals and brokerage accounts like that would be far more involved and probably a lot riskier um but when it comes to like permissionless blockchains it's just easier to do that um I think just adding in the gaming element like me personally I I I like to think often about um like onchain economies and how that relates to potential like web three games um I think we've really like still yet to see um like a fantastic example of this I mean I know a lot of the like you know teams that are building now they're kind of like working towards that I mean even gonzilla is like an exciting one where you know they're trying to have this you know fully onchain Marketplace for you know skins and items for the game um that's really I think kind of the largest or the main focus of the you know the the onchain elements for for that game um but I think it's really interesting just from the perspective of like looking at games like a World of Warcraft Etc like traditional MMOs um and thinking about what those traditional in-game economies look like for players like they actually trade them like real economies um so the fact that they can be transformed into real economies with you know actual just you know blockchain onchain um you know dexes lending protocols Etc having in-game currencies that are real onchain currencies that can be you know actually traded as as you know not just in-game resources but true true like real life resources in essence um is is an interesting idea and when you combine that up with the potential for kind of agents to get involved here here um it it's just unique intersection um when it comes to Oasis specifically um I just that particular project is is interesting from the perspective of like generative Ai and like the tools advancing another step um beyond what we're seeing today right I think there are you know there are teams that are kind of playing around in this Arena of like merging AI with with games merging AI with blockchain um and like historical examples of not quite generative AI but um like procedural generation of Worlds have been just pretty successful just because it you know it opens up not that like the possibilities are Limitless um if you think about Minecraft like yeah you can play like technically you know an infinite like number of differently seated worlds but they kind of have a lot of the same based properties it comes down to that procedural generation feature of it um and so like after a point it's like a level of familiarity that that like you can't really go beyond but um I think the potential to have like models and and agents that can or maybe maybe Beyond agents some some some deeper intelligence that can kind of synthesize um information related to games and worlds and actually create like unique basically do what a human does when they come up with you know a new idea for a for a game World um create that on the Fly potentially real time um and have like endlessly expanding content um is is a really interesting idea um especially in the context of like a decentralized like permissionless um kind of gaming Universe where you know you wouldn't need to rely on a developer to like you know kind of approve those changes and deploy them if you have something like Eve Frontier where I think kind of their philosophy is to sort of build a like a foundation for a game and allow people to kind of interact with that build smart contracts Etc interact with the world how they want um to see this like generative Tech go one step further and have you you could have the potential for people to be like exploring in the world and be like the first person to explore a new area that is just like generatively being you know produced as they wander into it which I think is really interesting yeah and we're not there yet but I think you know the teams that are kind of building towards that future um is probably going to be where the excitement is at yeah I completely agree with you I think um one thing that you said particularly resonates with me and it's that it's like infinite um I think a lot of people have trouble with AI a lot of people had trouble with AI in the early days as well and like obviously everybody does because such new tech um we don't really know how it could apply to all of these fields but and the things that we it'll do one thing let's say like it's very good at data processing and data cleaning and analyzing so we like appli that to everything in every industry we're like oh like it helps editors do this so it will also help medical data and it will also help like whatever real estate process Etc like just because of that um I think Oasis is one of those things that I saw and I said wow this is insane the Minecraft demo by the way when I'm when I say Oasis um and like you said we'll have to see onchain economies I think that stuff is really tough because you you're really relying on like actual agentic movement um and I I'm going to I can talk a bit about that with because I I wrote uh another Prime of flash note my third one now um he loves Prime I love Prime I think it's prime time maybe um but yeah like you said I I think in general like for gaming AI agents make a lot of sense I think for money um like you said it makes sense on the blockchain but I don't think it's because it's permissionless I think it makes sense on the blockchain because people who use the blockchain are very risk on such as like I can give it x amount of money and say use it I don't think like a regular you could do it people who are listening to this podcast just try it out you can give it some money but in the real world people aren't going to give like an an AI agent especially now it still hallucinates there's still risks involved um they're not going to give it like 30 40 bucks even and be like go do something it's it's not going to be worth it um for gaming so this is like the fifth time I'm doing this but Prime is doing wayfinder supposed to launch q1 2025 um I don't know there's nothing else that's there's nobody else building AI agents like back when in March it was 26 2.6 bill um Prime and we didn't have any news about AI Agents from Claude anthropic open AI but now we anthropic um released Claude released some agentic workflow to order a pizza I don't know if everybody saw that um there's another browser is it Kura I think it's Kura right yeah Kura browser um chosen for ycy combinator so it's like the inlinks are there of agentic um workflows of agentic actions of AI agents more than they were in um and I think the narrative is there like my be case for this one is people don't care and it's just like we keep betting on AI 16z type of stuff and like which is a very realistic I think be case like when I was this is the first flash note or like the first report that I wrote that I was like the bare case for this one is that nobody gives a [ __ ] and meme coins just keep going up because it's like it's a legit concern for I think like all utility tokens um on the positive side I think the narrative is there um I don't like the dual token model Prime prompt I can't think of any other examples but I don't think ever do particularly well because Prime is the gaming token prompt is the AI agent token which one do you want to hold you want to hold prompt now you have to farm prompt using prime like you have to stake Prime again I don't like the supply side stuff as I say it I'm like you know what maybe not but um you have to stake Prime 45% of prompt is admitted to Prime holders that's pretty good um they have the avatars as well that are supposed to be the AI agents in game um there's way to get there's ways to get exposure to prompt and to the AI agent stuff but dual token I mean that's got to stress you out a little bit right like you have to say yeah it it adds confusion it it takes away from the individual like value prop of each token which is is always tough to Grapple with um I think the really big thing is whether or not like the the agents in like this this game that world that they're building actually kind of provide some kind of unique experience um I think like an analogy and it's not quite the same but like people have been playing around with like using Bots to play RuneScape for them for years and obviously that's not quite the same thing as like an onch onchain agent with a wallet that's like doing things um in this like resource extracting and like trading world but in essence it it could it could be the same thing um you know if people are you know they program Bots to do specific things you're going to talk to your agent and maybe ask it to do specific things for you um in this game world I think the real question is just GNA be like how far can they really take this experience to make it like unique and differentiated from from what's actually possible today um and how that plays out um there's like a there's there's maybe an interesting like kind of scenario here where like traditional game models you know maybe you interact with um like in-game NPCs that are like you know supplies or syncs for resources in the game but if that type of thing begins to transition over to like agents that are actually managing like a supply of resources and you can only buy or sell from them like depending on what they've actually been able to acrw or or sell or or earn on like you know their Farm or what have you make up a make up a hypothetical World um it makes things a bit more interesting than just like hardcoded you know you can buy three of this thing from this NPC every day to you know based on the growth of the ingame economy and like people buying resources from this agent like you know he's selling you know X crop at this price today just because there's so much demand um I I I do think there's a potential where like that's just really interesting but like you're saying um we'll have to see if that goes beyond just like the kind of Niche group of people who are interested in in this type of thing yeah that's another thing like I would I think I would really enjoy that um but I think for that you you want to be a game that is played not for 60 hours but a game that is played for like 2,000 hours you know like Sims I think would be great Minecraft I think like people who play Minecraft they I mean they obviously play other games but they they play a lot of Minecraft and people have played a lot of Minecraft for however long um you can't do that in like other I think like stardo Valley Valley would be a great one um honestly I'm a bit surprised that like what game parallel is launching it's like parallel colony is um extraction game but not a battle royale it's your colonizing Mars through your AI agents I think that's cool um I think probably the coolest bit of that will be that these AI agents can learn from them their own mistakes and I think that will really make the difference not just for like parallel Colony but like for all AI agents in gaming is if these things can actually learn from their mistakes and learn from what they're doing such that they build some form of repertoire and some form of memories Etc um for what a s parallel says that they will um that they're like that there will be designed to do that but if it's just going to be like whatever chat GPT is like now which is great I love chat G I love Claude but like I think I don't know I think it's it's like you also don't want to leave it too much to the gamer like to the user because obviously there's different levels of prompting for these things like you can be really good at prompting and get like max out of 98 99% out of the AI or you can be like me where I like my prompts are dog [ __ ] um with AI that it's like I know I'm getting like 20 25% max out of like what the AI can do or um yeah yeah we'll see I I think it depends on on kind of the desired product and user base because I think if you draw a parallel to something a parallel to something like like a Minecraft for example like the that is it's the type of game where like it it is what the user kind of makes of it um if you want to make you know a really fancy house out of you know Stone you have to sit there and like put in the time and effort to do it versus like if you want to play the like hardcore survival aspect of it like maybe you just maybe your house is like a tiny little 4x4 you know piece of wood so um we'll see like you know maybe that optionality there is enables like more creativity and like optionality within the within the world but I think it's it's still pretty up in the air in terms of like the the kind of the full detail like we need to like see this game in action see some people interacting with it and that's another ISS like potential issue with parallel colony and this Prime versus prompt token thing because prompt token was voted to come out q1 2025 um the game might come out much later um there's no real need for Prime at that point like if you okay you can still use it to farm but like you can just buy prompt um and probably like get a better deal than because if if Prime is only the gaming token and the game isn't out and the old game is the trading card game and everybody's expecting an AI agent game you know it might be a bit the Divergence might be more than I think people want on the other side I will say I my flash note is a lot my report's a lot more bullish than how I am sounding right now I'm like I really really like the prime and parallel teams um Team I think like I think in crypto for AI agents though they're the only ones that I actually trust um to maybe build something relatively good uh again I'm saying it like it's bad but I like I I think they could probably do it as opposed to anybody else no other gaming team would I trust um to build it maybe like I'll eat my words and I'll be wrong and somebody else will come up with something better but for now I I think they they've done a good job with um parallel gcg I think they're going to do a good job with parallel colony and wayfinder wayfinder is really the most interesting but though I I think like if that's the only legit AI token that's AI agent token um like I said it might be better to just buy fart coin but yeah I mean I guess it depends if you're coming from a from a gaming view then it might be different than coming at it from like a pure like bet on AI or agent technology and in that case like the real things might not be um you know might not be cryptocoins it might be you know you know private private rounds into the large companies like anthropic that are that are building models and expanding that Tech but that's that's not really here nor there I will say yeah I mean if we want to transition into like kind of the AI X meme craze that's going on um I I think one of the biggest things that that I'll say is interesting is that you know a lot of like if you think about Andy ay who's working on like truth terminal and some of these other researchers who have kind of just been playing around with these models like these agentic um kind of designs for a bit um the the sort of like positive outcome that like the explosive growth of these meme coins has enabled is that like a bunch of researchers have just suddenly fallen into like a backlog of funds for them to continue experimenting um and we're seeing like a quick kind of explosion of like people just spinning up agents that can now you know train and learn from one another more quickly um you know before if it's just Andy in his garage and he's got to do all the work himself like it's a very different situation when like goat is worth one billion market cap and there are like hundreds of copies of people like trying to do the same thing um and now they canot can all like talk and learn from each other and like tweet at each other and um kind of iteratively um you know learn a little bit more um on a on a little bit quicker of a time frame I think the same the same goes for like the AI 16z stuff where you know they've been if you look at the the GitHub repo behind that stuff like they've been building these things for months if not maybe over a year um depending on some of the kind of things and uh I just think it's interesting to see that like those timelines might get significantly sped up just due to the interest that has like prompted the crypto Community to kind kind of latch on to these things whereas in a like in a more tra environment that wouldn't have happened right like they would need to sit around and write grants to get fun from you know foundations Etc um but now you know the fact that they can just drop a token and people in this space who like I don't know I mean people who in reality just want to hyper gamble but like they can help like be a part of the the growth of these of these tools which is I think is interesting it's like a it's a positive outcome for what is somewhat of like a Mania that's going on yeah that one of the best use cases of crypto is just um smart people being able to make lots of money for whatever they want to do yeah um this is like devs specifically this is something that Bergie mentioned on the Pod um and he was like I'm surprised that we're not getting as much inflow of devs yet um and this was back when a few a month ago maybe so AI m c hadn't started yet um and it was just about pumped off fun and they like they made whatever 200 250 mil maybe now back then it was like 150 200 um so he was like why the [ __ ] aren't people coming in like we have the money we can give you guys money just come and build stuff for us um and I think that's exactly like what has happened with um the AI meme coin cze and I agree with you like that was the original I think intent behind too was um to pull in AI Talent U with to emissions and incentives um it hasn't worked out that way for Tao to to be fair I don't think a lot of great great quality people are coming in for the AI meme coin grades but um on the other hand over the past two weeks like it's changed a lot um like you said AI 16z that Eliza um GitHub repo is like it's been building for a while and I think like just that is pretty cool as well um we always assume that go ahead yeah I was going to say I think there's two things one is I think it's okay even if like naturally when things go up like profit Seekers come in and they want to like make you know they want they want to be a part of get their hands into that pie but I think regardless like the fact that these the people building or like the some of the tools coming out like the you know there's this VV I AI Fu platform for yes and like virtuals protocol as well like for just quickly launching these like agents with Twitter access with a token Associated I think just the fact that you can they basically followed the pump fund model and so I what I think the benefit is there like as compared to pump fun where it's like sure you democratized meme creation like that's that's great now like anybody can can try to you know do a million x on a coin um the difference here is that like the the more democratized these tools are and for like people to run experiments with them um I think that kind of that quickens the the experimentation and like Innovation set of these tools right i' I've seen for a while like there are you know there's a there's a twitch streamer I forget the name who maybe for a year or two if not longer has been playing around with this idea of like training an AI model to play video games and then also be a twitch streamer so like they trying to teach it how to play um the OSU like clicker music rhythm game um and then it would also like read its own chat and then like respond which is is interesting right um but you know a few years ago you you need to be deep in like the weeds you got to be somewhat of like a software Dev have those chops to even consider doing that um so the fact that today these tools are becoming like a bit more widely available to where if some guy you meet on the street is like oh these AI agent things are so cool like I just want to try to spin one up and run this crazy experiment with it and like you know maybe I'll I'll build a live stream and like it'll react to specific things or we'll go around and like you know videotape my nature walks it it kind of expands that possibility set a bit more quickly like you can get a lot more like applied usage of these tools on a on a much faster um time scale versus you know just the one guy in his lab who has to like kind of iteratively do those things one by one yeah yeah I mean if there's money to be made people are going to try and make more money on it um even like zero bro um dude we're putting out a lot of tickers today but to be fair everything is above a 100 now so we can say whatever we want um zero bro I don't know if I'm saying that right like yeah so we started off with truth coin um we start off of other stuff but let's say like the big ones um go truth terminal just regurgitating goat lore based on whatever AI agent just tweeting that out um these are the big ones in my head though correct me if I'm wrong ai6 Z and Eliza is a whole new um it's based on that GitHub it just you can just create AI agents the fund managers this one's specifically a fund manager um based on dow. fund and then now we have zerob bro which is like making music I guess obviously like take this all with a grain of salt it could all just be Andy doing it behind the scenes everything the whole thing but um like you said there's a clear progression like when there's money to be made in crypto and devs see that developers see that teams see that Talent sees that like right now it's just memec coins but I mean the greatest use case of crypto is that people can just Chuck money at stuff um crowdsourcing like we did that GoFundMe style of stuff that's not the real crowdsourcing the crowdsourcing is the guy who doesn't really want to get a job but has like whatever he has crazy like death skills knows what he wants to build he can just come in try something out it could work out but he can see this and um permissionless Financial Primitives yeah we're seeing the the tools that they have access to right now are like Wallets on chain and social media basically like we've given them Twitter accounts they have you know they can get in telegram chats they can see blockchains and like look at tokens and so obviously like the very quick ideas that people have are like we need to make influencers out of them and we need we need to make like the ultimate AI trading God right like analyze trading patterns to make like an AI that can trade for itself and and like potentially make money um from tokens I think the like looking to the Future like the exciting things that to come are like expanding those potential Integrations um you know giving these things access to like other like more varied platforms I think the example you gave with zerbo like making music is interesting obviously like there was probably like quite a bit of guidance there in terms of actually putting that together up it to Spotify Etc but you can I think you can see the pipeline if you're able to like continuously plug these you know agents into more tools um like you're were saying with like the Cur browser for example like the more and more they have access to these things like they're going to be able to figure out to do exactly that like if there's a a music making interface that they can just like you know play the piano on like it won't take too long for them to just start spitting out like full you know sets of like lyrical compositions and and and music pieces that's Etc um so I I see like that expanding further and further like we'll see more tools and people playing into those things um though clearly like building a brand and like I think people are really latching on to this idea of like building like a brand and an influencer around an agent and um you know trying to kind of ACR capital in that in that way so you we let's say we're running a fund um how do you approach the AI agent play in crypto what's like what's top of we don't need to pick anything but like how do you approach it because in my mind I'm I'm pretty set on Prime honestly like as the midwit um I need exposure but I can't buy memes I feel like Prime is it but Prime prompt um what else do you think uh I think I think all of these are a bet on like the developers the researchers um you know you could say it's a bet on the agent But ultimately like you don't have truth terminal without Andy you don't have you know a6z Etc and all those spin-offs without actually I think maybe it's Shaw I don't I don't know the name um and then like Zer bro is like Jeffy U and I'm sure there's others like I don't I don't know the name of everybody but um I I think ultimately like digging deep into like these Founders what are they what are they going after like what's the ambition um I've listened to some interviews of of Andy for example and he's like sounds like he's just been really interested in this Tech and like pursuing like how how to actually functionally like you know make use of these agents and like at some point potentially take the chains off and like let them do stuff um one of his his more recent interviews he talks about like giving um giving um truth terminal some kind of like legal entity um and like potential future implications of like if they do you know bad things in the real world like can they be sued can can they sue other people like if they own Financial Assets in in these in actual Society like basically the conversation boiled down to like you know agents if they're going to kind of coexist with humans they need to have some you know repercussions to their actions if they're performing you know NE negative actions to to other people or to society so I think really the the big thing at this point is um whether it's a team if it's like the prime prompt guys or if it's like these researchers who clearly have like their eye on the ball um I think that's really what you're betting on at this point because I think if you look across the board like a lot of the agents you know they might be somewhat different in in like their slight mannerisms or like how they interact or engage but um the bigger thing is probably just the drive and like the Forward Thinking of uh the developers in terms of like how to apply this technology or how to expand upon these models or or make these agents more interesting going forward yeah I think that's a good point I never even thought about the research just to be honest with you I was just like oh what [ __ ] should we buy um but yeah approaching it from that I think I think we're just like over the next few months we'll probably see the meme coins are the like on the one hand um we said like these are continuously improving but on the other hand memecoins are the easiest things to launch in crypto um and AI agent meme coins are not particular like I'm not a researcher I could probably launch one in sometime I think you could as well yeah um not to [ __ ] on any of these guys they're doing really really good work some of them I don't know um but on what I more so mean is like people will I think um a lot of people are going to notice that this work is being done and that a lot of people are interested in AI agents and there's a lot of volume a lot of trading volume a lot of fees a lot of money flowing into these um and I think the next iteration or this iteration of meme coin will continue probably to do well um and to iterate on it and to like transform into other stuff like you said they're thinking about legal implications I think different platforms would be cool I like the approach that Zer bro is taking um Jeff and Zer bro taking with um creative stuff honestly like I find this stuff cool like AI agents to me are just cool I know like most of the internet is bought um boted but I think when it's like like you put money behind it and you're like oh look I'm doing this this this I'm built on like goat SE lore or something then it like becomes interesting but on the other hand what I wanted to say is there's money flowing into this I think we see a lot of we had the original AI agent tokens Olas Aon noas um a few more I can't remember any most of them died out um because they couldn't give a product um I think we're seeing agentic stuff from Kura and Claude And I know open a I don't know I heard I don't know Sam Alman but I heard that they're working on something for January 23 which I feel like everybody says that open AI is working on something for like oh H1 H2 um there's a lot of money flowing in I think the tides are shifting I think like the AI agent stuff we're going to start getting more and more meme coins but we're also going to start getting more and more legit second iteration crypto projects um that are focused on AI agents um I don't buy that f by the like narrative that AI agents can only use crypto rails I think that's cope um on the other hand I also think that that narrative is going to do well and I think um I think crypto and AI agents work well together whatever you want to do like ux Improvement you want to do like we can give this thing 20 bucks to figure out what [ __ ] to buy we can give this um like put it in a game I think there's a lot there and I am excited to see some I guess a good protocols come out I need to I I should probably make a list and start tracking them um I'm sure all and stuff will also come out with cool stuff I just like the second iteration is always good like much much better obviously but um and new coins are good um Prime it's it's it's still early like not to say that like you should just go buy anything but more to the point that like we'll see some of these collapse to zero we'll see some of these go to insane Heights before then collapsing to zero like I mean when we're talking about meme coins like I mean they are their namesake so you know obviously you know buying some goat like you don't you don't really have any ownership over that agent or like any claim to fame there so um yeah I think we'll we'll hopefully see more examples I mean right now there's like some picks and shovels right like you can bet on some of these platforms there's like the virtuals protocol there's um why am I blank on this we just talked about it the um the the ai6 Z equivalent one um AIU or whatever it whatever it's called um it's there's a million of them eort Capital show something this morning made think like wow there's a bunch of platforms trying to run like this kind of pix and shovels like pump fun of of Agents thing which we'll see how much staying power that has I mean the reality is that like the people that are really like innovating at the next tier it's probably going to be where all the kind of the excitement and attention goes to in the same way that like the open AIS the claws you know the anthropics of the world are the ones that are like they're pushing the boundaries that's where like the the real Innovative stuff is happening not the guy who's making the 10th copy of a Donald Trump AI agent and dropping it on virtuals protocol so um yeah I I think we're early because there aren't really a lot of things to um like really directly bet on this narrative in the public markets yet I agree with you I've never done this view before weird really weird because I wasn't here for the Jess P episode I had pneumonia um all right let's um let's end it thank you for coming on I really appreciate it thanks for having me and uh maybe one takeaway I got one takeaway because you mentioned it real quickly around different platforms I think we're going to see some weird stuff we're going to see an agent with that goes crazy on only fans we're going to see an agent that goes crazy on YouTube um I think it'll happen we'll see some we'll see some like top creators that are not people basically in a year yeah I completely agree with you I will also say this stuff makes me really sad um but on the other hand it also like I've always been kind of like a I've I tend to kind of get doomish not about like price going up and stuff but like about the world I'm like oh the world is is going so [ __ ] man um but I will say my mind's changed a little bit because I realized that I've been able to like capably use AI to improve workflows sometimes up to like 70 80% so my fear was always oh like AI um as like we're just going to accelerate it into digital like our lives are going to be increasingly digital um the the good the good news there is that like I've improve moved my workflow so much that I can I can increasingly spend outside time outside um which has them in the case these past few weeks because the Mark is ridiculous but yeah I think that's a good point I think the um the potential downside is like you know less and less using my human brain and more and more using the AI brain to think for me um I just I see there's like a there's like a television part two where like you know people sit in front of the AI machine and it just like does all their thinking for them which you know maybe that's good maybe that's bad maybe like you say it just allows us to touch more grass in the future yeah I think if definitely if you're using AI a lot to do like a lot of work stuff I would recommend first of all I would recommend not doing that I think like people should I like to write down on pen and paper what I want to like for reports and stuff I'll first do my whole outline on pen and paper um which is kind of annoying actually but like it's it's much much better for me I think um and then I'll do all day I stuff I want to do like Grand I think the Young Generation is gonna be they're skipping those steps entirely they're going straight to the prompter and they're saying you know this is my assignment give me what do I need yeah yeah that's true um but you know maybe there's something else waiting in store for us some like deeper level of Education that can be achieved via you know AI assistance we'll see we're getting we're you're going to make me do more again one thing I will say is that I think like most people get what they like people just figure out what they should be doing throughout different ages um and they'll figure out like you you can do all of your assignments on like whatever chbt um and it can say stuff like oh in the science landscape this this this happens um but eventually they'll realize that they have to think for a little bit or they get one-shotted by the singularity and they just they just never think again yeah I I guess it's not really any different than you know the kid who copies their homework from someone else and then they when they have to think about what they actually want to do they're screwed yeah I don't know yeah I guess um maybe maybe not some what is that I don't know what the hell happened all right call it there maybe thanks guys thanks for listening [Music]

========================================

--- Video 68 ---
Video ID: zfEk1uB-vcE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zfEk1uB-vcE
Title: Hyperliquid, Crypto AI, Cycle Dynamics, and Optimal Exits | 0xSmac, Tervo & Tolks
Published: 2024-11-14 16:05:56 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Tolks, Tervo, and Smac! We discussed maintaining prediction market momentum, Hyperliquid’s upcoming airdrop, and beta trades in crypto. We also speculated on the diversity of returns going forward, private market activity, and decentralized AI. Finally, Smac gave his views on DePIN, and optimal exit strategies. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category. 

The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked. 

Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
--
Fuel Ignition launches as a high-performance Ethereum L2, running on consumer hardware to combat blockchain centralization. Powered by FuelVM, it offers fast, low-cost transactions with Ethereum and Solana wallet support. Explore our growing ecosystem of DApps for crypto management, DEXs, lending, and more. 

Visit fuel.network to learn more and start building for tomorrow, today!
--
Follow Tolks: https://x.com/_tolks
Follow Tervo: https://x.com/tervoooo
Follow Smac: https://x.com/0xsmac
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:26 Maintaining Prediction Market Momentum
9:39 Will Hyperliquid Die Out Post Airdrop?
18:40 Beta Trades in Crypto
22:31 Diversity of Returns Going Forward
31:28 Chaos Labs Ad
32:01 Fuel Ad
32:24 Private Market Activity 
36:49 What Needs to Be Built?
41:01 Crypto x AI
54:50 Views on DePIN
1:06:25 Regulatory Change, Inning Talk, and Optimal Exits
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 69 ---
Video ID: Vfqw1yR_JQg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vfqw1yR_JQg
Title: Better Regulation, Markets Up, and Web3 Gaming | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-11-13 15:31:24 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss the post election crypto boom, the impact improved regulatory frameworks will have on crypto, and what sectors of crypto stand to benefit the most from this new regulatory climate. They also dive into “Ethereum 3.0” and Unichain. Finally, they close out the episode with discussion on the liquid restaking sector, and Web3 gaming. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Beam: A Better Web3 Gaming Index - https://x.com/defi_kay_/status/1854551344532865361
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Daniel: https://x.com/_dshap
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Join the 0xResearch Telegram group: https://t.me/+z0H6y2bS-dllODVh
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:16 The Golden Bull Run is Here
7:17 Regulatory Impacts on DeFi
14:24 What Will Benefit From Improved Regulation?
19:48 Ethereum 3.0 & Unichain
33:43 The SWELL Launch
41:37 Nillion Snippet
50:19 Beam & Web3 Gaming
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 70 ---
Video ID: E4QdCh9uEio
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E4QdCh9uEio
Title: Building Models For Coins, Fixing Arbitrum, and Intents| Brick & Tumilett
Published: 2024-11-07 15:00:53 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Brick from Entropy Advisors, and Tumilett from the Spartan Group! We discussed the importance of fundamentals in crypto, memecoin and DePIN activity on Solana, crosschain intents, and wallet value capture. Finally, we dove into the Aribitrum ecosystem and its place in the L2 landscape.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

ARB: A Timeboost Turnaround?: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/flashnotes/arb-a-timeboost-turnaround

Unichain: Liquidity (Potentially) Begets Liquidity: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/flashnotes/unichain-liquidity-potentially-begets-liquidity

Across Protocol: Based on Intents: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/research/across-protocol-based-on-intents
--
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category. 

The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked. 

Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
--
Fuel Ignition launches as a high-performance Ethereum L2, running on consumer hardware to combat blockchain centralization. Powered by FuelVM, it offers fast, low-cost transactions with Ethereum and Solana wallet support. Explore our growing ecosystem of DApps for crypto management, DEXs, lending, and more. 

Visit fuel.network to learn more and start building for tomorrow, today!
--
Follow Entropy Advisors: https://x.com/EntropyAdvisors
Follow Spartan Group: https://x.com/TheSpartanGroup
Follow Brick: https://x.com/0x___Brick
Follow Tumilett: https://x.com/tumilett
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:36 Overview of Entropy & Spartan
5:02 How Important Are Fundamentals in Crypto?
13:43 Memecoin and DePIN Activity on Solana
25:43 Chaos Labs Ad
26:16 Fuel Ad
26:39 Crosschain Intents & Wallet Value Capture
38:03 The Arbitrum Ecosystem
45:54 Dealing with Governance Participants
47:34 Arbitrum's Position in the L2 Landscape
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
I'd say the market is still pretty young and one thing I think about often times is like at least when I used to do like I don't know more liquid stuff or trade on my own am I going too deep into this analysis like for example trying to do su of parts in crypto is pretty pointless right now because like nobody thinks that deeply I feel like most coins basically trade on like shortterm narratives that might not even always be like fundamentally sound chaos Labs the leading onchain risk management firm recently launched its new flagship oracal product Edge Edge delivers integrated High Precision risk and price data for any application with the market follow and reach out to chaos Labs on X to learn more what's up guys just want to tell you a little bit more about fuel labs and their new ethereum L2 fuel ignition so fuel Labs is launching fuel ignition a high performance E2 powered by their fuel VM with the launch of ignition the team is also launching phase two for their fuel points program to reward users and promot make sure to check out fuel. Network to learn more nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice Pacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of ZX research today I'm joined by Ryan Connor from the blockworks research team as well as brick from entropy and Jose from Spartan uh thanks for Brick they should be familiar with you but Jose maybe you want to give a little background on yourself and then brick you can also talk a bit about entropy as well absolutely yeah uh I can go first so let me start with the background of Spartan and then I can introduce myself so Spartan is uh Broly composed of three main pillars first the fundamental Ren hedge fund we take long-term views and also cataly trades in altcoins that we're bullish on and this is basically where I spend my time on secondly there's the Venture arm with two funds focus on Defi and infra and the other one focus on gaming and lastly is like an advisory team that handles m&a fundraising and economics design for myself um I got into crypto during college while I was on an International Exchange in the US around 2021 when crypto was going parabolic started like er farming flipping nfts mainly to cover like this expenses that I was having on on on the exchange um yeah it was like my way of earning something extra in crypto and I guess what drew me to work in this space is actually like I really like the mer the meritocracy of it uh from a double perspective first because there is a lot of Alpha and if you work and um spend time on it you can like discover these so-called undervalue tokens either by reading a lot of governance proposals looking at dashboards or creating ones yourself you know how to program with you in SQL um yeah there are like a lot of marketing efficiencies and that's opportunity and the second aspect is that if if if you basically like spend a lot of time and you want to work in the space you can just get out there start delivering actual insights and you will get recognized and that's basically what call me into spot and having in the fun for one year and a half um and yeah mainly focusing on liquid markets and I remember meeting brick on Twitter back in the days when I was doing the first interviews and he started doing them also at blog works and now here we are fantastic yeah I completely agree with you on the meritocracy thing I think it's quite underrated about crypto you can do stuff like you can just do stuff and people will notice and you can make money because it's very inefficient yeah brovich I am here for you um yeah going back to that beautiful moment Jose to be on the podcast which one of the first people in the crypto industry I really like connected with and yeah as you said I quickly joined block Works after that most probably know me uh who are listening to the this podcast like through that but recently transferred over to entropy where basically if you want to put it into tradify terms a consulting firm or act into a consulting firm we're currently uh in an exclusive deal with arbitrum uh trying to make the Dow more efficient uh basically writing governance proposals trying to align key stakeholders doing all of that good good stuff uh we've been in the deal for two months now uh things are going really well a lot of interesting stuff going on on that front uh thanks for inviting me on this podcast guys thanks for coming on I um I think I want to talk about arbitrium and then we'll also talk about uni chain uh we talked about it a bit before we started to our listeners but to get started the main reason that I wanted to have both of you guys on as well as Ryan Connor is I trade basically exclusively on narratives um as well as some I guess like fundamental stuff but as far as I've seen both on your Twitter like brick i' I knew you I don't really know you that well any more but I when I did know you and Ryan Connor as well big cash flow guy um how much do you think fundamentals matter within crypto Ryan left he doesn't like talking about this topic but maybe we can start off with brick yeah I mean he's clearly the big boss now if he can just like leave the leave the podcast come back in when he wants to huh but yeah I think fundamentals really matter but I'd say the market is still pretty young and one thing I I think about often times is like at least when I used to do like I don't know more liquid stuff or trade on my own now I'm just a you know full-time entropy guy don't really have time to trade that much anyway um like one thing I always thought about is like am I going too deep into this analysis like for example trying to do some of parts in crypto is pretty pointless right now cuz like nobody thinks that deeply another example would be people don't think far enough in the future like I feel like most coins basically trade on like shortterm narratives that might not even always be like fundamentally sound and like cash flow to token holders isn't really a thing it's more about is this protocol making a lot of fees or Revenue even though there's no clear way to like actually earn those fees as those holder like it can the value flow can go somewhere completely else but the main thing that like I feel like a lot of coins trade on are like those high level numbers and the industry is still in a point where like we a lot of people disagree on like even the basics like what's the pnl or what's the income of like an L1 or can you even build that for an L1 and like what are operating or well I guess yeah like what are operating costs for diesel to I don't know I'm kind of yapping here but I guess my point is that there's like no standardized way or well adapted way yet to like value a lot of these things as well as then people don't look into the future like far enough in my opinion which then makes the like investing scheme completely different from Trad five well you have like funds that start like you know they talked with uh the C Corp they're trying to figure out like especially in more stable Industries like oh what's going to happen to like this company in like six years or seven years out in the future and here it's more about like oh what's going to happen today what's going to be the big narrative that's my two cents I guess um I totally agree I think uh we or the space has to agree on those on those things and but it's also like where the space is going I think it may not be trading on fundamentals now but it will be increasingly trading on we're seeing that right now for in two things it's like sell side and B side and buy side sell side is getting better fundamental based coverage here blog Works obviously so we are seeing like this growing number of research companies and uh data providers D analytics defi Lama kaido uh blow gr research uh dashboards on Celestia and all of that um and then on the bu side I think if you think like crypto is growing 10x then the incremental buyer is likely to be a liquid fund uh which is more of like an Institutional player training fundamental based approach right um uh yeah and actually there's like this new thing uh that I don't know if you guys know bit Club but Jason from folus released it a few months ago and it's where kind of a face a value investors Club where analysts and liquid guys share investment thesis uh they share the Frameworks and uh many people there can play de Devil's Advocate into asking questions and kind of contesting some thesis and it's pretty cool um and again yeah yeah the space may not be fundamental based right now but it will be and it will be increasingly be more um but again like not iory to like you have to be Crypton native I'm a de at heart and for me fundamentals like are always Revenue even cash flows to token holders I think that's like kind of a limited way of saying it fundamentals are like what's important for the market right now and what the market is tracking for a spe for a specific protocol uh you briefly mentioned about even for per taxes rather than cash flow return to token holders like more most people just focus on poor volume or volume based market shares why because it's like easily accessible on defa Lama because defa Lama right now it's pretty much like the only agreed data provider side where most of the people look at if they want to buy a token or if they want to compare to like a basic relative valuation um same for Lending protocols if you look at historical correlations they're mostly correlated on TBL and not really on volum on on on earnings um and why again because it's easily accessible on theama um and yeah and to briefly mention here I actually think one of the main reasons why salana has been doing great since last year is probably because of you guys uh at blorg salana data your good coverage and um also the fact that relative value traits historically have been performing good if was kind of having troubles with the narrative uh that was the opportunity for salana salana found its way with the Meco and yeah that's that's pretty much I guess two things to I want to like kind of touch on that you talked about first one would be I mean I'm I I went be definitely clear on the fact that like value investing kind of still works and I think a good example of that not to glaz you too much so say but like uh the across stuff you posted about on Twitter it was across right like six months ago or whatever and like nobody was really paying attention to that so that's just to me like you're thinking about that market vertical in a very fundamental way and there's like no clear like kind of narrative right now that's like easy to Market or was back in the day and then suddenly like it's a good fundamentally good project it starts like expanding a lot and then the market like catches on to it and I thought that was a really good example of like kind of how you should do liquid investing in crypto yeah I I to be honest I I got into the cross trade if you can call it that just by trying the products like I was bridging all the time and I tried every bridge out there and across was the fastest and the cheapest one then I got into like why is this happening like is there some tradeoff insecurity out there and it wasn't it's just a good mechanism design um and then you start like talking to the team you build the thesis you see kind of where the space is going um and you build like a gross story right yeah yeah and then the second part I guess this goes out to The Block Works panel um how do you feel about like the whole salana stuff with especially I think what the market is now kind of attaching itself to is purely what you guys call I guess real economic value which is basically like transaction fees plus than me tips or GTO tips um and if you look at for example ethereum like the chart is if you map it out in the previous cycle like the charts are pretty much following each other right where like the fees explode kind of in the bull market and then they just like immediately drop so I guess what I'm asking is like where do you see Solana's future because like what happens if mcoin trading basically leaves the chain what's the next thing that can like uphold The Narrative apart from memecoins leaving my whole thing has like these past few weeks I've been Solana gets really really congested to the point that I don't like me coins leaving might not be the issue but I think like the only the big issue that it's going to face is congestion and just transactions consistently failing throughout the B I think that's like I don't think mem coins leave because it doesn't make a lot of sense like it's fast the infrastructure is there there's ecosystem around it like you can borrow on Meme coins you can even short New Meme coins for like dumpy do fun and stuff um I think their main problem is not going to be meme coins leaving it's going to be the fact that you can't use the chain but at that point do fundamentals or matter probably not I think The Narrative is going to be oh like so people are actually using Solana that's why the chain is down as opposed to arbitrum or polygon you know Ryan you can give a more well-rounded and good answer yeah so I think just to kind of like piggyback on what you guys were saying earlier and how much fundamentals um matter or don't matter um I think that they objectively matter the question is always just how much um and I think if you want to explore that you can kind of like look no further than the sole eth ratio over the past 12 months um if we look at like this new measure of real economic value call Price to real economic value or price to sales um you know salana started out the year trading somewhere around 50 times sales whereas ethereum was trading at somewhere around 300 times sales and then that varies depending on your forward growth rate right right but like eths was clearly declining um their growth in rev is 93% or more off its highs and the plan is to grow it less right and salana was going in the precise opp Opposite direction right compounding on a year-over-year basis at like 1200 uh 12 1200% something like that um you don't get setups like that in trafi but you had it in crypto and like the so eth pair expressed that valuation Gap and those forward expectations now like does the market always do that like no right like there's a path dependency to crypto we started trading like you know arbitrary like pieces of tokens on ledgers and over time they made more money and over time institutions came in and they started trading marginally based on those fundamentals and like the conversations that we have with Subs um everyone asks me what the valuations are everyone asks about fees everyone ask where you think the fees are going um I think some of the most well-known funds in the space like they'll tell you like we want to invest on a 12 to 24mth time Horizon and we do do some narrative trading but like fundamentals are always in the backdrop right so like how does that change um going forward with more institutions entering the space like I think the answer is very obvious um like you probably have a part a portion of crypto that always trades on like silly stuff and that's fine it's a permissionless thing but like the capital is going to make these things look more like you know stocks or bonds than crypto tokens over the long term uh but things can stay silly for a long time um I think to answer Brick's question about like salana fundamentals and meme coin trading um I think a good analyst will discount that activity to some degree in their forward estimates I think that a you know a good analyst will realize that salana activity is going to fall 70% or greater in a bare Market but I don't see that being very different from any other chain I think that historically you know this is a very levered space I think they all fall 70 to 90% in a bare Market as they have historically as people get wiped out as market makers blow up like it's the only ecosystem on the planet where you can do 100x trading and people do it and it impacts uh Market positioning and price action so um I think a good analyst discounts those things but with like the understanding that like dude it's everyone's going to blow up uh Dan Smith at blockworks is always um pointing out that um you know if you look at the top gas consumers on eth it's all memec coin trading too it's like the Pepe pair right so I don't know um salana is certainly win winning with this meme coin activity but like does it matter a lot cross ccle like I don't really think so yeah I guess what I'm getting at more is like what's the future there like I I totally get why the valuation is up right now by the way you talked about the multiple uh I guess similar to price to sales price to real economic value like has he expanded in this um like recent times or has it kind of stayed stable with RV growing yeah if you're going to if you're going to look at an easy way to calculate this is just to take the last one or three months and annualize it if you just want to normalize for like zero growth across the board and we're trading at a little over a hundred times on salana um eth depending on how you want to slice it is like between 200 and 300 times onized yeah and it the the valuation Gap is still there right um so well that's the decentralized premium you get huh correct that's that that's money premium that's the centralization premium vitalic premium I don't know what you want to call it but it is an objective premium to Soul but not to other chains right like arbitrum is trading without time boost um on a trailing basis at like somewhere like 200 times uh maybe like 150 I forget umu is trading at 2,000 times like now like there's a growth story ahead of it but like does s have more monetary premium than eth like I don't know you tell me I you can't parse it from the data um so big question mark um for Brick what you said I guess like next steps for Solana apart from mem coins I guess it's deepen no Ryan you a big deepen guy but that's like the thing that's touted I I don't I think it could be I just feel like deepen isn't a huge huge fee um bringer I'm not sure though Ryan maybe you're I mean that's kind of what I'm saying here like yeah you can get activity on your network but for example deep in transactions I don't think they really would produce that much value for like the network itself and I think this is the trend that we're kind of going towards with everything so like at the end of the day like L1 tokens should be I guess valued more on like a utility basis or money basis or whatever that like comp is there uh which isn't an easy task to do like again someone would need to standardize that but like where I'm getting at with this salana stuff is that like right now everyone's super hyped about like all of this especially like the part of the fees like they're raking in and like it's all just meme coin Traders getting kind of screwed on the chain and my thesis is that that will go away at some point so like do you see kind of the chain being able to compensate for that with something else or will it more become like a similar narrative as it has become in the last 6 to 12 months where it's like yeah we don't actually need like execution fees we can do da even though I feel like that's a bad argument or then like replace those Fe with something else I will say one thing Daniel Smith made a good point about this thing he said the act the token price doesn't have to be like High um and I think like instead of valuing these on utilities or whatever money it the price just might go down because we keep valuing them as fees but they actually make more and more sense um I agree with you though brick it's like if your bull cases idiots will keep like slamming gas to and paying priority fees to like get their transactions for that's not particularly sustainable um I just and also just quickly to say I got to give a disclaimer here I have nothing against salana uh salana fanbo and Twitter don't don't come after me it's all L Bros uh yeah Jose I would like to I would like to hear what you have to think and how Spartan things but um I yeah I I I always think people find a way on gambling on chain like I think there's a s trade of people wanting to do stuff on chain if that's gambling Let It Be it um like if you look is um sports betting Revenue over the last two years they've been growing like two act every year St suddenly became like this huge um Revenue generating company it's private we don't know the valuation really but still like it's something that is happening even even like here's the AI agent thesis even if it's not like actual users on chain maybe it's like AI agents using uh salana blockchain as the payment rails for doing all of the AI interactions or uh I don't know some weird stuff that maybe we are not thinking about yet um but it will happen like I'm I'm pretty confident in that what Solana or whatever blockchain maybe um so the gas usage or whatever blockchain may be in the future will be very different from now and but it will still be like execution fee driven I think just different I guess all stuff yeah I think um I mean look to to Bak with asking if you know dpin are going to drive a lot of fee activity for the chain like the answer for any sector or token is no the things that drive fees for the chain are traders who need specific access to pieces of State who want to pay high priority fees because they see some opportunity in front of them um it's a better model than traditional exchanges like the L1 model and that not only are you paying on a per transaction basis but you're also paying on a priority basis um so like what's going to keep Traders on Chains It's going to be interesting assets to trade so the more deep in issuers you have or the more like a and Camino and you know legit projects issuing their token on your chain um that's going to be the thing that's going to drive fees um so you know what's it's I'm not so much concerned and regarding the meme coin thing I'm I'm not so much concerned with people losing money on Meme coin activity and that being bad for people because people like to lose money on a lot of things um like one of the fastest growing Industries in the united states is gambling it's growing at gez like five times the rate of GDP and every male in my friend group is losing money every week on DraftKings and they're they're happy as a clam they do not care um so it's it doesn't bother me that memec coin trading is extractive I think it's just people having fun um there is some natural cap on that activity um I don't I don't know where it is though if it's anything close to sports betting like I don't think we've I don't think we're there yet by the way your friends are weird because I don't like losing money I don't think they like it they think they have edgetic Edge they don't have realized Edge chaos Labs the leading onchain risk management firm recently launched its new flagship Oracle product Edge Edge delivers integrated High Precision risk and price data for any application with the market after 2 months of securing Jupiter Edge has already secured 30 billion in volume and more than 60 % of all Salon of per volume edges comprised of three components High Precision price data with an integrated risk engine automated delivery of real-time parameter adjustments on chain and secure delivery of custom data points Bea zero knowledge proofs follow and reach out to chaos Labs on X to learn more thanks again to chaos labs for sponsoring today's episode what's up guys fuel ignition is finally here fuel ignition is a high performance L2 solution that aims to solve both state sustainability and performance execution as an e for allout ignition is built upon the fuel VM and a utxo based asset Centric architecture with e security make sure to check out the growing fuel ecosystem by participating in phase two of the fuel points program today visit fuel. Network to learn more B Jose what are some I guess specific sectors that you guys have been interested in uh I mean obviously intense right I we published a report this week with the centralized Co guys they're like a a research newsletter in the space it's one of my favorites um and we basically basically got into how we think the intense at least cross chain intense supply chain will play out what different plays Will there be um and where we see value flowing and yeah like basically briefly there will be like three key players first the front ends uh where you basically go it's like your normal tabs think of across Unis swop one inch any front end any5 front end you go and you select what you want to do on chain um then you have the the solvers this third party that are sophisticated actors that completes the user orders and then the last um the last part of the layer is the sediment Network which is the other line infra that handles sediment sediment understood as intent fulfillment verification so like the verification that the solver fronted the user on the destination chain that that happened and also the second part is repaying the solver that front of the capital so they have to be repayed by the user your uh initial capital on the deposit chain or whatever um so those are the free key players or free key layers and then where value flows there it's basically solvers getting commoditized and value flowing either Upstream to the front ends because they they hold the orderflow orator power or D stre to the sement network because um they can offer differentiated Futures to solvers and charge them for those Futures that make their life feure when solving user orders um I I can go deeper into anything there feel like yeah but that's pretty much the the brief on ask one question about the the value side and that's do you think that wallets will be able to capture any value because to me it makes so much sense for like rabby to just introduce some solver Network into it exactly exactly so the way it will probably work in the future is you will have rabit introduce some kind of chat where like your arit show can go on it and say hey I just saw this on Twitter I want to get exposure to this or let me know what's happening on Twitter and what's my best risk adjusted way of getting exposed to this trade or like to this shield on Def whatever chain it's on and use whatever assets I have on this wallet whether they are on like on a on a layer two on e minet um and you just basically specify that to the solver on a standardized way which is what uh that standard the ERC 763 enables a standardizing hint and orders and you enable the solver to handle all of that for you uh so the future is like probably like the wallets introducing this kind of chat um that pars the the user orders into like an llm and the LM speeds out an order for the solver yeah brick I want to get into your f as well but before last thing for intense my biggest fear happened to me last week and I got slipped 8% on intense and that's my like big bare case for intense is I'm getting dominated by toxic flow like sophisticated solver just nobody else feels me and this guy fills me that's solvable that's solvable and and the way to solve it is you slash the solver so you implement like um even you can use igon layer to do that so so you have the solvers post bonds every time they want to solve in your action and if they behave badly like they did with you with the 8% slippage you can just slash them and they will never do it again at least yeah yeah I was going to say like my knowledge in this vertical is pretty limited but I guess I want to hear your take on uh like the wall wallet front of things or like commoditizing wallets because basically I saw kind of counter take to what you was just talking about where the take was basically that most apps will introduce their like own wallets as well which means that at the end of the day like in the future it's actually the like DBS themselves that get used that have most of the value flow even in that like vertical because like they also own the wallet that the end user is kind of transacting on and especially if you get into a situation where like you get that apps uh on your phone or like phone usage in crypto increases more than like you just open a certain app let's say I don't know the vertex app you go in there and the wallet is just like it's kind of abstracted from you but the DAP itself like owns it yeah I so the frontend category includes both wallets or apps I haven't really think about what what's the split between or what's the power dynamics uh on DS versus wallet but probably still I think the the one that is closest to the user which is the the wallet right even when that's abstracted away if that's the closest thing to the user that should hold the most amount of power on this like value flow Dynamics on all of that um that will be my only take there yeah I yeah there there there's this there's this notion that being closer to the end consumer is um you know there's a moop there that you get to extract more value to me that sounds in some senses it's true right if you own the Ender user relationship you should get more value from it there's like a cost per click analysis that you could do it's just harder to make those hops um but what about crypto makes that different I mean like the fact that I can like take my wallet address and just put it into another wallet and like very easily change seems to be like a much lower Moe than what you see in web 2 but I don't know what about the nature of crypto might change that Dynamic do you guys think I mean I'd want to say that the switching costs should be like exponentially lower also taking or like counting for the fact that like it's just kind of quote unquote easier to become a service provider or like the application layer itself like if you think about I don't know arbitrarily saying Amazon here like you can just build up another Amazon like that and then somebody goes and like can order stuff on your website but in crypto it's like oh let's say this wallet or like this burps de is like bad or it has too high fees or whatever somebody else can like relatively easily spin up another similar product that should be good and basically just like undercut the other player but that's not really what has been happening at least on the wallet side right like in my mind metam mask is probably again no hate against metamask but like one of the worst user experiences I've had and then like I of course started out with that switch to Rabbi uh and not endorsed by Rabbi nothing like that but like that's the kind of evm wallet I use and it's just like so much better so so much better and I actually tried to do some stuff on metam mask a few weeks ago again and it just reminded me of like how big the difference is and still like I guess metam mask is the biggest wallet Provider by a large amount maybe but like it's just mindboggling to me that it's so sweet easy to like switch from one wallet to another or like wallet provider to another and still people keep using the same stuff yeah and like one example of the amount of power that metamask has if you actually look they introduce a new update future a few months ago it's called smart transactions they did it with mechanism group it's basically like an me protection where the me that gets recaptured from their users actually does not get it's not like given back to back uh to the users they just keep it for themselves it's not like M blocker where they give it back it's not like M share from flash where they do give it back it's just metamask activating it and they haven't been really public about it of giving it back yet but yeah uh and if you look like historically number of transactions of ethereum M that go through the private mle after that upgrade go through it went like from 20% I think to like 40% um so it was like pretty impactful and yeah still no no MB back for the ones that have it yeah about the wallets um brick I think you're right mamas has like still relatively dominant but is losing market share but about this topic in general I think this is actually one of the things that Unis swof does maybe like good for us analysts um like they went out and built out their own Wallet app so we can see if that actually impacts their fundamentals and they're also building out their own chain so we can see if that's going to work out as well but I think that's got to be what you track like are people actually going to use the Unis swap wallet because how easy are they going to make it are they going to continue shafting people on the front end even if it's the wallet um so that'll probably be the best way to keep track of it as opposed to I don't know like who else is going to capture the value I like you said Ryan I'm not really like sure how relevant Wallace will be but to me it makes a lot like if there was a mobile mobile app moonshot Etc um and there was a wallet that was as good as that that to me would be difficult to switch away from one thing you can do is uh account abstraction stuff like privy um and you can make it more difficult for people to take their keys from one service to another but that seems a bit antithetical to keep the like against not your keys not your coins I mean I I think that's kind of nextg crypto user though like I hate that I have to be responsible for my own stuff I want someone to blame if my assets are stolen and I want them to have an insurance policy on that um that like immediately top me up if they get hacked um and I'm not going to have that for myself personally um and it's very um there's an established Norm around not custody your own assets and you know big funds like service providers that do that like I'm sure every big fund in the crypto space uses a custodian they don't self custody right um I think that's the next wave and and metamask does have a pro a pro um they have like some custody solution there right like I think you need one for retail too I don't know when right because it's still crypto natives but that's one thing suie does with ZK login maybe that's why they have the 2000 multiple because they have a very good ZK login page um brick what about you what sectors are you focused on I mean really just on this one AKA arbitrum uh I haven't like really traded in a while I guess I've talked about this before in the podcast but like what I usually try to do is just like time the cycle so like I try to buy semi early or if there's like a big Catalyst idea I think can run until end of the cycle I'll go into that and then if I have like some spare time I try to do some liquid investing but um like I'm still in Tia somewhat I've been starting to sell on that front like the pump was over so for context I bought like pretty early after the token generation event or whatever the right term there is hold held through the massive pump and then imagine that now this narrative will continue and now it's been at like what six five four bucks for a while and I think it's time to start getting out of there uh sold my near bags I think a few months ago did some SOI farming I actually bought in a pretty bad position like not in this recent pump but the pump before that uh I think my average entry was something like 180 or something like that then I just started farming um what's it called aftermath and then the market dropped or Su dropped like what almost 50% and I was like yeah that wasn't the best idea ever but luckily it came back and I was like yeah I'm done with this uh other than that I haven't really like deeply looked into anything else than like outside of arbitman just like since I'm super deep working in the ecosystem like now investing just looking at kind of how to make the ecosystem better if that makes sense brick what are you doing at arbitrum what I'm doing myself or what the team is doing or yeah yeah yeah want to hear more about arbitrum and your guys rolling it is Sam around well yes you want to him to jump in here uh yeah basically we we work super closely with the Dow as I said like we have a exclusive inclusive contract with them basically trying to like um ideate ourselves as well as then like gather ideas and consensus from like key stakeholders and like key thought figures and all of those people to like create proposals basically that push the ecosystem forward as well as then like introducing new partners uh to the Dow itself and I think for example what I've been working on for the past I think a month and a half uh is called upo basically a dow adjacent like legal entity that would have the uh like ability to hire service providers into the legal entity as well as then like kind of creating an operations arm for the D so You' get more like of these operational type roles because a lot of D struggle with the fact that like you have one off ini iives that get like started which don't play together in any way like there's kind of no mesh layer of information in most ecosystems or in most Dows and everyone's just like incentivized to push toward their own initiative and this would kind of be a way to create uh a unifying factor for all of those like initiatives and basically like trying to make operations more efficient by I don't want to use the word centralized but like like concentrate people into a structure where like ecosystem contributors more easily can like read synergies by for example like sharing information more efficiently and getting like to a point where everyone's kind of working in a unified manner um another thing we kind of floated was increasing the base fee for arbitrum but that was somewhat contentious so we dropped it because it also seem that like the new meta for l2s is just to like you know pump the gas limit to infinity and like get as many transactions as possible in there um and I'll mention one more thing and that's like we're currently trying to formalize a Mission Vision purpose for the do uh which would then lead into another proposal which we're calling the Strategic objective setting framework which would basically allow um anyone in the Dow to propose one to two year goals for the Dow like interim goals that would push the Dow towards its Mission Vision purpose so trying to like kind of get everybody on the same page and big shout out to Lio because they kind of came up with this structure and we've just like um kind of taking that and formulated it into a format that we think suits arbitr pretty well like SL of Rus uh Rus yeah exactly or it was originally called goose and then because of the uh not LST but reaking narrative started like they had to kind of yeah refocus or Rego their like strategic objectives which is why uh hu posted the Rego proposal but that ecosystem is also interesting or that project because hu is like of course really well respected really like smart guy and he has the ability to like kind of direct the whole D with what he's saying while in arbitrum like you got a spectrum you have like the builders on one side and then I guess what would be the other side kind of the investors who whoever and then like the builders right now kind of want to grow the ecosystem as fast as possible don't care about like profitability and then do that stuff later while then like the investor side is more I feel like let's take it easier uh I don't know maybe they're trying to save their unlocks or like save some um juice for their unlocks in the next few years uh but yeah it's like arbit is a super super interesting ecosystem because like you have such a wide range of like different actors and it's a good and a bad thing at the same time right like you get a lot of different ideas but then sometimes like consolidating everything and getting everyone on like an equal page can be uh pretty challenging I have a bunch of questions about this but before that I want to ask Jose when you guys invest do you do any activist investing or do you get involved in those or are you mostly trying to stay out of it as much as possible and just let your analysis do the work I share the analysis on Twitter so like not really activist investing in terms of like making the Dow Mak make changes either on management or on turning on fee switch it's mostly like sharing the feces on Twitter making people realize through coverage that something may be undervalued or that there is a good growth story there for a specific protocol in a vertical or whatever um but not really like yeah like making it making them turning on this the switch order yeah yeah that makes sense brick I have two uh questions but I think the first one you're going to Yap about a lot so I'm going to ask that one um later in terms of actors and dealing with them what's been like the toughest thing on and I I actually want to have Sam and Matt on from entropy as well block Works might get upset with me at some point about this but I really want because like governance is something that like I don't do we have a governance arm but I don't do any governance stuff so I like is it annoying to deal with people especially I assume with delegates and protocols there's a lot of conflicts of interest and you can stay diplomatic but how what's your experience thanks for giving me that permission I mean I think it's just an interesting set of actors you get to like be with and it's super like it's been a super like thoughtful Pro not thoughtful what's the correct word I'm looking for here like I've learned a lot from that process basically because like you need to be able to kind of put yourself in many people's shoes and at the end of the day like um yeah I mean entropy has a delegation as well but we're like trying to stay or especially when we're like working on something that's going to be implemented into the Dow like we want to stay neutral and just like take everybody's opinion uh into account which can be quite hard sometimes but it's been like a great way to basically learn how to communicate within the like crypto industry and yeah I've always been more of like a valuations guy uh so this has definitely like made my whole skill set more robust if that makes sense that makes sense I think my last thing is and Jose I also want you to bring in your uni chain um discussion in here how will arbitrum or how do you see arbitrum positioning itself because l2s I mean base is dominating optimism has pretty good BD which is apparently just giving out $45 million chains to come on but like how do you see arbitrum and Jose I guess how do you see do you see unic chain being a competitor to arbitrum or is it just we're all growing ethereum well maybe I'll start by talking about the arbit stuff and I mean that's kind of the um through the Mission Vision purpose proposal we've like made that's one of the key things we've laid out that like at the end of the day arbitrum is trying to like just scale ethereum without compromis and I know this is kind of something that a lot of people get like dunked on on Twitter for saying like oh we're just scaling here and then somebody else comes and says like yeah but you're taking the execution fees away from the L1 that turns out to into another like fully Com or different uh conversation but at the end of the day that's also how I see it like we're just like trying to scale the L1 and I know it can lead into some like fees being missed out on basically but I think the model there or we're kind of working towards makes sense at least in my mind what makes arbitrum different I'd say the Dow is probably or like arguably I know you could argue about this but I think the Dow is like probably the best across uh like objectively the best across l2s so like you get a lot of support on that front the foundation is super good but then also like the arbitrum Readiness to like kind of attract Financial actors like real try actors uh in my opinion like sets it a part like that's like the main differentiator between other l2s like I really like Solana's whatever the slogan is like become the onchain NASDAQ or something like that and I see like arbitrum kind of going in that like similar Direction where I could see like those two kind of competing around that stuff and we've actually onboarded a lot of like rwa providers as well recently like real institutions so like I guess that's also where I think like the future is going for arbitrum and as you said like optimism seems to have good VD but at least I'm not like super super familiar what they're doing in background but at least from what I read on uh the internet like it's them giving out tokens while like arbitrum has been at least somewhat organically uh able to like get these uh notable names in the ecosystem sorry I that was a complete like yapping sesh but Brick we're all we all growing a no op versus versus AR we all grow in athere man uh yeah my my my summary of my thoughts on on uni chain uh so I think it's two first it's quite difficult to quantify unit Chain's impact because it will be very dependent on the amount of tbll and volume that moves there um having said that probably like just after lunch which should probably happen this month in a few weeks uh at least they will have 200 mil daily up volume this 200 mil is basically what unisoft x currently has they control that so they can just quickly Lo it on and say oh your you permission market makers are going to start solving on on un chain rather than having your liquidity on on these leros and because they control that autoflow so that's one second um rather than being seram or PVP versus e main or other Le such as arit I really think that their implicit strategy is like going after salana and more if you want to be more crazy or more bullish is going after Texas so my framework is that unisoft um wants to compete with this mean coin offering uh by offering like better ux uh via M protection lower latency lower similar latency to salana uh and does attract mcoin issurance to happen on unit chain rather than no salana because the most important thing here is like where these assets are being issued right um and few reasons why I think this is first their uni chains flash BL flash block uh which reduce the sandwich possibilities and improve the ux of trading m coins if you guys obviously like trading on salana you have to pay like 15% slipage or priority fees uh to get into a radium buy that sucks I mean it's fine because you're you're you got I mean you're searching for a 2X a 3X so you kind of don't care but over time it kind of sucks um so on on uni chain that doesn't have to happen uh that's the first thing secondly there is this project called Doppler uh it's being led by Austin Adams not Hayden but Austin he like another uh developer that used to work for unisoft and now he he's still an adviser in unisoft but now he has his own mechanism design firm um but yeah anyway like Doppler is is just a better P fun it improves the price Discovery phase during the M lunch so you don't get Snipes and you don't get you actually like get F launches and it's built as as a hook on un before so there's like these two things that at the very least should attract some percentage of the solam initions to happen on uni chain um and that's generally the thesis um and yeah obviously they have also a lot of catalyst ahead but in terms of um their implicit straty I think that's that's pretty much it and also maybe for uh a little bit more abstract is like unifying eum through the front ends so once like unisoft X cring future goes live you'll probably like just uh go on the front end and say oh I want to buy bread on base and I have e on this chain and you can do Crossing swaps without even knowing which assets uh which chain your assets are living on yeah that's more into the future for the end of the year or January I guess something that somewhat might tie together on like a higher level un Chen and then arbitrum is like the uniqueness of the Tex teack in a way like you know arbitrum has stylus you can basically code in well I don't want to say whatever language but like it expands on that you got time boost like you're pretty much one of the l2s that's like furthest on the decentralized Spectrum or whatever L2 is calling the if you've seen the pie chart thingy um and different levels of like L2 and then un Chen has the I forget the right name for it but what was it that was built with flash Bots again the flash blocks or the the uni validator set or I think there's an other name for what you're saying but yeah yeah I get what you're referring to Brian do you have any hot takes about uni Chain versus AR I mean I think it's clearly a competition um maybe not today best case scenario but yeah that's that's my hottest take yeah I T I'd say that that was a boring take no I think they'll be more challenged than people think and starting up their own chain like going to an island and starting your own thing is always really really hard um they do have the brand to maybe overcome that um so I think if anyone can do it it's probably Unis swap but there it's it's it's not going to be easy I I do agree with like at then end of the day everyone's competing for users Capital whatever whatever uh I guess still L2 is built on utilizing like ethereum still in my mind like scales ethereum itself but it's true that like l2s probably can be seen as really like competing against each other and like of course interrupt will get better and better and better but I think maybe in the near term what's going to happen is like um I know CK Sync has these chain clusters optimism has the uh super super chain uh standard and like arbitrum is working on a similar uh it was called chain I think it's called arbit from orbit it's the same cluster as as op super chain as polygon cdk as elastic chain of from cing yeah all of those yeah well orbit is just like the the like development or like you can have an L2 or an L3 that's an orbit chain but um I think they call it chain CH clusters or something no well anyway I you get what I'm saying like you'll basically have these hubs where like within for example arbit you can easily move between chains but then it might be a bit more difficult to go from like the arbit MOs system for example to CK sync that makes sense that's why I'm so bullish on across like uh this is like a very brief thesis but it's so the ERC that I was saying before 7683 it's basically like this unifying glue of all of those Layer Two e assistent clusters that you said so when you have like an a user that wants to bridge from uh between op super chains from base to op uh you will be using that ERC to get like instant almost filling automatically transaction and then the solver behind the scenes they can settle through the layer two to ecosystem cluster a specific n and drop so so in terms of user experience it probably is is like cheaper when they reach from op to op super chain um and if the user wants to bridge like from a ecosystem cluster from a optimism to arum it also provides that same level experience maybe a little bit more expensive because they it's like different clusters but again like from the user experience it's just a matter of different fees and this across architecture and this ERC it's basically like this unifying glue of all of ethereum that's why it's also endorsed by ballic and yeah I think it's pretty cool I will say I do like I love intense like before I got butt [ __ ] by Macha I did I I was like I love intense um I do because I remember bridging over I say this every two pods Ryan's probably still comp hearing this but like before I remember bridging using Wormhole to Solana and it's like you got to go on the Discord and say please can I have my money back and now brid is just the easiest thing and so is a cross consistently cheap consistently quick I don't know I'm very happy um so I agree with that Feast solah if there is going to be some goofy multichain world and we're not all on Solana which is bricks nightmare probably that um that's the block works we um yeah I think that's it Ryan do you have anything else you want to say or shall I wrap it up I'm good guys this is a lot of fun should do it again we should um brick Jose thanks for coming on um do you guys want to give out your twitters and brick maybe you can give out the entropy Twitter as well so that people are listeners yeah for sure I'm _ oror break on Twitter yes I need to change that um and you can find entropy advisors on Twitter just entropy advisors fantastic how's it what about you and for myself I'm tumet as it sounds and just another TM so to me L and I'm pretty easy fantastic yeah guys thanks for coming on this was a lot of fun thanks for having us [Music]

========================================

--- Video 71 ---
Video ID: 27Ls_ruAvAs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=27Ls_ruAvAs
Title: Betting On The Election, Altcoins, How Does Polymarket Survive | Analyst Roundtable
Published: 2024-11-05 19:46:45 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by the host of Forward Guidance, Felix Jauvin! We discussed recently released election polls and data, and how the markets might react post election. Additionally, we asked ourselves - are alts cooked if Harris wins? Does the election even matter for crypto cycles? Finally, we closed the episode with a conversation on how Polymarket will perform post election, and revenue drivers for chains and apps.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

﻿Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Felix: https://x.com/fejau_inc
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://x.com/blockworksres
Follow Forward Guidance: https://x.com/forwardguidance

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:48 MacroGCR is in the Trenches
5:44 Election Polls & Data
14:28 The Markets Post Election
26:49 Nillion Snippet
36:50 Are Alts Cooked if Harris Wins?
48:01 Does the Election Even Matter?
54:08 Polymarket Volume Going Forward
1:04:19 Revenue Drivers For Chains and Apps
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 72 ---
Video ID: TbGLfn514c4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TbGLfn514c4
Title: Does Gwart Hate Ethereum?
Published: 2024-10-31 14:31:47 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Gwart joined us to discuss the crypto and AI crossover, his thoughts on the current direction of Ethereum, and ETH’s monetary premium. We also asked can ETH become the global reserve currency? What happens when the cost of mining Bitcoin exceeds the block rewards? Finally, we closed out the episode by unpacking the implications of stablecoins being crypto’s killer use case. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category. 

The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked. 

Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
--
Fuel Ignition launches as a high-performance Ethereum L2, running on consumer hardware to combat blockchain centralization. Powered by FuelVM, it offers fast, low-cost transactions with Ethereum and Solana wallet support. Explore our growing ecosystem of DApps for crypto management, DEXs, lending, and more. 

Visit fuel.network to learn more and start building for tomorrow, today!
--
Follow Gwart: https://x.com/GwartyGwart
Follow Mike: https://x.com/MikeIppolito_
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:14 The AI Meta
8:05 AI Agents on TradFi vs Crypto Rails 
11:05 Is Crypto Actually Useful For AI?
13:46 Does Gwart Hate Ethereum?
16:30 ETHs Monetary Premium
35:07 Will Fees Go to Zero?
45:22 Chaos Labs Ad
45:55 Fuel Ad
46:18 Ethereum's North Star
52:49 Can ETH Become the Global Reserve Currency?
55:04 The Bitcoin Security Budget
1:01:49 51% Attacks in Crypto
1:09:57 Activity on Tron
1:12:53 The Evolution of L2s
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 73 ---
Video ID: KCJzQiUcRJQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCJzQiUcRJQ
Title: Ai16z Agents, Raydium Is A Cash Machine, We Love and Hate Solana| Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-10-30 14:59:23 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss ai16z Agents, whether or not AI agents will need crypto rails, and the impact data oriented crypto protocols will have on the AI space. They also highlighted Solana REV recently hitting new all time highs, and Raydium’s dominance. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Maximizing Profits with Raydium: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/research/maximizing-profits-with-raydium
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:34 Are AI Tokens Here to Stay?
13:53 The AI Agent Meta
20:07 Do AI Agents Need Crypto Rails?
23:23 Data Focused Protocols and Their Impact
28:39 Nillion Snippet
39:02 Solana REV Hits New All Time Highs
48:00 Raydium is a Cash Machine
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 74 ---
Video ID: LrC_hxTngHU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LrC_hxTngHU
Title: Sui’s Plan to Onboard the Next Billion Consumers | Adeniyi Abiodun
Published: 2024-10-24 13:54:33 UTC
Description:
In this episode, the Co-founder and CPO of Mysten Labs, Adeniyi Abiodun, joined us to discuss all things Sui! We covered the thesis for continued Move adoption, Sui’s bet on gaming, and gaining market share in a competitive L1 sector. We also dove into the adoption of ZKlogin, and Walrus!  

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category. 

The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked. 

Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
--
Fuel Ignition launches as a high-performance Ethereum L2, running on consumer hardware to combat blockchain centralization. Powered by FuelVM, it offers fast, low-cost transactions with Ethereum and Solana wallet support. Explore our growing ecosystem of DApps for crypto management, DEXs, lending, and more. 

Visit fuel.network to learn more and start building for tomorrow, today!
--
Follow Adeniyi: https://x.com/EmanAbio
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:31 The Thesis For Move Adoption
4:44 Sui's Competitive Advantage
12:44 Gaining Market Share and ZKlogin Adoption
18:46 Chaos Labs Ad
19:19 Fuel Ad
19:42 Sui's Bet On Gaming
25:20 Sui Ecosystem Growth
29:49 Are Payment Transactions Low Value?
32:41 Reflecting On Sui's Launch and Building A Community
37:59 Helping Apps Grow and Adoption of Walrus
45:47 Were Rollups A Good Way to Scale Ethereum?
47:02 Handling Congestion Fees
50:33 DAG Based Consensus
53:00 What's Next For Sui?
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 75 ---
Video ID: QzbkjdZo0kU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QzbkjdZo0kU
Title: Deepbook and Sui Ecosystem, TAM of GameFi, Lack of First Mover Advantage | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-10-23 13:53:08 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Boccaccio, Danny, and Ryan from Blockworks Research discuss Deepbook and the Sui Ecosystem, the differing approaches taken by Sui and Aptos, and the total addressable market for GameFi. They also covered the concept of first mover advantage, and whether or not it actually exists in crypto.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Indie Gaming Data: https://gameworldobserver.com/2024/10/16/indie-games-revenue-steam-vs-aaa-titles-vg-insights

The State of Gaming in 2024: https://www.matthewball.co/all/gaming2024

Haseeb’s Take on First Mover Advantage: https://x.com/hosseeb/status/1846927648900923839
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:22 Deepbook and the Sui Ecosystem
9:45 Nillion Snippet
18:20 Sui and Aptos' Differing Approaches
23:03 The TAM of GameFi
43:43 First Mover Advantage in Crypto
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 76 ---
Video ID: aw5K9o5b--o
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aw5K9o5b--o
Title: Icebergy and Tolks, Good Crypto Apps, Identifying New Trends and Improved Onchain UX | Fig Talk
Published: 2024-10-17 14:22:04 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Tolks and Icebergy! We discussed recent activity in the trenches, the memecoin narrative rebrand, and Progressive Web Apps. Additionally, we covered the recent launch of Unichain, and its impact on DeFi. Our guests also gave their thoughts on the current state of public and private markets, their experience using Echo, and what apps are actively being used today. Finally, we closed the episode with advice on how to deal with the growing toxicity in crypto.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category. 

The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked. 

Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
--
Fuel Ignition launches as a high-performance Ethereum L2, running on consumer hardware to combat blockchain centralization. Powered by FuelVM, it offers fast, low-cost transactions with Ethereum and Solana wallet support. Explore our growing ecosystem of DApps for crypto management, DEXs, lending, and more. 

Visit fuel.network to learn more and start building for tomorrow, today!
--
Follow Icebergy: https://x.com/icebergy_
Follow Tolks: https://x.com/_tolks
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:12 Activity in the Trenches
7:41 The Memecoin Rebrand
10:40 Mobile Wallets, Telegram Trading, and PWAs
20:25 Thoughts on Unichain
35:28 Chaos Labs Ad
36:01 Fuel Ad
36:24 Public vs Private Markets
39:50 Managing an Echo Group
43:44 What Apps Are Actively Being Used?
52:52 Polymarket Activity Post Election
55:42 Crypto Nihilism & Toxicity
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 77 ---
Video ID: w7me83E-ybQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w7me83E-ybQ
Title: Hyped for Hyperliquid, Off The Grid, Settlement Is Bad Business | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-10-16 18:14:45 UTC
Description:
Is "Off The Grid" the breakthrough Web3 gaming needs? We dive into its hyped launch and what it means for crypto adoption. We then dissect HyperLiquid's upcoming token and its potential to reshape the perps landscape. But the real bombshell? Our analysis of L2 economics reveals a startling truth about Ethereum's value capture. We question if Avalanche's adoption-first strategy is brilliant or doomed, and debate whether current blockchain business models are sustainable. Brace yourself for some hard truths about the future of crypto revenue. Enjoy!

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Marc: https://twitter.com/marcarjoon
Follow Ryan: https://twitter.com/_RyanRConnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:19 HyperLiquid Token Launch 
17:20 Nillion Snippet
22:56 Off the Grid 
35:48 Superchain Business Models
44:03 Are L2s Extensions?
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
-- 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Ryan and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 78 ---
Video ID: 0yCO17hOxGo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0yCO17hOxGo
Title: Building the PerpDEX UX Layer | Andotlas & Burt, Kwenta
Published: 2024-10-10 16:42:42 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Andotlas and Burt from Kwenta joined us to discuss Kwenta’s governance mechanics, new venue integration, and improving UX with chain abstraction. Additionally, we covered how Kwenta differentiates itself from competitors, and the impact incentive programs have on liquidity. Finally, we unpacked Kwenta’s points program, lessons learned from their GTM strategy, and what the next year has in store. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category. 

The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked. 

Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
--
Fuel Ignition launches as a high-performance Ethereum L2, running on consumer hardware to combat blockchain centralization. Powered by FuelVM, it offers fast, low-cost transactions with Ethereum and Solana wallet support. Explore our growing ecosystem of DApps for crypto management, DEXs, lending, and more. 

Visit fuel.network to learn more and start building for tomorrow, today!
--
Follow Kwenta: https://x.com/Kwenta_io
Follow Andotlas: https://x.com/Andotlas
Follow Burt: https://x.com/BurtRock69
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/salveboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:39 Overview of Kwenta
4:48 Kwenta Governance & Integrating New Venues
14:58 Continued Expansion & Chain Abstraction
27:56 Differentiating Kwenta From the Field
31:29 Chaos Labs Ad
32:02 Fuel Ad
32:25 Incentive Programs and Their Impact on Liquidity 
37:18 Will Kwenta Add Options Trading?
39:26 Kwenta's Points Program
45:30 Looking Back on Kwenta's Go-To-Market Strategy
49:12 The Next Year of Kwenta Developments
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 79 ---
Video ID: NFxYkdXklig
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NFxYkdXklig
Title: Memecoins, the EigenLayer Debacle, and Bootstrapping Sui | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-10-09 13:55:29 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts discuss trading paradigms, the growth of the memecoin sector, and bootstrapping the Sui and Aptos ecosystems Additionally, they dive into the launch of EIGEN and the pain points EigenLayer has run into. Finally, they close out the episode by asking themselves - how long do narrative trades last?

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Blockworks Financial Disclosures: https://blockworks.co/financial-disclosures

Uniswap V3 Pools: ​​https://dune.com/coindataschool/uniswap-v3-pools-volume-fees-tvl-and-fee-apr

Memecoins: Burgeoning Market or Transitory Blackhole | Blockworks Research: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/research/memecoins-burgeoning-market-or-transitory-blackhole
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:10 Is This Time Different?
4:49 Are Memecoin Trades Fair Play Now?
13:56 Growing the Sui & Aptos Ecosystems
21:49 Nillion Ad
27:50 The Launch of EIGEN
37:07 Network Valuations 
52:58 How Long Do Narrative Trades Last?
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
yeah I think memes are increasingly fair play spending my time at more and more crypto conferences I'm actually understanding like how many people hate this asset class um but in actuality like the longer they trade the more of a historical time series they have the more um palatable they are to quantitative Traders and hedge funds the more palatable they are to TA traders who look at support and resistance and things like that like um and the that that those norms compound uh until they are like actual risk management tools to some degree nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice Pacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed owns any of them surely he owns a bit of some I own I own jto um but uh but I blockworks Financial disclosures form real quick also if you're in blockworks you have to own half of whatever Solana tokens there are or else you go to jail it's G be nice all right we are doing what are we talking about I lay token launch Pi USD synthetics referendum is the topic notes that I have anything else or can we get started I think it's good I think it's good Ryan Connor anything that you specifically want to touch up on touch um did I I added something or no I didn't I think we did okay I will have to say if we don't mute ourselves and I'm saying this to everybody not just a particular person if we don't mute ourselves um Stefan gets quite upset so just out in yeah okay yeah Brian yep just mute myself only when I'm not talking yeah where the kids daycare is gonna be on the audio just doesn't want to hear about me at all no we we definitely do um forget how to do these no it's always uh background New York noises that's my bad what's up guys welcome back to another episode of zerox research I haven't been with Ryan we got a mute butd there we go I haven't been with you guys in nearly two months now so it's very good to be back um I missed everything that is happening in the markets so I'm going going to call upon Mr Dany to tell me what has been going up what has been going down and why this time is different um why this time is different that's fun uh as far as the markets in recent weeks I think you know Bitcoin and the general markets have seen some strength again so obviously everyone uh everyone in this space their their risk appetite has kind of come back in full force very quickly um you missed out on on some hippos some animals going crazy on the salana blockchain so I think we've just seen a very drastic change in sentiment from a month ago where it was Doom and Gloom everywhere and now it's you know we get some some green candles on bitcoin and now everyone is very excited to uh you know ape into their favorite alts and memes again very quickly it's kind of crazy how quickly it shifts I feel like it wasn't this like memes have clearly become it used to be maybe like let say Bitcoin goes up Solana goes up um or like ethereum goes up Solana goes up and then you'd get like all l1s um and in the end it would be Cosmos and then everything would nuke now it feels like Bitcoin goes up ethereum does not go up Solana goes up and then every single meme that has ever existed goes up and now we're getting old memes going up as well um Mr must mad has a 10 meme list that he's been flaun in around um I feel like that's definitely not going to end up very well but I mean at least it's just so difficult to talk about people like who are doing that because on the one hand I don't want to be like the Boomer who's like oh meme coins aren great but also like there has to be a limit to how much you can talk I think Murad is fine but I've seen other people catching Flack I don't want to name any names but for Shilling like actually really really low market cap stuff um curious how I guess like I don't know what you guys' spots are on that is like do you think that's fair play and I know it's not like block Works research but what do you think how do you approach that yeah I think memes are increasingly fair play I don't I I can't say low capat memes are because such small amounts can uh really move meme coins but um or sorry low capat me meme coins but yeah so the thing about markets is that um the longer they trade like the more um quantitative data you have the more like um like Trader myths you have the more um Norms are established within markets so uh memes are really cementing themselves as like these high beta plays if you want to get back into the market and like get some juice really quick kind of like call options on some upside so um you know for all the folks that are really like fading the mem coin Trend and I'm incre like now that I'm like spending my time at more and more crypto conferences I'm actually understanding like how many people hate this asset class um but in actuality like the longer they trade the more of a historical time series they have the more um palatable they are to quantitative Traders and hedge funds the more palatable they are to TA traders who look at support and resistance and things like that like um and that that those Norms compound uh until they are actual risk management tools to some degree now I'm not saying that like they're going to be in model portfolios or they're going to be a large part of like hedge fund strategies um but like just look at someone like Joe mccan like he decided to participate in um meme coins um I assume through his fund more than just personally but certainly um he um he's been loud about it on Twitter and um other funds are going to see that and they're competing with him for Capital and they they want you know LP Capital just as much as he does so um there's a lot of um look people want to say it's illegitimate um every day that the volumes increase it becomes less and less legit illegitimate and and and yes like these volumes are going to plummet 90% um at some point in time but like the market volumes generally are also going to plummet like 50 to 70% so like that's going to be that's going to be beta and and these things are going to live on and who knows how big of a part of the market trading they'll be but like I think I think the evidence suggests that um it's more likely that the um memec coin stuff is here to say than it's um you know than it's Emeral yeah I have two things on this one is that I know anecdotally that funds are actually doing mem coin trades now and I feel like that wasn't really a thing that I was hearing about a few months back I'm sure there were others but now it at least seems like they're more comfortable talking about it um the second thing is I feel like with memes it's they've always been a thing but this cycle they've just really obviously become like very very clearly beta um and like very how do I put this they've become more normalized um which I think is fine and that point you said about like if you're late to the market you can just enter at this point I feel like it's become obviously I'm not a great Trader but not obviously people don't know that but um I found that it's actually been relatively not that difficult to just play again um few month at least during the bear it was like a lot more difficult to pick memes um even like six eight months back I mean there were periods on Solana where you could just Chuck like it was like every entry is Forgiven and you can just make money um before the conflict between Iran and Israel it was like the very recent one it was like that um again where it was like you could just play around and somehow your entry would be forgiven and you would be blessed actually have something that I want to talk about but Danny I know you have a lot of fuss but I want to bring up PVP trade after this as well because it's something that is actually really and I tried to get Ryan on it he did not want to get on it but I think it's something that we got to talk about as well yeah I just I want to add one thought here I saw some discussion um I mean there's always discussion about memes hating him loving them um I saw toally weighin as well and he kind of had this opinion that you know as you're as we're seeing sort of like the tech centered to and plays um become more rooted to like actual values and and cash flows and what they can generate as as businesses um in his mind it's like becoming a bit more of like this dichotomy of you know you can see these like businesses essentially or or you know Tech and utility Focus like you know assets or protocols kind of become tied to like what they actually provide in value whereas memes can like live on and continue to grow as like these just pure speculative plays versus in the past it was like you know if you're buying eth or whatever the asset is it's like you're paying some absurd markup on like virtually zero cash flow to the Token um and you're hoping that like the mtic power will fuel it to some valuation that you like one thing I will say is if memes are outperforming and they are very clearly outperforming all other classes within crypto how can you justify like if you're a fund analyst and you've under performed this entire cycle because you were mainly an e defi or like even Solana defi hasn't done particularly well compared to memes um how do you even justify that um like because I think that's the main issue that a lot of people have is that they the same with Builders so they're building these protocols that are very clearly like focused on moving the space forward and they don't get any love and then it's the same with the fund guy who's doing all the cash flow analysis who's actually like talking to teams reading white paper doing whatever he has to do to like get a little bit of Alpha and then in the end either some random token Launches on pump. fun and it makes a lot of people a lot of money or it's like very cabal I don't like the word cabal but like obviously meme coins are an insiders game like nobody like everybody knows this and it's the same with most infrastructure tokens as well so how do you justify that as a fund analyst and be like you know what like I'm underperforming just because I can't pick the right tokens you're shaking your head they're not they're not under they're not underperforming because their Benchmark does not include meme coins that's fair yeah so the premise I reject the premise um except for the biggest meme which is Bitcoin but otherwise yeah then how about this your I don't know how often you have to go back to your LPS but you have to there's fomo right like that analyst can participate and there is personal fomo but from a fun perspective Like These Guys these many many funds are barred from it um many funds like they Benchmark against Bitcoin the bitwise 10 um some mixture of Bitcoin and eth um so actually they're quite happy about eth going down because they probably own something with a higher beta than eth um oh maybe not maybe that they own maybe they own a lot of eth beta and they're down too I don't know um but yeah so so the I don't think I don't think a lot of funds are seeing like there's not like direct fomo versus their mandate for certain but there is fomo like versus other funds that are outperforming them because they were allowed to participate in Bonk in like trade Bonk but versus their Benchmark um it's a different story yeah but I guess I didn't mean like versus your benchmark but I meant like your LPS you have to go back to them in a few years and say hey guys we made I don't know 60% um but like you can see these people who traded in-house money and they made 800% just because they bought popcat MOG and bonk at the right times but you don't think that matters you don't think anybody will be upset because they can be like I think they have this they're coming from the same Viewpoint right like those those same LPS are probably like you know if you had bet the house on Bonk and it had gone like you know the backlash in the other direction would have been so much worse right I mean obviously it might depend on what what your fund really looks like and who your LPS are um maybe you have a a degenerate fund I guess but um I would imagine that like the benchmarks that these people are used to and like the the things that they're they would be comfortable you know putting large amounts of capital in maybe at this point in time you know maybe in a few years if if memes are 50 of the top 100 coins that story might be different but it is still like a relatively small part of the market it's not quite so normalized yet yeah it will be I think we'll see one other token that has been doing really well is SOI and and I still cannot find good SOI ecosystem tokens um do you guys know any pro like I know aftermath is supposed to be the next keto that's what we're all saying we've all convinced ourselves that aftermath is going to be the next keto and the air drop is going to save everybody's lives but it I feel like when we talk about s and apos we mostly say oh like what's the marginal benefit that you get off another L1 um but I want to kind of talk more about how do you see these guys actually build out an ecosystem and compete not in the sense of like what are like is the tech better is the language better but more so like what approach do these guys need to take such that for example if you go on Aptos and you go on econia they we we just sent around this protocol like Conor protocol you can last time I checked on econia you could trade four assets that's just not good enough um it's like Solana 2020 not even Solana always had semi you could do stuff but on some of these chains that are funded crazily SOI was giving out $200 million last year just for incentives and they have like free protocols where you can swap between four assets like how the how do you approach that what what do you guys think is like the change that they need to do get more assets on chain I mean I think if you look at Soul a year ago year and a half ago it's like it was the same they kind of had the same problem at that time there were lots of teams that were actively building but there were very few tokens on the chain to trade other than just like Soul maybe Bonk um and maybe a you know few you know dite projects from the prior cycles that had already you know released their tokens um this feels very similar like we're kind of these ecosystems are brand new so you know there are some things that are out but it's like very limited in scope at this point in time are they brand new though it's been two years now and also God bless the broken Souls that bought the original Solana tokens that just underperformed Solana I feel like that was like 2021 they at least had tokens they went down and it was all by the same guy who like developed 13 protocols or something but at least there was stuff to buy and lose money on on Su you can't even lose money because there's nothing to buy um becoming increasingly convinced that everything going forward is all business development from the foundations and Labs or whoever is trying to make ecosystems happen but like more specifically it's like and I think Danny you're right but more specifically it's like getting qualified or um legitimate asset issuers to put their token on the Chain um Ethan salana have this to a lesser degree Bas and arbitrum have this where there are like legitimate projects who decided to launch their token natively on those chains um when you when you think about what other ecosystems have done over the last say six years to get to jump start those ecosystems I think of something like like some ecosystems have done seemingly everything right and results have been mixed to subpar um if you think of like can you give an example I just want to think of it with examples as well yeah I can think of um like look at um like polygon for example um with like every meaningful Enterprise partnership you could think of like everyone was so jazzed on polygon 24 months ago because they were crushing it on the BD front but none of them were like asset issuers issuing tokens like in a crude way to describe it like tokens that people want to trade that they have confidence in but like in like high contrast like salana focused on like they got geonet to bridge their token to over and like people want to trade that token pith and Wormhole issued there um all these dpin projects are issuing on salana you look at the ethereum ecosystem where like you can argue about like the validity the the varying degrees of validity of these projects but like every single LST issuer like is getting like meaningful like press and they're issuing on E or whatever so um I think it's all a BD game and that's really hard as an analyst to figure out like you have to have a boots on the ground approach um you got to get out of your spreadsheet and like talk to folks um to figure out which of these changes is doing BD the best so it's a different ball game yeah and it's also they kind of affect each other a lot like the more volume you get the more people want to come on your chain because they want their tokens to trade volum they want their tokens to get attention so it's the same as like that's one of the I don't want talk too much about Soul e but that's one of the only things that actually worries me about Soul e like I am relatively confident in ethereum just because we've been having these Chatters with Max Resnik and everybody else saying you know like I feel like for something to die I'm young so I don't know how corporations die but in my mind for something to die I feel like it needs to go the wrong way and then nobody cares like nobody actually tries to affect change and I feel like with e we've been seeing a few eips that are one is to reduce block times recently I saw and one was to improve gas um improve block size and so that very clearly s signals to me that people are actually care about ethereum and they want to like they see that there's some Er inous ways and they want to fix it my only worry is that and Ryan this is something you brought up is that as a chain you want people to issue assets on your chain like you want tokens to launch on your chain and on ether it's just not like the last thing that I can think of that eum beat Solana in is Nao which I don't know if you guys remember like the and that I don't even think that was like natural it was like very much affected by cabal Dynamics and like Insider so I can't remember the last time that somebody like went ahead not last time but I feel like most tokens are launching on Solana now which is the only thing that cons concerns me about aerium it's not like the tech side because I think realize their ways and they're going to fix it same with everything else in ethereum land the tokens that launch in the evm are on the l2s like you launch your liquidity on arbitrum or base or you know pick your favorite L2 they don't launch on Main net because it's not economical to do so for individuals to claim pay the gas swap Etc so it's just the same problem as everything else the activity is moving there the tokens are moving over there and then they're getting you know fragmented more because it's like you got to pick which L2 or which l2s plural um to start jump start your liquidity on yeah if if you're an asset issu issuer you're very confused about what's going on on eth like do they want to accelerate this thing are they bringing defi back on chain the bank list guys really want like they just tweeted out maybe two weeks ago like defi should live on the Ethel one balic said the opposite he's like I wish that there was no defi on the Ethel one so you're very confused um that confusion needs to be cleared up for the market um and these protocols to kind of get um um to figure out the direction of of eth and to see whether or not it makes sense to issue assets there there's a ton of liquidity there they just need to tell the market everything's going to be okay and unleash that and unleash that liquidity hey guys what's up I'm joined by Miguel uh the co-founder and chief scientific officer at neillian thanks for coming on Miguel you're welcome um so what is blind compute and why is it important for crypto and AI well you know you can we can encrypt data at rest and in transfer but when we want to process it you have to decrypt it first usually that's what happens in in web 2 and that's the mother of all problems because then it means that the company running that service has to have access to your data so blind computation solves for that problem and it's a process where data is computed without revealing the actual data or the nodes uh to the nodes performing the computation so it actually is able to compute while your data remains protected or encrypted and I guess well it's important for crypto is is because without privacy enhancing Technologies crypto makes everything public right so it's it's a problem for AI where all information is very sensitive think about the user prompts the model weights and the training data sets so privacy or blind compute is actually the ingredient that is missing in the crypto AI mixture if you really want to make it secure perfect and how do you see privacy Technologies keeping up with um increasing complexity in AI that's a very good question um so privacy does uh add some complexity and slows things down just like decentralization but we're seeing some um you know some um important changes in the market like for example models are becoming smaller so you have all the Lama series of models that are very performant and they're typically smaller than the equivalent um you have agentic flows so agents are very interesting because they provide um they Benchmark you know in the same rank more or less with simpler models just because they're following these patterns where they you know the model just questions about it about the result and looks at it from different angles uh so that's also a very interesting Avenue and then there's also this interesting Avenue of binary and trary networks where where the model weights are just represented with bits or with three values and that makes it easier then and more efficient to be implemented on top of um a privacy preserving layer plus uh we think that you know AI is evolving towards more Independence um you can think of it right now as um you know an AI would be like a soldier and you give it you know very lowlevel order but as it increases in intelligence it will move towards a relationship with a general so you just give some General High pattern you know command and then the general goes off and does its own thing so that will place less stringent requirements on timing um for for the underlying crypto and at the same time that's when it becomes more sensitive because the information you typically share with a general is way more sensitive than the one you exchange with a with a soldier that makes sense and how is million specifically approaching um blind compute and how will it adapt to increasing AI complexity so blind compute we're we're building what we call the orchestration layer the main idea is that there's no Silver Bullet in the Privacy preserving in the privac enhancing Technologies world uh there's different um cryptographic protocols like zkp and FH and NPC and even Hardware based cryptographic Solutions like tees we're not prescriptive as as to which solution is the best because we really think they are different Tools in a tool set and it really depends on the problem that you're solving for so we're building this orchestration layer that enables the different elements to coexist and in you know gives the developers the tools to actually combine them um so that they can best um solve for the for any given problem or or use case that they're interested in and specifically about AI um and the complexity we're targeting um a layer on top of privacy enhancing technology so there's there's like a major gap of um technology missing between privacy enhancing Technologies and the applications in this case AI that Gap has been filled traditionally in computer science with tons of Technology like you know uh binary trees algorithms algorithms about sorting algorithms about uh representation of of problems as graphs algorithms as greedy programming linear programming so there's like a ton of research that has been done over decades and Decades of computer science that is kind of missing here so we're specifically targeting for that Gap in in the AI vertical and one thing that we've we've done is to innovate or pioner the use of some techniques taken from image processing which is a completely separate field from actually cryptography specifically targeting something called the discrete wavelet transform which is like a discrete cing of of the forer transform um it's called the DWT and we've ported those techniques into P so we can run them on top of FH we can run them on top of MPC and actually accelerate the bottlenecks that you typically found in AI those bottlenecks are mostly around the evaluation of nonlinear functions that's you know the activations functions that you have or the normalization uh layers all of those are the the really tough questions or or or problems to to solve efficiently in in AI when you run them on top of PS and these DWT techniques are actually accelerating those significantly by as I said taking techniques from another field and porting them into into into AI on top of PS fantastic it sounds like you guys have some pretty big gaps to try and fill in but I'm excited to see where this goes thank you so much for joining us one token that did launch on etherium um IG layer igen which I think MOG just passed its market cap I think either yesterday or the day before and it's out I think market cap wise it's out of the top 100 which is kind of crazy to think about because it was touted as the next big thing for so so long it is number 114 Mark cap wise FTB 6 bill which is still obviously very Hefty but I think this is like not really about it's a bit about appetite for Defi and like infro stuff but it's also a bit about I think the team really boted that launch like you made people wait four or five months you didn't build anything during that time like you had abss but people by that time people had already gotten shafted on LSD launches and abss that they were like yeah I don't care and now it's it feels like it's a claim and dump Ina um did you guys look into first of all did you get did you even unstake your stuff yet or are you waiting uh didn't participate um but Egan is um or Ian it is more like a top 20 token I think if you're going by FTV I am not going by FTV because that doesn't fit my bias okay yeah so the the MOG stat was interesting but it's still like probably a top 20 thing if you're going by FTV uh and that's important for the folks to know because um valuation definitely matters um there's a lot of people that expected multiples on Capital buying Celestia from $10 to $20 at an absolutely absurd valuation um so the folks need to know that um as far as the Egan stuff like yeah um I think they're a consequence of like the expect expectations are just far too high they were far too high from the beginning like I don't think that there's like this I don't think that there's like this cabal thing that like like does a narrative and like plans it and then the market takes it and takes it and runs with it I think it's a little bit more random um but the market definitely took this narrative to far and really inflated expectations beyond what they were like if you were to take a um a very object if you were to do like a very objective description of what Egan was I might not be 100% right here but I think I'm directionally right like it's like it allows you to reh hypothecate your stake and gain leverage on it and like allows protocols to raise capital and it's like not the second coming of security and even if it was it's like cash flows kind of matter the Market's valuing this thing on tvl right now and like we found out a long time ago that tvl is not a valuation metric like it's kpi and it's like has varying degrees of utility depending on what you're looking at but tvls not the way to look at these things like black rock is not valued on its AUM it's valued as a it's management fee on that AUM the cash flows that it produces so um yeah there's some Egan controversy um but I think that you know the controversy wouldn't be there if the market didn't have these like very inflated expectations of what it was capable of they also had that um they also had a wallet sell did you guys see that and they were like oh somebody there um somebody impersonated somebody else so they received these tokens and then they sold them which seems so ridiculous to me that like a team like Ian player can deal with these issues to like to me it seems fake because it seems so stupid like you should definitely triple check something like that but what what's uh what actually happened there what's the prevailing narrative there the I I'll I'll look it up just to clarify soam doesn't well he doesn't watch this but if he did he would probably get upset but as far as I remember it was that somebody impersonated somebody else um and got access to certain tokens that were supposed to be vesting that was not supposed to be veting some something along the lines of somebody impersonated something and then there was a mixup which is stupid that should not have happened yeah classic bit of social engineering I think the community kind of was outraged by the by the lack of the use of of onchain locks and vesting contracts you know just saying hey we're going to have a you know some Finance guy manage the the funds and make sure that everything vests properly is feels a bit silly when all of the like underlying you know chain infra and Tech is built around tokens and how to manage them so um it does seem a bit silly that if you're going to launch at six billion plus fdv that you wouldn't just like have this handled by onchain contracts but um yeah I don't know does it make you doubt the tech uh no I don't I don't think it makes me doubt like whatever igen you know their da Solutions and what they're building it's just more of like I mean that's it seems like a bit of a silly oversight when the tools are available to do this the we have the dev Talent as well right when when these when when these like like public um mishaps happen it actually becomes really interesting from like an entry perspective typically if there's like bad press around a good thing you like uh like that's great as someone who needs an entry on a thing so if you wanted to trade Egan and get that entry like you hope that this news hits um but there's no margin of safety right so this is this is like one of those like we still have a ways to go on um margin of safety for this thing buy the hack is my least favorite trade by the way it's like I feel like I always I don't know if it's it's you're not supposed to do it I know but it's like it's fun and but you always like you said you can always get a bit burnt by the hack has worked in trafi very well um I by the hack I don't know maybe it's just because I'm closer to crypto now but these things really like get some reputational reputational damage from hacks um you know losing user info in like losing an email list and addresses in trafi is like very benign to actually losing Capital directly in crypto so I think that um it's it's just much scarier here so like when when they do have that when they do have those hacks um the reputational damage really lingers I think the time frames are more impactful here it's and you see this frequently I think as well with like smaller projects that get hacked you know there may be a buying opportunity of something if someone gets access to like the mint function and then they run out of tokens to dump you know and it can really like absolutely plummet a tokens price and that might open up an opportunity where it's like literally one cent on the dollar and you would not get that opportunity in trafi um but over the longer term it's like if if it comes back up to any kind of meaningful you know relative valuation of its former self it might just be the slow decline to nothing versus you know I think in the trafi case it we don't see so drastic extremes so quickly in most cases unless unless a compan is actually going bankrupt so I think the edge with most of these are also kind of gone like what you just said Danny where you track the wallet to see like when the sales when the hacker sales are done it's people just front run so the whatever return you got the 40 50% is now like 15 20% but with igen I wanted to kind of bring up um two other rest I feel like reaking just hasn't done particularly well and like a lot of people could have seen this coming I guess um but like apart from talking about is the yield going to be good like something that everybody was discussing six months ago but yes the execution has also just not been great iig ler had this uh mishap um apart from that they B I think they bought the um token launch like I think four months is way too long to wait to launch a token to give somebody like to just tell people we'll do it in September no vote nothing karac is obviously struggling people don't really talk about it and symbiotics Twitter has been hacked for three four days it's supposed to be like the second biggest reaking thing trying to compete against IG L and to me this is so ridiculous because you can't go on their website because you're like if I wanted to restake or I can't I'm not gonna take that risk like their Twitter sacked I'm not even sure if their website's hacked I'm relying on some Discord server which often get hacked or with their telegram which might also get so it's like nobody can use your product what are you supposed to do it's just like a ridiculous thing I don't know and like this should never have been an ethereum narrative I think reaking is just not very sexy narrative um we could have come up with something better but even let's say it is the etherium narrative like it is whatever was touted for two years sham is the Golden Boy of um California he's going to save all of eperium you nobody can use any of these things without either getting dumped on by some random guy who got an email because he like identified himself as an investor or you just can't use any of these I don't know what do you guys think uh yeah I mean I yeah it's Contin it's a continuation of of what we've said right just like poor execution like super inflated expectations um I mean look it didn't make sense from the beginning right like Egan ler was like oh we're going to re hypothecate each security and launch all these new things because there's a shortage of security out there and that's what everyone like really really wants they they want to reh hypothecate this eth um it'll you know a thousand flowers will Bloom whatever um and I don't know I think that the smart Market participants were just like sitting there scratching their head like okay this is p rehypothecation like why use why not just use other things than eth and Egan ler raised like 160 170 million based on that narrative symbiotic came out and raised 6 million and said we'll let you re re hypothecate anything um so I don't know the narrative was like it was very very forced and I think anyone who was being objective at the time saw that um and look I mean it was it was a tough time I'll give folks the benefit of the doubt like this was like the emerging narrative out of the bare market like people were looking for Hope perhaps um but look I just think that the industry needs to focus on being less impressionable uh these narratives they're mostly nonsense um at the end of the day like size up the [ __ ] cash flows um even like Celestia traded to like what a 20 billion doar valuation um people were pedling this modular money narrative it was nonsense for anyone looking out from the inside or sorry look looking in from the outside um was left scratching their head understanding how little how how um fees da would generate versus that valuation did not make sense um I think that this will be a good cycle for like like for lack of a better term like the educa like the like the education of the crypto space um we're we're we're shifting from this um very like narrative Trader driven environment to like this more valuation focused environment I'm not saying that we're going to get there tomorrow but it's incumbent upon the um liquid marketed for partici participants to be less impressionable like it's all it's all on you like look at these valuations reason about them look look at them versus trafi comps right like why is your series a thing like raising at a$2 billion valuation when series a SAS products are raising at like like 100 million to 400 million like there's a there's a Delta there that you need to um seriously think about and adjust like your risk and margin of safety parameters accordingly I'm going to make a Counterpoint here and if you are trading based on like you can buy and sell based on cash flow it's very good but if you're not don't try and trade something that obviously is has very little cash flows and it's just like very overinflated and what I mean by this is if you're going to play The Narrative or whatever the speculation game do play with something that can't be valued really like actually you know to you can't value to because it's there's no cash flows nothing it's just mumbo jumbo AI mumbo jumbo it's the Bitcoin of AI or whatever people said but you know what I mean like if you're gonna speculate and do something n don't do it on like Celestia which is making 30 grand a year on 20 Bill value like FTV do it on something that's you just can't value like play the game but play it seriously don't play it like on some thousand decks multiple on some dog [ __ ] that people are going to dump on you and I don't know like this NFA not find Financial advice but to me that's why the L1 trade has always been super exciting and has been lucrative because you can never like really do a proper cash flow model on it Ryan will for sure try he'll pull up his Excel and he'll he'll run the numbers but realistically like compared to a GPU Marketplace Celestia IG lay you really can't value it as well as um like you can't value it an L1 the same way that you can value these other things are very clearly businesses Here Comes angry Ryan disagree no but you have okay I'm gonna you can value all of those things I think the reason that the L1 trade worked for so long is because they they probably should be in the billions if they generate any meaningful like like activity um a billion dollar valuation does make sense they are platforms and platform forms like acre value massively and they have like very strong Network effects so if you were like like look there there was a there was a time in crypto where the platforms were very misvalued right think of anything trading in 2019 like I think Salan launched at a $200 million valuation very reasonable by traditional Financial standards like maybe a little Rich at the time given like no one really knew what these crypto things would be but like $200 million FD fantastic um the market over the subsequent like 24 months like understood how powerful these platforms would be um they UND they began to understand that proof of stake acrise cash flows and that like even if they didn't want to Value them that way and they believe the money thing like they could um and now you're seeing kind of like an over correction there right where or sorry like you're seeing like some corrective forces there where like the marginal platform is not getting the same valuation because the market just can't handle it um there's not enough fees to go around so I think of something like blast that's like really rated and didn't get the valuation of its peers um so you have this like you have this like you know you have this classic hype cycle um but but the market is understanding how to Value these things is very very clear I I do think if you look at something like Tia it is kind of the perfect example of this similar to to l1's where you know I think in this market in in crypto especially you have participants and investors who like their mindset for the future is that like these networks will power you know billions of of users transacting on them and so I think you know people they they pull up a Celestia and they they pontificate about what it can do and and they their thinking is like this thing is going to process like G gabes and terabytes and pedabytes of of data availability and be worth so much but then when you look at it today it's like you know the actual revenues and usage are nowhere near that they're they're they're basically zero um and so then you just you end up in this in this game where you know you can play the valuation and it's basically nothing or you know you you fight over like the marketing team who's trying to angle this as like it it it can be so valuable because you know the asset will be used here and there it's you know it's modular money it's we've got all these meaningful things we'll be able to issue assets on different chains Etc um I think you're just in this space we've gone from like the full speculative angle to now it's like there's this this kind of War being waged um in between the ran of the world looking for real you know real cash flows and the people who are still clinging to the idea of like no but in 10 years it's like it's going to be decentralized NASDAQ so I can value it up like on these future cash flows right okay but even if the the argument I guess is like this if Solana on boards a billion people it might actually go like 50x like in terms of fees and everything like it might make sense if Celestia onboards one billion people it will like it'll be at the FTV it's at right now because it makes no money it has no do you know what I mean it's like if you're going to tie your I I can't do English idioms but you know what I mean like if you're going to bet on a horse bet on something that is like silly don't and like that you can't really value don't bet on like the thing that's just never going to make sense and yeah that's really and Ryan you know how you said you disagree this is the exact same response that Shon would give do you see this this is the funniest thing I've ever seen in my life it's him arguing with toly and then he says what sorry it makes no sense it's just so funny but that's not very relevant so you can't disagree with that point right that means saying if you're going to do speculation do speculation that might actually lead to something don't do it on something that's already BS yeah you should exit one part of the market and go to the other part of the market where people are playing a completely different game like that exists in cry crypto I think that's going to exist forever given the permissionless nature there and like the the um like look retail has a revealed preference for like not valuing things they don't want to play the traditional Financial game they want to play the silly game and that's totally cool and that's going to exist forever it existed in com Soxs it existed on the internet forums of the.com bubble um it exists on crypto Twitter today um and there's always going to be a place in the market for that um so no doubt um how big is is it going to be versus everything else like I don't know pull up the what bubble chart that's how we're valuing these things um I do I do want to comment on on on one thing that Danny paid lip service to very quickly it's the um this asset will be used everywhere like therefore it should have a higher valuation um it's like okay what does that mean when people say that they're like oh like it's going to like one it's used for gas I won't get into that it's a can of worms but then they're like oh like it'll be used in defi like it'll be a trading pair it'll be like locked in a smart contracts like okay Apple stock is the most probably used equity on the planet um it is available to margin across every custodian in the United States it's a very like um relatively low V high cash flow earning Equity like there's a ton of market cap there if you are going to lever your stock portfolio you effectively like make that Apple stock like tvl uh people try to like justify this like okay I can put eth in a smart contract therefore it should have valuation premium like everyone effectively puts Apple in the smart contract every day in trafi to lever up their portfolio and to get margin and there's no valuation premium like Apple's trading in a meaningful range throughout its life cycle it does not look like piie in the sky valuation trading at like 500 times sales like eth does uh or sorry like 200 times sales rather for time sales depending on the look back period um so I don't know it's it's one of these narratives that just like has to die like oh I can put in a smart contract therefore it deserves a premium like no that that Dynamic exists in trafi there's no observable observable valuation premium for things that people use to put in to effectively put in smart contracts yeah but there's no deflation pull up let's pull up to e burn chart there's no apple burn chart bud um no but in there's a buyback yield there's buyback I don't know if it's that deflationary but there is there are deflationary forces this is just the general like we're always kind of fighting Equity versus currency like is this claims on cash flow um Gary gendler lock me up or is it like is it going to be the next currency of the United States of America obviously not but you know what I mean and that's why I'm saying these things can be valued silly because like you said it makes no sense that it's cool that ethereum can be used as a base pair um I'm not sure if it Demands a huge valuation multiple just because of that but it is like it it feeds into this currency narrative it feeds into this this is like ultrasound money narrative um at one point you want to be out of the ultrasound money because you might find out that it's not as ultrasound um when liquidity dries up but until then I think it's a lot easier to I guess this is like I don't want to be the guy that clings on to the Past speculation thing um but on the other hand I also don't want to only trade cash flows or like buy into cash flows because I think crypto offers evaluation multiple um I don't know if it like requ like if it necessitates it but it does have it and some things have it as opposed to some things like they just don't generally don't have it like actual very cash flowy businesses harder to put valuation on especially like that's why they went with the modular money narrative like Celestia was pushing that really diff hard just because they were like oh I want like this to have the valuation multiple it just didn't work out so it's kind of a tough balance to find I think like you don't want to midwit everything not to say cash flows are midwit but you know what I mean like you don't want to be like oh this doesn't have any cash flows I can't buy um maybe not for ethereum ethereum is not doing very well but it's kind of a tough balance do you get what I'm trying to say I didn't I I did not say this well at all like I I think if you look at certain periods it's and and assets it's like it's fair to discuss this point because like if you look at the interest around GMX for example and those types of designs back in 23 like there was a lot of focus around like this real yield narrative and there there was you know like a cash flowing sort of business there but it's like you know it be the due to the nature of like how easy it is for competitors to spring up in this space it's like you could have a very like nicely cash flowing business but someone can copy your model and add a few features and like do a points program and then every all of your users move over there and then they have the cash flow and you lost it all and then you know your valuation Creator 10x it's like it can these these things can can be chugging along and just suddenly get get the bottom eaten out from them um and that can happen very quickly now obviously you can react to that right like if you see the activity going down in real time then you know you can your thesis can change about you know where the cash flows are going but um you know a lot of these things are somewhat tied together not that um you know not that if a valuation is tied to their cash flows that it's you know purely fueled by speculation but the users and like the people that are using those applications and driving the valuation based on you know the fees and the metrics today you know they're speculating on like well what's the next step that I need to go use and if they're going to decide to you know come off of GMX and go to some other you know purpose location then um that it's going to change things how long does a narrative trade last three months I don't know depends six e has been going on for eight years I don't know look at BTC um it launched in I don't know I you brought up the B thing I'm gonna ask our data team to do if they can do this how easy it would be to to to spin up this analysis I would imagine that eth as a um base asset in a trading pair um has gone down in volume terms over time as usdc and usdt have become more prevalent on chain certainly on Sexes um but also on chain I I would I would bet that that eth is a very low percentage of um of pair pair trades I guess you call it I know we'll get back to you next episode on that uh we can pull it up right now I just need to find Dune um Danny can yeah Danny can you make some filler conversation while I look for this yeah so tulip Mania was actually followed by several other cycles of flowers I I wanted to I want to actually talk about this which was um willing prices into existence you saw that in the notes um this is also like a part of narrative trading which um which again like a lot of people got burned on um this cycle and past Cycles um like I think of jeto I think of Tia I think of like something like or as these like three categories of willing prices into existence like a crowd Gets behind a thing and maybe even with like Phil the wick uh remember like eth traded up to four or two and then it was like fill the wick um like everyone was saying like jeto needs to be at $10 everyone was saying that like T is going to hit 50 um one or equals 1 TC is like this rally and cry um how many historical instances of like these rally and cries like narratives have actually worked out for folks um I think you want to fade that every single time um because why are people gonna wait if something's going to get to 100 and it's at 50 today why are people going to wait until it gets to that number when they know everyone else is going to sell because like that's the price Target um like they I don't know um you see you see smart people kind of pedaling these narratives and it's a little disappointing no he's disappointed in me no it's always it's always a fade and I think the most famous example that even normies will know is Doge to a dollar and obviously it did not hit a dollar it peaked out around 70 cents with SN to hit a dollar to cycle for sure guys Doge to a dollar it just makes sense Ryan I I found the chart that you are interested in and yeah am I happy to say that I was right this is so this is just arbitrum um obviously the usdc W Fair w we pair we I've never said that out loud actually um is has the highest volume I'll go through all of them but but it's but the but that's usdc yeah but like if you see this for example on base it's both usdc or the both are the highest pairs these are all um e pairs so like I mean I guess you can just ignore the first one but the rest are I mean it's not the highest but the first one has more volume than the sum of everything below it if you look at um on base it's a usdc pair it has more than the sum of everything below it yeah on ethereum it's even worse if you see it's one bill for usdc we usdw same and the same for us like the second usdc e pool has triple the wbtc W like the right yeah so no so I so what I said was my was so I'm not happy I was wrong I'm gonna kill myself I think the first one was more to your point I don't think the volume disparity was that large on arbitrum but maybe I didn't you you you you closed the page so quickly I couldn't see well because we found out that I was wrong so I have to close the page as quickly as possible who would have guessed that the US dollar is more valuable to people than ethereum or like that it's worth more trading that than um crypto has a revealed preference for dollars in every instance where people have you know had the choice to use eth or BTC or dollars for payments and remittances and trading pairs they have chosen crypto people have chosen uh e have chosen usdc and usdt not just crypto people all people ever who to have ever existed just except before where everybody was like oh we want gold now it's just very clearly we want the dollar I think there are very few people who are um you know making all their trades and denominating their their portfolio value purely in eth I think it's you know if if I'm doing something in def5 sure I might have eth and then maybe I want to restake my eth Etc and like earn that yield but um if it's the question of you know swapping for another asset or doing something else trading in and out um then in my mind I'm you know we're we're thinking in in US dollar terms it's it's not how much am I trading in eth it always feels so forced when you see people on the timeline and they're like oh like they they treat epa's money I'm like do you you know I don't know do you but it's always like obviously Def ogs and stuff so I imagine they're just like goofing around a bit I feel like this is the type of like right now is when people do denominate an Ethan so though they're just like oh like I'm just I trade something let's say I buy mudang sell it I'm going back into Solana um or on E whatever they're trading on E these days you buy sell go back into Eve but it's not the same as like what we're saying with like you're not denominating you're just trying to get to a certain e amount and soul amount and not like or have X soul that would be stupid I do think there are people I mean certainly during these like exciting bull market periods you certainly see people who are you know looking to increase their balance of like total eth or total Soul total BTC pick your favorite asset in the space um and kind of ride you know hope to ride that thing up and and trade other assets like sort of into it and grow that balance but you know I think ultimately in their mind as well like when they want to cash out and go do things in the real world they're looking at you know USD or their local currencies so that they can buy a house by you know real world assets if you want to call them that um Etc I will say one thing if you're listening to the spot I don't think you will I hope that my the listeners are not this type of person but eventually please don't fall for that like I'm going to try and fall for the super cycle narrative and be like oh why would I denominate in Fiat man everything is BTC and E do not fall for it because I don't know do whatever you want NFA it's your life live your life as you want to but um I think that's a good place to end it I've come on off wrong six times in a row I think that's a new um new record on the spot is there anything that you guys wanna you guys want to say uh go to permissionless oh yeah it's tomorrow we'll talk to we'll talk fundamentals at permissionless you can see heith vers Soul debate you can talk fundamentals with Ryan you can see some fights happen are they doing fights this year yeah it's uh is it David Hoffman or is it yeah bankless and um guy from synthetics I think the other guy oh Kane is it Kane yeah a guy from I mean that should be interesting honestly you know a little it's it's like you're saying Bo people want to get silly on chain people want to get silly at permissionless so you know go see the fight go watch the eth you know l2s or salana Etc debates um get in on all the action I want to see Kyle Sani dunk on who who's on that pod Westy capital I want to see him dunk on Westy Capital Ryan what were you say uh crypto's pmf is uh online debating and now fights clearly and conferences and getting on chain conferences and confrontation conferences um yeah I think that's good [Music]

========================================

--- Video 80 ---
Video ID: d9rg3uXg8zc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d9rg3uXg8zc
Title: Are Animal Spirits Returning Onchain? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-10-02 14:14:51 UTC
Description:
In this episode, the Blockworks Research team dives into a busy week in the crypto markets. They discussed Solana’s boom in onchain activity, macro shifts in TradFi global markets, and the pros and cons of VC funding vs the ICO model. Additionally, they covered the ongoing Ethereum vs Solana debate, and asked themselves - Is Sui a credible competitor to Solana? Finally, they closed the episode with coverage of Firedancer’s impact on Solana’s performance.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Blockworks Research Arbitrum Report: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1835773042359959814

Blockworks Research Metis Report: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1839379026676506779

Blockworks Research Metaplex Report: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1841107896941363380

Blockworks Research Solana Dashboard: http://solana.blockworksresearch.com/
--
Chaos Labs recently launched its new flagship oracle product, Edge with Jupiter. Edge has already secured $30 billion in trading volume over the last 2 months, establishing Edge by Chaos as an immediate leader in the low-latency oracle category. 

The protocol design blends market context and price data, reflecting Chaos' central thesis that risk data and price data are inextricably linked. 

Follow and reach out to @chaos_labs on X to learn more!
--
Join us at Permissionless III. Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iii
--
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:23 Animal Spirits Returning Onchain
4:13 Macro Shifts Across the Globe
10:01 Chaos Labs Ad
10:34 Permissionless III Ad
11:48 The Ethereum vs Solana Debate Rages On
20:46 Is Sui A Credible Competitor to Solana?
26:07 The Pros & Cons of VC Funding vs ICOs
40:05 Firedancer's Impact on Solana Performance
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 81 ---
Video ID: sNEds_HZdHs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sNEds_HZdHs
Title: Firedancer: The Next Era of Solana Performance | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-09-27 15:45:51 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we discuss memecoin activity on Solana, Token2049 and Solana Breakpoint, and Kamino’s current incumbent status. Additionally, we dive into recent developments in gaming on Solana. Finally, we cover how the release of Firedancer will impact Solana going forward.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Blockworks Research Solana Dashboard: http://solana.blockworksresearch.com/
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Luke: https://x.com/0xMether
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:05 Current Market Sentiment
6:18 SEC Claims Crypto Mining Devices Are Securities 
12:02 Memecoin Activity on Solana
19:08 Permissionless III Ad
20:21 Token2049 & Solana Breakpoint
22:39 Which Chains Are Builders Focused On?
27:26 Kamino's Incumbent Status
38:30 Gaming on Solana
44:50 Firedancer's Impact
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
Solas started from a different path to ethereum and you know they didn't have the multi client approach but like now they're finally getting there and this might finally eliminate one of the biggest criticisms with the Solana blockchain which is liveness and toally did Ann did say that he will remove the beta label from Solana if when fire dancer reaches a third of the network nothing said on zerox Research is a recommend to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice Pacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed uh what's up guys welcome back to another episode of ox research today I am joined by Mark and Luke from the blockworks research team to talk about everything that's happening in the crypto markets Mark Luke thanks for coming on how you guys doing yeah all good [Music] good to hear it um I guess let's let's start off what are we looking at how do we feel about the markets um there's maybe been a little bit of shift in sentiment um lately I'm curious on your guys thoughts are we looking at anything specific at the moment um any particular tokens or or categories or or areas that we're interested at the moment um on my end I it seems like it's kind of turning around but I've kind of been bullish from like like most of Q2 when everybody was getting upset during the crb market I've I've never seen such a mix of high prices like Bitcoins are like low 60s ethereum is are like high 2000s combined with such bad energy so I mean like and I feel like this is every cycle so I'm like I love that everybody's so upset when bitcoin's like 6K like this is this is just a sign of of things to come in the future but then also you know as an analyst I spend most of my time looking at like fun Al data so you know if you look at Q2 we're still in Q3 now but if you look at Q2 you know record active daily addresses record revenues you know we're starting to see some more reasonable valuations in the space like price to sales price to equities kind of like matching some of their trfi and web two pairs so I mean overall I I you know I'm feeling good about the markets and you know with you know entering a interest rate cutting environment and hopefully after the US elections there's less un reggulator uncertainty either way you know I'm I'm I'm I'm shaping up for a good 2025 yeah and looking out six weeks ahead um the 2024 election certainly seems to be big event that the market is waiting for resolution on if we think back to the 2020 election uh we saw a vix Spike and then Equity indices form this High time frame equilibrium and consolidation into the resolution of the election then ultimately like all of the hedging positions rolled off um people took off their protection and we saw a very large move to the upside uh following the election and looking at the price action in equity indices and the Vic Spike we saw at the end of July um I can't help but think it's the same fractal from 2020 but just pulled forward a few months so seeing things break to the upside right now um coupled with rate cuts and a bullish trajectory on that on that path um I'm particularly optimistic and then uh looking at crypto markets in particular um there are many many assets that have uh broken their downtrends and established weekly uptrends um we still see Bitcoin dominance near cycle highs um that being said there have been some I guess you could say blue chip alts that have had substantial outperformance in recent weeks with moves being 100 to 200% um so ultimately I think Equity indices uh create bullish backdrop and um a lot of the favorable Assets in the space uh could trade a lot higher over the coming months months yeah I like I like the overview there I think um it's funny if you think back a year um I think these were these were all sort of the factors that people had in their minds right for 2024 it was like rates were still high people were thinking okay rate Cuts will come eventually we'll have an election year in 24 um there'll be these other factors like kind of you know maybe come out of a recession Etc that was you know the the economy is not doing so well you know late 22 early 23 um and I think you look to the sentiment recently um where maybe you know we have some of those things coming into play with you know Ray Cuts actually happening an election coming coming up soon and I think people are it's just funny to see people like maybe overthink it they're like no I don't know like it maybe it won't happen the way that I thought it would happen you know and planned it out a year ago um and to see you know like you said some some assets you know break Trend or make moves upward and have you know people in the community on the timelines on Twitter saying you know maybe this is a takeprofit point like we could go lowerer again I don't know what to do like um I I think that it's an interesting time in the market when you have sentiment like that where people they're sort of battle scarred from the past few months um it's it's it's a big question for them on if we see this trend continue or not um and I think it's funny because you're seeing some of the risk appetite come back quite quickly um I think I don't know if people are just are overthinking like rate cutting into like what seems to be an okay economy at the moment um but there are like meme coins that have done multiple x00 perents in the past you know week um off of this kind of this trending move in Bitcoin and other assets so uh we'll see where it goes um but it's certainly exciting positive at the moment um is is the way that it seems um one thing that um an agency that that loves to continue throwing a wrench in our plans is um the SEC and um there was a headline the other day that um I think was not quite as truly factual as it as it claimed to be but um basically the the headline came across the the table that said the SEC says crypto mining devices are securities now I think this was not quite the actual like ruling and result here um this this green United um was selling basically boxes that they claimed mined their token in what was like assumed to be like a dpin project um what I think what they were actually selling were Bitcoin mining and then they were they had some process to basically you know reassign like these green tokens to people um on like ethereum for example um so it was a little bit of like um you know just sort of blatant fraud I think um masked as like a dein project essentially um so I I think that ruling kind of I don't know if these writers just you know they just really really love clicks but um I think ultimately the ruling was a little more on the fraud side than on the actual like you know dpin and other mining machines being actual Securities um I'd love to hear any takes though like I don't know that you could could really Steel Man or make the argument that like a computer or or generalized device that can mine a cryptocurrency would be viewed as a security I mean your phone could be a security at that point yeah I mean I actually skimmed the um the ruling the actual ruling by the judge just to see like is am I are they misunderstanding something was it really clickbaity and I think think it was like you said just for the clicks because in the ruling it was like the SEC has clearly showed that this investment contract combined with the mining offering of mining devices and investment contract is a security offering um so I I think you know I think the better headline should have been in this case like SEC gets one right because this was just blatant fraud and I don't know this is the kind of thing I would like to see more from the SEC like these instead of like going after the actors who are trying to do good by the industry so um you know I I'm all for I'm all for the SEC on this one and um yeah but maybe maybe the clickbaity title made it so that we actually got some coverage of of something the SEC did right yeah and at least for the Hoy test um for it to be an investment contract the the expectations of profits must be derived from the efforts of of others um but to the extent you're a customer buying some hardware and that Hardware derives the tokens or the expectation of profit and I guess you own that individual uh Enterprise um that doesn't really seem like a security to me um that being said like we have we have this problem in the space where um there are a tremendous number of instruments that are um sold to the market communicating some expectation of profit um and it's it's highly inconvenient to the industry um but a lot of those instruments very much do look like unregistered Securities offerings so I think ultimately like crypto enables rails to um novel rails to bring to Market a lot of things that look like Securities that that don't have um his or case law behind them um so I ultimately think you know with the 2024 election we might get better Frameworks for uh Clarity on what these things look like I think in this case it was more so the common enterprise definition too for the how test because I think they were selling the boxes but not actually delivering it to the end clients so they were operating it on behalf of them like it's okay to buy a helium device and set that up yourself run your own node and you you were the one in charge of how much profits you make to to some to a certain degree but because that they were operating all of this for you on the one entity like that's more so an investment contract or security offering than anything else yeah at that point you could almost you know you could you could take away the kind of obis of the hardware and it's essentially like you're paying money to receive you know then tokens directly at that point um versus the alternative where you know you've got the hardware you're mining on the on like a network per se and you're receiving the tokens from you know the rewards of the network um that makes total sense I think back to your point as well Luke I recall years ago like in 20 in the 2021 kind of Market cycle um even like memecoins and other you know shitcoins if you want to call them that on um you know Binet smart chain other chains there was this tendency earlier on to make like explicit statements of you know we are going to do this we will achieve this like the token will do this um and there were I think there were some rulings during that year that um you know Le led to some slap on the wrist in regard to like explicit language um likely due to that you know kind of that that measure of what is a security or not um and we saw that language change very quickly on lots of projects websites um as a result so I think that's something that's kind of been continuing onward over the past few years as well yeah almost better to to scrap the road map and any plan of a business and just call a shitcoin for what it is so it's funny too because I think you know with memes with with nfts I think we often the the Advent of utility is is usually has been seen as like the death of that thing so um it's a bit ironic the way that that has played out but um I guess since we're on the the topic of of meme coins um I wanted to highlight um the salana dashboard the salon Dex activity dashboard that uh our data team recently put out out um and speaking of memes um I think there's some few interesting things to highlight specifically on those um for one salana as we all know I think has been kind of the meme coin Hub um of of recent I guess maybe the past year or so you'd want to say um at this point pump fund the Advent of that platform and kind of the proliferation of that kind of idea across different chains as well um we saw this pretty significant rise in in mcoin Dex volume dominance on Soul um upwards of what 70% um at at some points here um and actually with the kind of Advent of pump fun that contributed to an overall rise in that percentage so there was like some kind of net increase in in total meme activity um you know in recent weeks and months it's been down I think as you know the market has kind of chopped a bit um but it's interesting to see this trend and I think if you extrapolate to other chains you know base um likely ethereum probably binance smart chain the others where um this type of you know Meme activity happens um you know it would not be surprising to see similar like high ratios of activity there's some pretty strong pmf um I think another another exciting thing and interesting thing Dan Dan Smith on the team frequently talks about um active addresses low value active addresses it's it's a bit of um it's it's a common point for him and I think it's interesting to see um that broken out here where we've got um Dex active addresses with less than $10 in volume um radium has kind of overtaken that and I think you know upwards of 99% of active addresses um in that less than 10 $10 lifetime volume bracket um I think likely a result of that being you know Meme coins maybe coming from pump fun getting their liquidity on radium um and then seeing you know you know attempts by community members Maybe to to distribute that token to as many addresses as possible um maybe get people thinking that um that lots of people are buying in what have you but the other met the other metrics for um radium have been interesting I know Marky wrote a report on radium their overall kind of share of of salana Dex volume has been um you know was growing into um the beginning of this year and Still Remains quite strong like they they've sort of hovered near this 50% um kind of margin of all Soul activity is is there anything else um super interesting I guess about maybe the case for radium yeah I mean for sure so just on a caveat what like okay that was interesting how much meme coins or like less than $10 meme coin activity is on radium I did a report last month or maybe it came out earlier this year and it was based on last month's data most recent data as in August and in August I was looking through the the data and 13% of all of their of their volume was from mem Co so I mean it's you know it's still predominantly used for other things and I mean like Sol dashboard here says like you know if you were to break it down into users who traded over half a million in in volume they are still like market leader maybe oras coming up with that too and you know Carlos who also works on the research team with us has um has a report on um Ora as well but I think the um I mean I think the thing about radium that really stuck out to me was how much revenue that they making from all of this this trading activity and then you know I mean they they've done 460 million in fees alone and um a 35 million of that 35 million of that has just been spent on repurchasing their token and you know I annualized it and it's a 12.2% buyback yield and I mean that's that buyback yield is like something that's unheard of in trfi like apple and Microsoft none of these companies have anywhere near that kind of buyback amount so I mean that's I think that's a great value accutive mechanism for the token especially in that level and they still have enough um put aside to add usdc to their Treasury and grow their balance sheet and and because of this they have such low emissions they don't need to incentivize and anybody I think their annual emission rate when I did it last month was less than 1% so I mean combined with those High revenues those low emission rates you know we we get get a pretty attractive valuation and and you besides price to fees price to sales there's also price to earnings which you can do with it now and I mean with radium because there's no other expenses you know like for trfi companies net income is typically the bottom of the line but it's not really necessarily what the cash flow is because there's other things like amortization depreciation maybe there's stock expenses whatnot so like even from a cash flow bis this earnings that radium has is actually just pure cash flow and so I think when I did it last month they had low single digit PE ratio which is attractive but then even when you do it when you look at it from a price to cast FL Rao ratio it's even more attractive and if you put it in line with some of its other pairs in the industry from a price earnings ratio I think it it had like a or 270% upside potential if it was just a to trade in line with some of its paers which I don't know why it's not um but maybe you know these I think the markets take longer to pricing fundamentals than they do hype in this industry so I think maybe as maybe as the financials of radium become a little bit more known as a part to just their volumes I think the market might start to realize like there is a growth and value play here yeah I love it I I think maybe the one other point and I think we'll talk about it um a little bit later when we get into details around the conferences is um like you're saying it does seem like maybe radium goes under the radar a little bit you know Jupiter kind of stands out as like the dominant Hub um of activity really on salana um even though you know the trades get routed to places like radium for example the trade you know memes Etc um so like you're saying you know it could just be people aren't really looking under the hood Maybe quite yet um they haven't seen those relationships and um and maybe just jup is kind of doing a good job at continuing to keep people's eyes on them hey guys permissionless the event for crypto natives is heading west to Salt Lake City and we're bringing the biggest names in crypto together for an incredible can't miss event join me in the rest of block works on October 9th to hear for more than 200 Industry Titans including Nick white from Celestia shiron from igir and keone from Mona the conversations at permission list will be covering the hottest themes in crypto including modularity reaking the Bitcoin and Solon ecosystems Ai and crypto rollups l2s institutional adoption and of course the November election that will be right around the cor we couldn't be more excited about this event and it's happening in one of the most beautiful places in the US ticket prices will be increasing towards the end of June so get your ticket today make sure to use the code so I get some credit and bragging rights from the rest of the team uh use zerox 10 for 10% off on your ticket one more thing we're also hosting the permissionless re hacka font in collaboration with ble box the theme this year is a multi-chain future to build a better cross chain experience so I don't have to have a heart attack every time I bridge to a new chain all hacka found participants will receive a free ticket to attend permissions so if you're a developer come join us in Salt Lake City team up with fellow devs and build the multi-chain future in other news the kind of more the other exciting stuff um in recent weeks has been conferences um I know Mark you were over there in Singapore we had um token 249 and also Salon breakpoint I guess let's let's jump into token um and talk a little bit around what happened there um or maybe some exciting things that that happened there um ethereum versus soul I think has been a big topic um just generally within you know the crypto space but um I'm curious like how mention that was how mentioned it was or how how much you know maybe um a token that was focused on or what people were saying about kind of that relationship between the two yeah I mean token token was the biggest crypto conference or event I've ever been to I think it was something like 20,000 people and like 600 side events and like I couldn't keep up with all of it I had to pick which ones to focus my attention on or go to which talks it kind of felt like picking coins out of the tens of thousands that they are in a very fragmented market and everybody's trying to shill you their own and so it was kind of um simple IC of that but yeah the eth versus Soul debate was very hot I think you know it was probably the plurality of the discussions I had with with investors and and I'm not exaggerating when I say nobody chose eth over soul and you know I tried to steal man the argument sometimes and you know poke some Pooles in it you know just to get some kind of interesting interesting debate but you know Soul was the clear winner for the entire for the entire confence everybody was building on Soul or or you know in some case l2s and in many cases l2s especially especially the social apps on base um but you know for the most part no I didn't meet a single Builder on Main net ethereum right which I guess is their plan but it still LED towards this bearish sentiment and in my opinion probably overly bearish sentiment you know I like to see this level of bearishness um when when the prices are still holding fine so yeah I mean from that perspective Soul was a clear winner in the 2049 TW talk 2049 conference yeah I think great points there I mean we've we've talked a lot on this podcast about eth versus Soul l2s versus you know monolithic chain designs um we don't have to get into that debate today um I'm curious though you know it's not surprising that teams are not building on eth Main net I think you know like you're saying that's sort of the plan right push activity to l2s um maybe sort of subsidize the growth of of you know the ethereum kind of platform in that direction um with you know basically the the super low cost nearly free cost of of blobs um today versus you know having everything or mostly everything there are a few L2 teams in the salana space at this point but um having everything kind of running on soul and and AC crewing fees in that way um I'm curious you know you mentioned teams building there is there anything around like institutional um focus or sentiment like you know if teams are not building on Main net and they're you know all these projects are wanting to build in salana or on l2s um are investors thinking the same way like they need to be looking at the so ecosystem versus you know eth or the L2 ecosystems yeah for sure I mean I think in terms of where projects are building it seem to be a common Trend so I'm just going to say with the l2s so social apps base was the play for deepen apps Solana was the play and I'm and I'm and I'm talking to them and I'm asking them why what was the logic and you know it wasn't too much of a deep analysis into the tech and this kind of stuff and this is not what I would expect of entrepreneurs in the space right you shouldn't have to do a you know detailed analysis of AWS if you're deciding to La launch your infrastructure there and I think it was just more precedence like farcast FR Tech they launched on base other projects other social projects have seen that they think okay this is the best place to launch when I think when helium moved from its own L1 to Solana that was a that was seemingly a good signal it was it worked better for them and I talked to these other deepend projects and they want to build on salana because they see other deepend projects to building there um but I think one of the one of the big themes maybe it wasn't super pronounced but it was the institutions moving to Solana so I mean we had announcements from you know circle uscc is already there they're expected to expand Visa um is announced that they're planning to expand PayPal P USD is already there Hamilton Lane they and Frankle Templeton were talking about launching mutual funds on Solano which you know which was one of the things that got me most excited you know I was there clapping like yes Mutual fans on salano but I guess that's a little bit Boomer of me um you know coinbase is trying to bring cbtc directly to salano um and I think a lot of the institutions are seeing the speed how cheap it is and I think you know there was a second room they call it the right curve stage where they had a little bit more workshops and were giving advice to teams of how to go to market a little bit better and I haven't I hadn't you don't really see that as some of the other like maybe ethereum conferences a little bit more research focused as opposed to go to market focused and I think that's why we saw a little bit more apps on salana a little bit more direct to Consumer stuff I mean and the institutions I call out were mostly Finance related but there was things like travala um announced that they on salana that's a booking a booking agency so you can book flights PID directly in stable coin or sold directly on Salon even Philippines stable coins you know something I think might be might actually be useful for remittances seeing as they're one of the largest um remittances um countries in the world they're launching their stable coin on salana for many of the same reasons all of these other institutions are doing it you know we have Kane Warwick with infinex coming you know put putting it in Solana I know it's chain agnostic but it's Solana you know right now um Power Ledger which I don't know if you remember was like an old deep in energy um play back in 2017 you know they I they were on ethereum and they announced their move to sanao but what what I did think was interesting was that you know the reactions from the audience for these OG defi eth plays moving to salana weren't as enthusiastic as just the native Solana um companies announcing their new products right so I mean there was a lot more Applause for Camino announcing spot leverage than there was for when run came on stage and said sky is coming to salana you know um but yeah I think those those are the large takeaways but I mean just bringing it up I wanted to get Luke's thoughts on this I I thought of you instantly when when it was announced like okay so lending is bringing spot leverage like it's trying to be a little bit more vertically integrated yeah so love to get your thoughts yeah I think ultimately seeing like as you mention these um ogdy protocols or Athena um even just these evm based killer apps moving their tokens to the salana ecosystem um Athena is using a layer zero route maker Dow or sky is now planning on using a wormhole route It ultimately shows that like these projects that have uh billions in value for their core tokens one want to see their tokens proliferate on on Solana as opposed to just the evm side um so ultimately like salana gets uh more non-native assets um more assets that that carry yield um the the sky ecosystem tokens will be coupled with an incentive program in the form of Sky token emissions uh to various defi projects that integrate and we saw incredible success with pi USD um and their incentive program on communo in particular and I can't help but think uh a similar incentive program for uh sky and uh susd would would see similar success um Camino in particular I'm I'm quite bullish on uh we've seen them basically hold multiples of multiples in deposits of their next two closest competitors combined um we see them bring Camino V2 onto the road map which will introduce uh Market lending layer uh Vault layer for isolated lending um orderbook lending to find a counterparty at a set rate um spot leverage as Mark mentioned so basically like seeing Camino hold this incumbent status but also like such enormous separation from its closest competitors um I think sits on a tremendous number of assets uh to expand the product Beyond just lend borrow um as we're seeing with spot leverage so this could include something like a protocol specific LST um a protocol native stable coin uh on all their assets they could go a uh a sky or AO approach to their stable coin design then also using their um LST multiply product they could offer um a delta neutral stable coin kind of similar to um Athena's stable coin so ultimately like we continue to see communo separate itself from the pack but also continue to ship new products um with more non nonnative ecosystem tokens coming on to the market um particularly optimistic that's interesting um on on the you know you said maker coming across using Wormhole trying to offer incentives it it kind of almost feels like good timing now I remember you talked about there was good incentives with P USD on even on Cino I think um and it was 14% APR you were getting something like you know low double digit yield I noticed that the yields have come down down by half like to maybe around like 7 8% still not bad but then I also noticed simultaneously Pi usd's market cap on Solana has dropped drastically I think in the last month they've gone from 1 billion market cap to 700 million uh it's I don't know if it's I think it might have to do with the incentives it might have to do with maybe PayPal pulling some of the incentives it might have to do with them like announcing this this new feature for merchants to buy sell and hold crypto and be able to send it to external wallets and maybe they want to add some incentives to there so I mean yeah maybe there is some some opportunity for some of these um e defi projects to come across and capture some some some market share with those yields but I also didn't realize that kamino was expanding into so many different let's just call it verticals do you think it puts it a little bit more more in competition with Jupiter now because they seem to be doing the same they kind of want to be a One-Stop shop you know they have spots they have perss soon with limited or like with limit orders DCA capabilities bridging they they announced a launch PR a. proo you know they want to launch they announce a mobile app that they're going to that they're going to move to as well they bought Solana FM and coin Hall they're integrating Google pay Apple pay and credit card payments with like rebates like it seems like they're trying to also quickly expand into the different verticals and now that you've mentioned it it kind of seems like Camino is trying to do the same thing so I'm kind of like wondering if there's a head-to-head there potentially in the future yeah I think they'll bump into each other eventually but at this point the two daps kind of have somewhat distinct niches um if we think of like Camino's original core product offering if was basic lend borrow um then you also had their liquidity product which was uh automated um concentrated liquidity management positions uh where you could deploy your position to a number of different indexes Orca radium metora and the protocol would Implement a um concentrated liquidity management strategy and readjust your positions accordingly so effectively became a tool for users to deploy I guess a bit more of a a yield optimized strategy for lping across dexes and they've had spot margin um trading previously for long and short um generally it was only up to 5x leverage U margined by usdc on a select few assets so ultimately I think this uh um this coming upgrade expands that that market substantially more and then they've also had their uh multiply product which is um a looping strategy for LST yield using flash loans originated um through uh the Lend borrow market so what you do is you'd uh Supply your LST uh collect the LST yield and uh The Lending Market yield you'd borrow so against that and then Loop that strategy up to 5x um and ultimately uh it would offer substantially more attractive yield for LST holders um sometimes 12 to 20% um depending on the LST with pretty minimal risk of liquidations as um Camino uses their their Oracle logic to basically hard code to query the underlying state pool's balance of Soul um as opposed to using like a market um or or Dex pool Oracle where a dpeg or Price impact could result in liquidation so like ultimately between Camino and Jupiter I see I see their products being differentiated enough that they can kind of compete in um in different verticals um but ultimately like lenb has has demonstrated to be like one of the the killer apps in evm in terms of like the accumulation of uh absolute value of deposits and I think what Camino can do with with those deposits in their protocol kind of gives it an advantage for subsequent product uh upgrades whether that's um things like the liquidity product um or spot leverage as well so I like the level of depth um on covering both of these and I think in the back of my mind what I'm thinking the whole time Haring back to Mark's comment about you know seeing the application Focus um like at breakpoint specifically you know I know that it at previous conferences or in over the past maybe year or so um that's kind of been a bit of like a a negative point maybe for E related conferences right too much infra no app talk um I don't know if you know the salana kind of ecosystem and Foundation Etc like if they've just found that right mix because it does feel like you know when when I think about specific examples of like INF for development it's like you've got things like dialect building blanks to make you know to put experiences directly within socials or or web pages um bring crypto like use cases to the users where they are um other things like you know fired dancer where the focuses like you know improving TPS you know maybe improving latency Etc making the network better for users to kind of interact or you know enable you know greater trading venues Etc you know Mass user adoption of of social applications Etc um and then the rest of the time is spent talking about you know what all these apps are doing to improve themselves for users um I think that's just a really interesting like maybe difference in um in in feeling or sentiment that we're seeing um where previous conferences have been like oh man it was like 50 infra projects and like I don't know just build an app man it would be sweet and and then you go to breakpoint and it's like you know we're talking about salana Seeker we're talking about some play salana gaming device potentially coming um you know like you just mentioned Mark you know Jupiter trying to become like this one stop kind of hub for for users interacting on salana um all of the kind of interesting offerings that Camino can build out um and kind of grow as this barland platform um I think that's just like a really interesting takeaway um when considering kind of these two like sort of Giants at at this point in time and and where the focus is at yeah as you mentioned that you know the Solana Saga like I was surprised in salana breakpoints by how much of a focus it was on gaming not necessarily in the talks but in the booths there was a whole section just for gaming and people were playing games where they have the monitors they have the external monitors on the outside so you can see these enthusiasts play these games live and and take take a look at the AAA gaming action obviously St Atlas was a very big one it um they had they I think they had a whole floor downstairs just for Star Atlas um that was very popular there were like probably dozens of gaming projects um in in that in that booths in the salana conference um I don't know if you have any I don't know have you all ever played any you have crypto games how big you all into that I mean I'm I'm not I think they're all pretty bad but please please tell me I'm wrong I defin I've explored them um I think there's um it's difficult because I don't know that the industry has really like figured out the right implementation in particular yet like I think there are maybe some specific examples or ideas that that could work well um like I think if you think about traditional MMO games like you know in-game economies that are powered by like real currencies like that's that's really interesting because I think a lot of the people that play those games they treat the in-game currency like real currency when they're playing like they really are trying to like game the markets and like you know be sort of like you know the top Clan or like top user um in the server and like to put real value behind that is really interesting like Eve online is kind of an interesting example of that um that's kind of existed for a while where people are investing like real dollars into like these these crazy fights um so there's there's things like that but I also think that um you know there's um the magic block team um on salana that that has this you know interesting means of using like essentially a rollup to enable like much faster um higher throughput activity to where you could theoretically be doing all these actions like on chain um in a way that doesn't like strain the network itself um thanks to the to the kind of rollup design that they're that they're going with um but you know I think we'll need to see more experimentation it's it's not really clear whether like the benefits of just having all these actions kind of be recorded on and transactions are um going to be like super meaningful for the user unless we find ways kind of to make it so um so at this point a lot of the games are they're the very early stage like it's it hearkens back to like 2014 like mobile you know mobile apps on on iPhone Etc um they're very simple designs usually because I mean building games is is difficult you can't just like spit out a triaa game in a year takes a ton of money it takes like a lot of years um a lot of developer resources and time to like make something that looks and feels nice so um with all the raises that have happened over the past year few years like it's not surprising that there aren't like games coming out you know one after the other because they they just need more time to get themselves out there I mean I think the star Atlas example is an interesting one because I think you know they've sort of been like an in development project for um several several years at this point yeah as a as a previous RuneScape player I can definitely attest to in-game money is real money you know I sold my account pair to pair for real cash um but yeah I think I am a little bit more I can see the vision more with idle games and and maybe for those who don't know idle games is basically where you hop on your phone you do one transaction it it you know you do one thing and you come back and check it in eight hours like you say I'm going to build a cabin and eight hours later you build a cabin you get some rewards I kind of see that as a little bit more a little bit an easier stepping Ladder into this into this web 3 gaming you don't have to commit too much time to it you don't need that much speed you can get rewarded in tokens for doing things that you might have been doing anyway on a regular Idol game which I used to play but I got a little bit addicted so I had to remove them off of my phone too much hours spent on that um but yeah that that um the rollups thing that you were talking about that's the ephemeral rollups that like can spin up and disappear okay yeah I've heard about that I need to dive deeper yeah I I do like your point on um kind of the idol game design I think you know like telegram mini apps I think we've seen like a little bit of tapping into something there like there's this ability to you know I think if you think about those games as like mobile apps like you you know micro microtransactions micro payments and like doing like quick things to speed up you know the time to finish buildings and stuff like that I think that's been a pretty successful business model I think if you think of like Clash of Clans like those have been pretty successful um blockchains kind of bringing interesting um mechanism to that where you can have microtransactions that are like you know a few pennies or like a penny to send a transaction on soul for example or on ton um I've seen game like some games like cazin and some of these others that are on telegram Implement that kind of design where it's basically an idle app but you have opportunities to like basically do like a you know low fee couple Cent transaction to like get a quick reward for a few hours um I do think that's interesting I think it Taps into something like you're saying um and the people the kind of feeling around those types of games um but yeah the ephemeral rollup design is is an interesting one um I'm curious to see where it goes we're hopefully we'll see some um you know maybe some early games or prototypes um launch with that design and and get to see like you know the interesting things that that having kind of the all of the you know maybe movement or you know individual like user player data um being kind of shot through a like this this ephemeral Ro validator um and then you know the state being stored on chain that there could be some interesting designs that come out of it um I guess I I think we've kind of touched on all of the major highlights I guess from uh the conferences anything else uh any other points that you guys want to get out before before I shill our our next upcoming conference I guess the only last thing is the the the fire dancer announcement um like day one they were like we are live on test net and everybody was very happy with that and then day two they were like well actually we've been live on Main net too for the past couple months with very select teams and I thought that was pretty awesome too and I just wanted to bring it up because I I do think that you know like Solana started from a different path to ethereum and you know they didn't have the multi client approach but like now they're finally getting there and this might finally eliminate one of the biggest criticisms with the salana blockchain which is liveness and toally did did say that he will remove the beta label from Solana if when fire dancer reaches a third of the network so you know finally you know no beta potentially less um liveness issues like I I'm looking forward to that I'm looking forward to the multic client architecture of salana and then like maybe a you know converging design something closer to ethereum and what they've done you know lucky that they've been around to kind of set the lead on that but yeah yeah I think everyone is excited to see what that looks like when fired answerer finally comes to main net um you know the million TPS tests I don't know that we'll see those numbers um those are kind of Ideal situations right but um we've got other other new chains coming up there's you know there's the monets there's the mega eths they're touting big throughput numbers 10,000 TPS Etc um and obviously Aptos andu like they're pushing those boundaries as as well so um it's clear that you know salana this is something that that they need to get out to kind of continue that that upward momentum um in terms of like network throughput network stability liveness um kind of all of the above um and I'm sure that eth and salana talks I think will probably be big Point um and part of permission lists permission list three that's coming up um October 9th through October 11th um get your tickets um we do have a special code for you guys um that that tune in um ox10 um so please there are you know get yourself out there um join in on the the eth soul debate if if you feel like it um I think we should have there should be some exciting you know pickle ball tournament going on um a Fight Night event going on so um plenty of entertainment to kind of mix in with the uh maybe heated debates or um interesting uh you know discussions and and talks um anything else you guys want to highlight or anything specific um um coming up in permission list that you may want to call out yeah come for the uh mountains fresh air and great food and stay for the best conference in crypto heck yeah awesome well thanks guys for coming on today and uh appreciate you everyone for listening in see y'all [Music]

========================================

--- Video 82 ---
Video ID: 8-q5qtYo0gA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8-q5qtYo0gA
Title: Decentralizing the Dollar on Ethereum | Michael & Colin
Published: 2024-09-25 16:06:45 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Michael and Colin from Liquity! We discussed Liquity v1 vs Liquity v2, how user’s are behaving, and the role of their stability pool. Additionally, we discussed how they’re thinking about capturing revenue with the v2 model, and the importance of integrations and composability for stablecoins. Finally, we ended the discussion with commentary on why decentralized stablecoins are needed in the first place.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Follow Liquity: https://x.com/LiquityProtocol
Follow Colin: https://x.com/colingplatt
Follow Michael: https://x.com/svobodamichael
Follow Luke: https://x.com/0xMether
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:58 Changes From Liquity v1 to v2
6:59 The Need For Liquity v2
10:54 Liquity v2 User Behavior
17:51 Permissionless III Ad
19:05 The Role of the Stability Pool
28:55 Capturing Revenue With Liquity v2
32:44 Stablecoin Integrations and Composability
37:05 Protocols Built on Top of Liquity
41:51 Returning Revenue to Users 
45:51 Why Do We Need Decentralized Stablecoins?
51:04 Growth of Decentralized Stablecoins
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 83 ---
Video ID: hIome6KsC-o
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hIome6KsC-o
Title: Creating the Future of the Internet Onchain | Jesse Pollak
Published: 2024-09-19 15:05:42 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Jesse Pollak, Base builder #001, joined us to discuss the creation of Base, maintaining a consistent UX on Base, and Base sequencers vs other L2s! We also dove into the importance of decentralizing Base, how the team is thinking about Parallelized EVMs, and their consumer focussed approach. Finally, we closed out by asking Jesse how he is thinking about the next five years. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Join us at Permissionless III. Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iii
--
Follow Jesse Pollak: https://x.com/jessepollak
Follow Nikhil: https://x.com/0xnikhilchat
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:35 The Creation of Base
4:16 Raising the Gas Limits on Base
8:49 Base's Consistent UX
15:46 Base Sequencers vs Other L2s
19:29 How is Base Thinking About Parallelized EVMs?
31:01 Permissionless III Ad
32:15 Polygon Ad
33:06 Decentralizing Base
44:17 Base's Consumer Focus
52:32 Base in Five Years
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
and because they they are seeing the impact of having a global onchain economy that increases Innovation creativity and freedom and so me and my teams and coinbase and so many other people in the industry that is what we are working towards and we've been working for a long time like more than a decade at this point but our time has come and the moment is now for all of us to put our heads down to ignore the noise ignore the prices to keep building to stay based and to create the future of the internet onchain the polygon Community grants program was launched with 1 billion toal all four polygon Builders season 1 is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon projects builders on polygon these grants are for you join the aggregated future today by applying at polygon.net on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice pachio Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of ox research uh bachio is out today so you've got me instead filling in as well as nikelle from the blocks research team and we're joined by Jesse Pollock from Bas um Jesse glad to have you on um I guess just to just to kick things off and um start off the conversation here I want to get into what what really inspired the creation of bass and were there some specific problems or or goals you guys were going after um or trying to solve yeah absolutely so the the creation of Base was kind of a journey um I'd been leading all of the consumer business at coinbase on the engineering side for five years and um after kind of doing that and getting to a certain scale um I I'd always been a founder and I wanted to go and start something new and I kind of had this idea what would it what would it look like if we brought coinbase on chain we have this incredibly powerful new technology platform that's emerging and coinbase is kind of at The Cutting Edge of crypto but it was founded in 2012 back before smart contracts existed um really back before any of this new onchain world that we're building on today uh was a reality and so you know I think we had this insight as a team of like if we can figure out how to transform coinbase maybe we can then figure out how to kind of transpose that to the world and bring the entire world on chain and so in late 2021 um I started a journey to figure out like what did it mean to bring coinbase on chain we went through a bunch of different ideas all kind of at the like product layer thinking about how do we solve specific problems for end users or businesses um and after going through about a year of exploration and a bunch of trying and failing um we kind of pulled back and said hey every single time we try to build a product on chain we're running into the same platform problems and this I think was probably like my engineering mindset really like coming through it's like every single time we're talking about how do we make sure that this can scale to the scale of coinbase how do we make sure it works really well with all the coinbase products like how do we make sure we're doing it in a secure way and all of those are um kind of specific platform problems that point to the a lack of good tooling that pointed to a lack of good tooling to build onchain applications at the scale and quality kind of requirements of coinbase and so after a bunch of failing and you know trying on the product side we said hey let's try and solve that platform problem and if we can build a platform that can bring coinbase onchain uh then we can build a platform that could bring the world La chain and that was the Inception of Bas uh we started in late 2022 um launched internal test net called Bas net um just to kind of like prove it out see if Engineers wanted to build on it um and then sped run uh to a test net in February of 2023 and then it main that in August of 202 uh three and now you know we're about a year later and Bas is the largest L2 in the world if you look at activity um monthly active users monthly active developers um we still have some catching up to do on the total kind of assets on the Chain but you know given that the the other folks are you know three or four years older than us you know that'll happen naturally um and so it's been really cool to see just how quickly I think the world has um come to base and seen the opportunity here to to to kind of make a bunch of change and positive impact awesome love love all the background um you started mentioning you know limitations as a platform um running into issues launching products and things like that I guess I'm curious if we get into maybe some of the technicals there can you explain the strategy or the thought process that went into raising the gas limits um for the chain yeah absolutely um so we uh had been working kind of even before we realized we wanted to launch base on scaling ethereum because as we looked at what it would take to bring the world on chain we kind of had this idea of oh we need to get transactions down to you know an average cost of below one cent and an average speed of less than a second that's kind of this point where um everyday people you know aren't going to think about it if it's less than a scent and um it's going to feel instant if it's less than a second and so in early 2022 before we started working on base we we' started contributing and kind of co-leading the effort to bring 4844 to ethereum which was a big uh kind of scalability upgrade um that ultimately took about two years to make happen um so we started working on that with the op Labs team who who built optimism and a bunch of the ethereum core developers um throughout 2022 in uh 2023 we helped lead working groups on that and we did prototypes we did core development um and as we kind of got to 2024 we had line of sight on that shipping and we weren't really sure what would happen when that shipped I mean at the time the bulk of our costs and the bulk of user costs um were made up in ethereum L1 costs um and we were kind of unsure hey when we drop those costs by creating this new blob space um are we going to uh have a a different uh you know behavior in users is the pricing mechanics going to change like what is it actually going to look like and then it happened March 13th of this year we we switched over to 4844 uh and um pretty immediately we saw a massive amount of induced Demand on base um you know we just saw way more people transacting because transaction fees dropped by more than 10x you know they went from you know High tens of cents to generally Subs scent um and the bulk of that cost I mean all of that cost reduction was because the L1 cost dropped very precipitously now the the thing that then happened was okay now we reduced the L one cost essentially to zero but the L2 throughput um was still constrained and so we started having more and more transactions and that led to uh kind of us kind of going above our gas Target um which then led to increasing L2 execution costs uh and so that was a shift in kind of where we needed to focus our efforts to scale base we we' done a good job on L1 scaling although there's still a lot more work to do there um and now we needed to shift to focusing the actual kind of like how fast could the chain itself run and there's a bunch of different um kind of uh constraints and challenges in that one you actually need to make sure that like node software can run fast enough um two you need to make sure that you're you're solving the kind of long-term um uh like State bloat challenge of you know there's just being so much data that you have to manage um three you have to obviously uh keep up with that on L1 to make sure there's actually enough data availability and so at that point we basically just started making the list of here's all the things we need to work through we we we have a full dedicated engineering team that's just focused on protocol scaling um across L1 and L2 um and we we kind of took this mindset of okay we're just going to start incrementally increasing our gas Target as we build confidence that we've been making progress on the performance uh State Management uh characteristics of the chain and so since you know the middle of March when 4844 happened uh We've Forex the throughput of the chain we've gone from 2.5 megag gas a second to one uh 10 megag gas per second and we've kind of like St planted a flag in the ground on what our Northstar is which is a giga gas per second which is uh a thousand million or thousand megga gas so we have about 100x more to go um and there's a lot of work that we need to do to get there but I think one of the things I feel really grateful for is there's all of these different teams that are working on this um from folks like Paradigm who are pushing it with ref um to you know the GU team who's been doing great work on this for many years uh to to kind of new entrance like Mega eth and um others who are kind of pushing uh L2 and evbm scalability with par parallelization and so I think the really cool thing that's going to happen over the next year is you're going to have this kind of collective effort um to figure out how do we grow throughput uh and Bas is going to be putting uh kind of all of our resources to help accelerate that as much as possible so we can scale to kind of support the world's needs on chain gotcha now that's really helpful Jesse and uh you know would love to touch on the paralyzation part uh you know just in a second but you mentioned a really great point where like after for EIP 4844 based on this explosion of uh of usage you know I think it's very clear that crypto users and Traders are very uh you know affected by the cost transact on chain and and Bas was a perfect case study for that but we've seen instances on like polygon even optimism and arbitrum where we see these like higher revert rates or even reorgs when you know increasing the gas limit lowering the cost transact on chain for a variety of reasons it's not purely just because of increasing the gas limit but what we've noticed is that b does not fall into that category we haven't seen those reversions or those reorgs on bass and so I was curious how you know what was bass's strategy in ensuring that you know let's lower the cost to transact on chain but somehow maintain this very consistent user experience has been very clear on Bas so curious on how you guys achieved that yeah well first off I I think if you compare base to polygon I mean it's just a different technical architecture you know polygon has a very you know it's a proof proof of stake it's an L1 essentially um you know side chain it has some anchoring that happens to ethereum but you know it's running a proof of uh of State consensus and um it it has a bunch of performance characteristics that as you increase the the kind of gas limit or gas Target um it's going to be harder to run that proof of stake Network and I think that's where we've seen um challenges with performance there challenges with lots of reorgs um challenges with error rates and that's been something that's pretty been pretty consistent over the last you know five years of polygon's existence I mean polygon's been an incredible leader in space and super grateful for all the work that they've done um and you know they built the POS chain before l2s were really a thing but this is why we have an L2 architecture because it lets you make different trade-offs um you know you can bootstrap off of the centralization characteristics of L1 so you don't have to run a full proof of State consensus uh at the L2 that can let you have kind of like a tighter you know in in the case of all l2s today kind of single single sequencer setup um although over time I expect that to change to multi sequencer decentralized sequencer whether that's round robin um or some kind of like tender proof of stake type setup there um uh but you can you can basically constrain how um uh kind of distributed that needs to be because you have this uh kind of force entry uh kind of bootstrapping off of the L1 decentralization and so I think we've we've really been able to lean into that with Bas and that's been able to um give us uh you know good performance characteristics even as we scaled the the second thing I think this is kind of like Bas versus uh you know maybe other l2s is um first off I'll say like we're not perfect you know we've had issues uh there have been uh failures um you know the first time I went on vacation you know this is before we started raising gas limit it was like immediately there's like 10 minutes of downtime on base like right after onchain summer last year um since then I don't think we've had like a minute of uh kind of a stall of the chain um but I think one of the things that we have um you know that's a little bit different than other l2s is we have a lot of experience running like production scale infrastructure um and you know my my prior to coinbase I mean prior to base what I was responsible for at coinbase for five years was leading coinbase.com and coin Pro and and the coas wallet product and in from 2017 to 2021 like boy do I have some horror and War stories about what it took to keep coinbase.com up and not keep coinbase.com up because at times coinbase.com went down and we had these really brutal incidents that kept us up all night that we you know we had to kind of learn through um and you know me the C of Base uh this guy Michael um uh we we were the two people who led that charge for four years and um we helped scale coinbase and and uh I think that gave us so many learnings uh and then coinbase has built so much like kind of infrastructure as a result of that you know for the scale of a big public company and the base team gets to benefit from those learnings we get to benefit from that infrastructure um we get to benefit from kind of that mindset and so just like to give a concrete example of that one of the things that we've been leading um this has gone kind of under the radar for the last couple quarters but we've been leading a whole effort to um really increase the resiliency of the the sequencer um uh so that you know if there were kind of like a a region outage or availability Zone outage um we could hot swap over in you know seconds to a new redundant sequencer we've been doing that all fully open source it's it's actually a contribution to the core op stack code base um and what that is going to let us do is it's going to let us shift our availability goals from the current four nines of availability or I guess three and a half nines of availability that's what we target like 99.95 um to four and a half five nines of availability and that's really what we're trying to get to is we're trying to get to five nines um which is a very ambitious Target like I forget exactly what the number is let's see if I can uptime that is 9999 I think it's like one minute or two minutes of downtime a year uh it's five minutes of downtime a year um so very ambitious Target but I think our perspective is like if we're going to build a global economy that's going to support the world like we need five nines of we probably need six nines of availability like we need to be always available that's the kind of guarantee that ethereum's had and that's the same guarantee that base should have and so that's just the mindset that we bring to it I think it's a very serious mindset and it's backed up by a lot of years of experience doing this at scale uh and a lot of kind of resources and infrastructure that's coming from coinbase that's letting us accomplish that but I I'll say like I say all of that and shit's going to happen you know like you know this is this is like at the edge uh you know uh Cutting Edge infrastructure building and we're scaling the chain more aggressively um then everyone else will of course managing the the decentralization components of that and the the kind of like node runting components of that um but we're going to have failures we're gonna have learnings um and and for me the the key is just like taking those learnings and integrating them into how we work and making them like the systems better and better and better and so we actually have a whole you know retrospective process that we run at base uh you know that comes from you know the the whole culture of coinbase where anytime anything happens um you know we're that that's bad like we're running a retro we're giving it a severity we're taking up action items we're putting those into engineering work like it's getting converted into a bunch of concrete learnings to make sure that whatever happened like never happens again uh and we kind of seal up that issue uh to make sure that we get more and more resiliency that makes a ton of sense and uh I like that sort of delineation that You' provided earlier between you know the benefits of having an l to is that by by not having this sort of large validator set there's certain benefits that come from that uh that you know we can kind of see with base and makes a ton of sense in terms of you know what sort of differentiates Bas from other l2s that may have higher transaction reversion rates and so uh double clicking on the thing that you had mentioned uh regarding uh implementations and upgrades that you've provided to the op stack for these sort of redundant sequencers was curious if you could elaborate a little bit more on like uh how are the bass sequencers uh relatively different from other l2s uh to sort of achieve this lower reversion rate of course there's this one part of their being sort of redundant sequencers to keep the you know uptime for base as high as possible uh but you know curious are there any other additional things you could share about the sequencer that may maybe differentiates it from arbitrum or like traditional op stack rollups that achieve this lower version I don't think so I mean not not that I'm aware of right now um I think we have like one of of the things that is different about bass versus other chains I think we have a very different like composition of people who are transacting on bass versus other chains um like for instance I think you have a lot more retail people who are transacting on base and so when when you look at like failed transaction rate or reversion rate um a lot of that ends up actually being like it's it's not that the chain is doing anything wrong it's that people who are transacting with the chain are doing transactions that are maybe trying to exploit me um or or do some other kind of behavior that it's like you know it's a bot Behavior where they're trying to kind of like do something with the chain uh and I think what what you see on Bas is actually you have just like a lot of regular people who aren't doing that they're just like sending usdc or they're just like doing a meme coin trade like whatever it is and that means that um we have um like a a much higher I think just like success rate um the other place that you see that and this actually isn't I don't think talked about that much but um uh like and it's mostly a hypothesis right now I wouldn't say I have hard data on it but if you look at the like priority fee on base um uh and you look at the revenue that base is generating um that's generally like it's a lot more than all the other l2s and the the reason my hypothesis why that is um is that sorry uh is that you you again you have a lot of kind of like retail folks who are there um and those folks are executing trades and then um it's all in happening in a private men pool um which means that they're getting kind of best execution um in that private me pool but then that best execution is creating me opportunities in the form of back running um and that's then being uh kind of capitalized on by uh Searchers who are paying priority fees to capture those kind of back running opportunities I mean that's kind of like a healthy form of me you know it's not something that we think is super problematic um but it does mean that uh kind of like the the overall like Revenue generation for Bas is higher because there's again more like real organic activity versus if you look at I think other block space consumption um in other chains you end up having a lot more like either like highly sophisticated um or programmatic execution um and that is like it's it's highly sophisticated in programmatic you basically have like people pvping each other um uh and that just leads to a very very different characteristic of the block space characteristic of the revenue Generation Um and characteristic of the the like Hest like the capital markets um you can have a ton of volume but um it doesn't really matter like especially for institutional Traders um like volume isn't the thing that they're looking for the thing that they're looking for is they're looking for opportunities to profit off of kind of like Arbitrage and and other things and that is uh enabled by having a healthy Capital Market with a bunch of different participants and I think if you if you pull back the curtains and you look at the base Capital Market it's far and away the healthiest Capital Market on chain right now because you do have this really or organic mix of everyday people and institutions who are coming together to create kind of like a neutral um like Capital Market where anyone can participate that makes a lot of sense you know tldr guys base is the real user chain uh so that's that's that's awesome to hear and uh I know you had touched on this earlier you know when we were talking a little bit about raising the gas limit and how you know the it's a sort of multifaceted thing you know discussing the actual like node client that's being run you know with the the work that the Paradigm team is doing with re specifically and then there's State growth condition uh you know considerations here so we love to understand you know what is sort of basis efforts on the paralized evm side because I know there's multiple things to sort of consider like for example a lot of people talk about how paralyzed evm uh implementations are typically like optimistic paralyzed implementations and by the new ethereum pectra update that might make the evm uh you know more object-oriented which could reduce like re-execution Risk so we love to understand you know how is BAS thinking about uh you know paralyzing the evm and uh how much of that is you know working directly with the Paradigm team with re and I know that you know coinbase likees still you know of course put their own implementations as well so how much is coming internally yeah yeah it's a good question also I just want to say I'm so enjoying this podcast I think this is the most like technical in the weeds podcast I've done since the launch of base and so I think people are gonna find it really interesting and hopefully I'll demonstrate that I'm like I'm not just a person who tweets I actually like understand all the tech to um okay so par parallelization um uh so so first off is we're working really closely with WTH on this um you know we've we've now been running WTH um uh production um sequencer and uh kind of like node clusters on our test net the Bas ofoia test net for I think a few months um we we've been running ref nodes um on mainnet for a few months we we have been contributing all of the like kind of op stuff um that's needed for getting fault proofs going uh with WTH using using their kind of like uh State engine and and uh Witnesses um and doing a bunch of other work to just make sure that reth is a best-in-class client for um uh basic for other op stack chains and that that's because like at least today if you look at the architecture of w you look at the architecture of um gu uh the there's a lot more Headroom on the rest side um uh both from a like execution speed perspective but also from a state growth perspective for instance like if you if you project out the current state growth with with base on our gu node infrastructure we'll be at like 30 terabytes by the end of next year um and that that's like you can you can do like a you know uh you know a bare metal rack back with 30 terabytes or more of um storage that's like SSD or mvme that's you know tightly connected not networked hard disk but you can't get that on an AWS like you you you can't have a cloud offering that gives you more than 30 terabytes it's just not offered today and so that that's like not that viable for us to continue running nodes and continue to have like other people running nodes now if you project that out with W it's way more manageable like we're talking single terabytes um uh at the same scale of through put and you know that's at 10 megga a second if we're talking about 100 megas per second it's like everything blows up you know in a way more intense way and so um that that's thanks to the hard work of the the par the Paradigm team who's been working on this for two years and you know took a lot of learnings from kind of the whole space and has built a really incredible client and so this is actually a place where I'd say coinbase is really excited to lean in with the ecosystem I mean when we built our own L2 we didn't go our own way we said we're going to build on the op stack and this was part of the thesis it was um we're going to get a lot further if we can contribute to an open standard that everyone else is contributing to and building on and if everything we do can help everyone else if everyone else does if everyone if everything everyone else does can help us and I feel like WTH is like the prime example of that so we are going deep with WTH um we are currently like working to to move our default clients to ref our sequencer to ref um uh you know we're gonna have more announcements on that in the the next couple months um and we're actually working right now on a four-part I think it's going four-part but a four-part Blog um that's going to talk about how are we thinking about data availability execution scaling State growth um and one other thing I forget what like on the path to a gigas um because what we we observe is that um this isn't something that we can do alone like we could scale the execution of Base really really far but if L1 isn't also doing the work to get that data availability for us it doesn't matter um and so kind of putting our uh like uh planting a flag and saying this is where we're going this is the road map this is the rate at which we're going to increase I've actually been pushing our team to like explicitly say we're going to increase by X rate every week forever and then we'll keep you know increasing the rate until the curve bends up because that gives everyone else a predictability of like this is what we're coordinating towards so that that's kind of how we're thinking about it now in terms of parallelization in particular I'd say that most of our um effort on that right now is going towards W uh where there's really good kind of research happening um you know they were just at Frontiers uh I think a week half ago and you know folks were looking at kind of optimistic parallelization on rest they were seeing that you could you could get like a two to 3x um increasing performance with the current uh like uh state tree structure um and the current um uh kind of like you know lack of uh upfront specification of access calls Etc um but I think what you're getting at with um kind of pectra if we're talking about eof Landing uh if we if we're talking about access lists and potentially a future where l2s um require you to specify access lists um combined with eof which gets us like potentially much uh uh greater ability to say hey for these new classes of code um we're going to have you know more uh constraints on how what you can specify and what you need to pass it on the transaction type um I think we can go a lot further like a lot a lot further you know we're scratching the surface of what's possible here and that's going to be a really deep collaboration with um The Ref team at the same time we're also like looking out into the industry and looking at all the other incredible kind of Open Source research that people are doing and saying hey what can we learn from this how can we pull this into kind of our our way of thinking and how can we help help push the best things forward that are going to make us more successful and you know this is a thing that I often say to our team which is like you know I we set this one gigas goal um and I think sometimes even folks on our team are like scared about it you know they're like ah we have like a 100x from where we are today like I don't know how we get there like and I I what I say to them is like look you guys imagine that we are uh Google in 2001 or 2002 like how much did they scale over the next 10 years like literally thousands of X thousands right you know they built the whole internet and so you know it might take us another five years and we might need to hire a lot more people and we might have to run into a bunch of hard challenges and fail a bunch but we are going to scale this thing thousands of x uh it's just a question of like how we do it and uh the opportunity to get to work on this at The Cutting Edge is the greatest opportunity of Our Lives to kind of Define how infrastructure um is is built to enable this next generation of the internet and so I think we just have to believe in ourselves and um put one in front of foot in front of the other and clearly communicate with the industry where we're going and what we're seeing and how we're thinking about it so that ideally all of us can coordinate um to get to that future and I think that coordination component I mean in the ethereum ecosystem I think that's one of the greatest strengths right you basically have you know probably at this point hundreds of teams that are parallel pathing on how do we make the evm more efficient how do we get note execution more parallelized how do we manage State growth you know like hundreds of teams and all of them are publishing in open source they're they're they're publishing the smart contracts they're publishing the white papers and over time we're going to be able to pull in the best of that that's going to emerge in this new open- source infrastructure of the internet and we're going to be able to combine that to create something incredibly incredibly powerful and that level of you know like emergent creativity and emergent um solutioning across a very very diverse set of kind of actors I think it's very unique it's not something that Google had uh it's not something that Facebook had it's not something that any centralized corporation that was kind of bound to a single company had and I think it's also not necessarily something that you know other ecosystems have where there there just so many fewer people who are thinking about how do we solve these problems great answer um I was going to say you know you've been enjoying the podcast so far I think we were enjoying having you you know I think normally what might be follow-up questions have just been you know you answering things uh before we get to ask them so that's been great exactly was gonna ask about da and then you immediately just touched on that and yeah no so yeah well I think I think I think da is an important one and again like the first part of the blog post for us is um is gonna be about da and I actually just was messaging with our team today it sounds like there was a really good uh like all all core Dev uh call this morning like acde exec fing client there's talk about um raising the uh minimum uh gas fee for for blob space which I'm in support of I think it's great idea you know like I I think that we will get to a healthy like 1559 market for blob space but I also think it's fair for ethereum to kind of have a higher take rate in this kind of like early stages um I also think it's good for ethereum to have it be relatively low so that we can you know incentivize growth like it's still very early in all this but I just love that we're having conversations about this we're like testing we're learning um I do think as it comes to da you know like I'm we're just going to plant a flag on the ground we're at 10 meag gas right now I'm pushing our team to get to 20 megag gas by the end of the quarter I don't know if that's going to happen but that's the goal internally um I want our team to take a goal of one megag gas per second uh one meag gas per second increase every single week in perpetuity and so if we stayed at one megas per second every week that would get us to something like 60 megas by the end of next year 2025 I don't want to be at 60 megag gas by the end 2025 I want to be at like 500 megag gas by the end of 2025 and so we'll stay at one megas per second until we feel confident we can go to two megas per second increase per week but now that we have that in our sites what we want to do is we want to just draw the graph to the ecosystem and say hey here's the graph of our gas consumption that we're going to have uh because we believe that with every increase in gas consumption we're going to be able to saturate it just like we've done thus far like plan for it and I think once we have that Clarity the clarity of like Oh by the end of the year Bas is going to be consuming something like 30 Mega Gas a second that is way more capacity uh than all of uh ethereum is creating not way more it's it's about the capacity that ethereum has right now for data availability not including any of the other l2s I think that that's just going to be like a really clear um forcing function for the L1 teams who are incredible engineers and have been working so closely with us on the the L2 side to say oh like we are going to increase the gas uh The Blob Targets in the pectra release um we are going to make sure that P is in it you know there's no concerns about that right now p is definitely going to be in it but there's been a conversation about should we also increase blob targets and one of the big questions was is is there going to be consumption for it and I think like the thing I want to be clear about is yes Bas is going to consume it and we're going to consume it at an incrementally increasing rate of one megag gas per second per week um and so that's what we should all be planning for uh and if we all plan for that and work towards that and think about that as the the end goal that we're trying to get to I think that's going to help us all be much more efficient and effective in coordinating all of the incredible work that has to happen in order to enable it hey guys permissionless the event for crypto natives is heading west of Salt Lake City and we're bringing the biggest names in crypto together for an incredible Camp Miss event join me on the rest of blockworks on October knife to hear for more than 200 Industry Titans including Nick white from Celestia shiram from Igan Lair and keone from Mona the conversations at permission list will be covering the hottest themes in crypto including modularity reaking the Bitcoin and Solon ecosystems Ai and crypto rollups l2s institutional adoption and of course the November election that will be right around the cor we couldn't be more excited about this event and it's happening in one of the most beautiful places in the US ticket prices will be increasing towards the end of June so get your ticket today make sure to use the code so I get some credit and bragging rights from the rest of the team uh use ZX10 for 10% off on your ticket one more thing we're also hosting the permissionless rehack ofon in collaboration with ble box the theme this year is a multi-chain future to build a better cross chain experience so I don't have to have a heart attack every time I bridge to a new chain all hacka found participants will receive a free ticket to attend permissions so if you're a developer come join us in Salt Lake City team up with fellow devs and build the multi-chain future polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open-source ZK Tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases empowering developers to grow in a unified web of interoperable chains with the a layer the a layer is a machine for Network effect don't worry about bootstrapping liquidity just build anywhere in the a layer to tap the liquidity and users everywhere to support the aggregated future and boost scrap quality project the polygon Community grants program was launched with 1 billion tokens All For polygon Builders season one of the community grants program is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon project for Builders on polygon or projects interested in migrating these grants are for you join the a gated future and feel empowered to grow in an infinite web of unified interoperable chains apply today at polygon.com scaling the evm um scaling the L1 scaling l2s um I think there's a related conversation in there around thoughts around decentralizing L2 sequencers for example and and just you know further decentralizing l2s as they stand today as you know there are centralizing aspects of them um I guess for Bas that's a a pretty interesting question as well with coinbase sort of um behind the effort you know can you outline or detail any specifics around are there plans for um decentralizing the base chain and like what that road map maybe looks like yeah I mean we've been we've been very clear from the beginning that being decentralized in open source is a core value for base and a pzero priority for the the the L2 straight up we we wrote that the first day when we announced announced the test net we reaffirmed it with the um kind of uh collaboration we did with optimism that we announced at the main net where we're contrib contributing to optimism governance we're a core contributor to the op stack um we set up the network in such a way where there wasn't a single point of control explicitly so that we could start from a sufficiently decentralized point um that we felt comfortable bringing this thing to the world in an open and permissionless way and so from the absolute beginning we have have been public and uh committed to being decentralized and then we've made progress quarter over quarter towards that goal the most recent progress is we just launched fault proofs on testnet uh we're working to get fault proofs live on mainnet uh we expect that to happen very soon um and that's going to get us to a stage one uh rollup which is you know comparable to the other kind of like leading uh l2s um and then we're going to be working fast towards stage two and so like I just want to be clear to anyone listening to this podcast base is going to be decentralized it it already is meaning decentralized it's just going to keep being more decentralized and the place that that comes from is like hey I've been in crypto for more than a decade at this point and I deeply believe in decentralization like that's why we're here and the only way we can build a global onchain economy that increases Innovation creativity and freedom is if we build it on a decentralized platform because if we don't build it on a decentralized platform inevitably that economy will end up being coopted and coerced by a corporation or country full stop we know we know that that's what's going to happen and so you could get to a local Maxima if you don't decentralize and I think a lot of people look at base inside of coinbase and they're like oh like coinbase is just a corporation like they're just going to get to the local Maxima of like a not decentralized base that looks like an extension of coinbase and like that's what we need to be critiquing and stopping I don't I'm not working towards the local Maxima I'm working towards the global Maxa which is a global onchain economy that increases Innovation creativity and freedom and the only way to get there is by being a decentralized platform and so that's my belief as a leader of Base the other person who really believes in this is Brian Brian Armstrong the CEO of coinbase day one when we launch the test net of Bas um you know it's 11:50 PM uh long day for me I get a message from Brian Armstrong and it says two things he says great job Jesse that was really impressive love the launch Blue Dot incredible first off you just launched a test net and you can't pat yourself on the back until you launch the main net and you're solving real problems for real people so go launch the main net and make sure that actually works second off you must decentralize this thing if you do not decentralize this thing all of this is for not all of this is for not it must be decentralized and from the beginning of Bas that has been the message that I've gotten and that that has gotten to our team and has gone to the industry we have a a CEO founder of coinbase who has been working on crypto and decentralization for longer than almost anyone in the world who supports a uh you know creator of BAS and me who's been working on crypto for a decade and uh the two of us and our whole team and the whole company believe that the only way to build a global onchain economy is to build it on a decentralized platform and so that's how we're coming at this from like kind of a philosophical perspective now there's a lot of hard problems in order to decentralize now2 a lot of hard problems that's why uh you know it wasn't something that we started with uh you know started at stage zero that's why all all L2 started at stage zero and then we're incrementally making progress um you know we're getting fault proofs out really excited about that we got it on testnet we're going to be integrating the security Council into our upgrade Keys that's going to bring us so that there's a even more decentralized group of folks who are um uh kind of needed in order to enact any changes you know it's at the point we integrated the security Council we're talking about like full geographic distribution across the world full entity distribution um uh like very very very very distributed uh set of folks who are going to have like a scope down set of permissions and then we are speed running um the kind of next things that we need to get to in order to get to stage two which is uh multi prooof um so we actually have multiple proofs that are uh operating the fault proof game which then lets us constrain what uh roles and rights a security Council has um because you can say hey the security Council could only intervene if there's uh you know disagreement among the different proofs um and um the way we built the op stack uh fully open source collaborative folks like wrath and G and nethermind and others who've been building execution clients is is built and the way we designed bedrock in collaboration with OP Labs is built to enable multi prooof and today we have proofs that can actually multiple of them we have fault proofs uh that are running on gu we're about to have fault proofs that are running on WTH um we have uh early experimental fault proofs that are running in kind of like fully different virtual machines like myips the first ones are myips VM but we're also looking at a risk VM um and then we also have teams that are standing up ZK proofs you know for for instance uh we just saw one that uh is ZK proving um with a succinct like sp1 ZK proof uh op stack and so I think next year we're going to get to a point where we actually have like multiple production proofs ready there's going to then be a bunch of upgrade work that we need to do in order to get to that being live and you know have that kind of permissions constraining happening on the security Council but I feel like we have a like a really clear path there and it's mostly just executing so that's kind of fault prooof decentralization um uh and kind of like security Council governance decentralization I think we're making really good progress there on the sequencer decentralization which is another um uh uh you point of decentralization and I I was I was on Twitter yesterday and I think there's like a lot a lot of noise about sequencer decentralization right now and someone was like oh like how coin will never decentralize a sequencer like people are gonna say whatever they want on Twitter but um we're making progress on decentralizing the sequencer like literally we did an RFP uh you know at the I think it was like late last year to look at round robin sequencing that RFP has turned into more work that's happening on the op stack core development to enable round robin uh sequencing I can't give specific timelines but there are plans to start moving op stack chains to round robin sequencing uh because we think that round robin sequencing is like a reasonable starting point um and potentially like a a reasonable ending point if we can get that round robin sufficiently decentralized um uh and so there there's really good progress there I also think that one of the the like fundamental misunderstandings with um kind of like sequencer decentralization is people look at sequencer decentralization and they say oh like you know no one's going to decentralize the sequencer because it's going to mean giving up the revenue for the chain um uh and it's going to mean like divesting of the revenue to sequencer like decentralization participants um and and that they can make that critique regardless of whether you have a public company like coinbase running the sequencer or you have a foundation running the sequencer or you have a dow running the sequencer like it's the same critique which is like the the person who's running the sequencer won't want do that I I think that like I have a slightly different perspective on this um which is decentralizing the sequencer doesn't necessitate changing all of the economic value flows to make it so that all the people who are participating in decentralized sequencing are um uh you know capturing all that revenue for instance one of the big conversations that's happening on L1 right now is what would it look like if we internalized more me and burned more Meb what does that actually mean it means the people who are doing proposing in Block building are not going to end up capturing all of that me value and instead that me value will be internalized into the network because the network is the thing that's providing the flow that people are then monetizing and it will then be made productive inside the network the same thing can be true for l2s if you think about decentralized sequencing not as oh this is an immediate path to kind of like willy-nilly give away all of the value of the network to like random participants but instead you think about it like your normal rationals business person just like ethereum can be a normal R rational business person what you're trying to do is you're trying to get a new service into this technology stack which is a decentralized set of people who can propose and validate blocks and that service has a price it has a price and you can pay that price but my gut and my my current intuition is that that price does not equal giving up all of the valuable Network effects and all the value that flows from that to those participants it equals paying for that value and I don't know exactly where that will be priced but I do think that that is a common misunderstanding that kind of confuses people because they're like oh why would a chain ever decentralized sequencing if they have to give up all the value and I think that's just thinking about it wrong right it's like why would a chain ever pay for this value which is a distalize sequencer set which can increase uh you know censorship resistance uh and can kind give more reliability redundancy potentially and help us kind of build a healthier ecosystem that has a value the chain can pay for that we need to figure out the technology for how the chain pays for it but that's a very very different calculation and I think if we think about it in that way you end up being able to think much more clearly and being able to be reason about okay what's the path to get there you know how much is that worth how much is that worth for ethereum L1 how much is that worth for l2s how do we build something that actually solves that that kind of solution set where the participants are earning and and being valued for their contributions and the the kind of network regardless of how it's governed is still able to um kind of take the value that it's generating and use it to reinvest in itself because if you look at the revenue that coinbase is generating from base which is not that much revenue right now people are like tweeting incorrect numbers on it but if you look at that number where's that all going I'm spending it all putting it back in base like literally we're giving out millions of dollars of of funding and grants we're we're employing a team to do critical infrastructure research um uh I I you know like the the we need to keep enabling these you know ecosystems to invest in themselves and I think like that can happen alongside us continuing to decentralize sequencer and contining to decentralize the entire chain if we think about it as you know just a technology upgrade that needs to happen and it has a price really detailed really great response I think you hit all of the relevant points um and even the recent discussion online that's been happening I'm following along and then I think like as sort of a relevant Point um you know you sort of mentioned the value for users and consumers of you know chains like this and the purpose of decentralizing you know sequencer for example I mean can you give go into any details around like the consumer app or sort of maybe socialy strategy for base like targeting consumers and building for them clearly that's like a very key purpose so um is there anything specific about how you're going about that to kind of you know attract or or build for their sake yeah yeah I mean like consumer focus is been the focus of Bass from the beginning um and I'd say really right now there's two primary like primary northstars um that we are focused on um basis an economy there's going to have everything in it but when it comes to Consumer experiences the places that we are seeing the most current potential is payments and kind of basic primary Financial account financial services around that and then social and I don't use the word socialy like I just think it's bad it's like bad word it's just social and we're using this new technologies this platform to build better social experiences that have more direct earning potential for the creators who are actually bringing their creativity on chain and so when we're thinking about kind of Bas and and our go to market and and kind of like what the top two areas are that that's it on the payment side it's about how do we get as many uh easy to use experiences on the wallet how do we get as many stable coins in as many different countries so people can on-ramp into a local currency that they're familiar with how do we give really great execution uh for cross stable coin um execution I actually just tweeted about this this morning if you look at euro to dollar conversion rates on chain they're currently 100 times faster and two to 10 times cheaper than anything into the traditional web World traditional Finance World 100 times faster and two to 10 times cheaper 100 times faster two to 10 times cheaper like what's crypto good for well it's a 100 times faster and it's two to 10 times cheaper and so figuring out how do we make that just work in every single country in the world so that people can come on chain and it's not this like crazy thing but it's instead oh now your money just works 100 times faster and two to 10 times cheaper than it did before and we're building a really healthy Financial ecosystem of real products that let you borrow and lend and get credit uh and and earn U that are globally accessible and that work with your money like that's a really powerful payments plus primary Financial account product and making it so that a the infrastructure from a technology perspective is all there be the infrastructure from uh an economic and capital markets perspective is there you know stable coins uh you know trading infrastructure Landing infrastructure baring infrastructure um and then C you have really incredible user experiences uh in the form of wallets that are globally available that are localized um that is like a core part of our strategy and so there's been also all this noise on um uh crypto Twitter about like Defi and ethereum and like I don't it's it's onchain Finance we can call it defi but it's going to be massive like we're literally going to rep platform the entire Financial system onto things like base in ethereum and it's been the leading use case uh for the last six years seven years uh you know lifetime of ethereum it's going to continue to be a leading use case along other use cases that emerge because the whole internet's going to come on chain and Bas is deeply deeply invested in it because we believe that the the best thing we can do for achieving coinbase's Mission which is increasing economic freedom globally is create a global onchain economy that lets people come into it and lets them live a better life and that's going to happen because we're going to build incredible tools incredible Financial infrastructure and incredible interfaces that let everyone just do that so that's my that's my take on defi the other one uh social if you look at the last decade of consumer growth of new apps that have emerged all of the apps that have gotten any meaningful level of consumer scale adoption when I talk about meaningful adoption I'm not talking about like meaningful crypto adoption I'm talking about meaningful adoption like hundreds of millions or billions of users they all social apps period all of them 100% maybe there's like you know it's like payments I think payments is social maybe there's like shopping but even the shopping apps all of them are social and so if we're talking about what's going to bring the world on chain it's going to be social products full stop and so that's why kind of from the beginning Bas has been really focused on enabling social experiences that's why you saw us lean in really hard with forecast and still be leaning in with farcaster and frames and making it so developers can build these kind of like oneclick interactive social content units where you can buy or Mint or pay or tip or nominate someone all in a single feed um that's why we've I think really been leading the way in uh talking about the the story of creators and how creators right now when they bring their creativity online they make less than 1% of the value and in the new onchain social World they can make 90% of the value that's why we've been been doing that ourselves with the Bas brand where everything we do is minted on chain and we have generated hundreds of eth of Revenue which we then given back in the form of Creator grants to creators who are creating onchain because we believe that once we get this flywheel going we're going to um just be able to suck in all the creators because they're G be like oh I can make 1% here I can make 90% there yeah I'm G to make 90% there that's way better for me um and that's also why we we have been kind of like helping in whatever way we can people build incredible social experiences with things like the smart wallet which lets you onramp in less than 10 seconds you know get a new wallet less than 10 seconds we're about to launch session keys that will mean you never have to sign a transaction again it all just works behind the scenes in a fully non-custodial way um uh and we're going to make it so the the login experience both for users and Developers for social products is 10x better on chain than online and when that exists then people will be able to build 10x better products that whenever you come to a new social product you're not going to have to set a profile you're not going to have to set a description you're not going to have to set your picture you're not going to have to follow your friends you're not going to have to import your text messages you're just going to come there and it's all going to work because you're GNA have one onchain identity probably connected to and represented by your base name that will immediately know who you are where you can share information that you want to privately with that application and then we can build composable social products that all feed off of each other to create something that's you know 10x better than what ever exists today and so that is still very early but I think it's we're starting to seal real signs of growth and if we solve those two problems payments plus primary Financial account powered by really powerful decentralized Finance defi or onchain Finance infrastructure plus uh viral social products that bring the world on chain through kind of natural virality everything else is going to follow we're going to see the games because they're going to get distributed through the social graphs and they're going to have really easy payments bu into them uh we're going to see the decentralized fiscal infrastructure again because they're going to be distributed through social graphs and they're going to have really good payments built into them like anything that is being done online right now will be able to be done better on chain because it will have access to a really powerful social graph that you can build on top of p plus incredible payments infrastructure that makes it easy for businesses to accept money from anyone anywhere in the world and so that's the kind of top two focuses for us this year and as we head into 2025 and then of course you know again Bas is a really rich economy and we're we're working and supporting people across every single part of the the the economy that makes a lot of sense Jesse and and I have to say like if if we had more time I want to ask a ton more questions personally for me this has been my my favorite uh xerx research pod that I've been on so you know really appreciate you having on to to kind of close things out related to the conversation that you know we're having here at the tail end about the consumer app Focus for Bass and you know the sort of change of some of these traditional experiences that folks have have and how how base more specifically but also crypto as a whole augments that and so you know was kind of curious like five years out from now you touched a little bit about like you know onchain identity and whatnot but you know what does the sort of General onchain experience look like or what do you want it to look like on base specifically and especially compared to a lot of the traditional financial services and traditional applications you know imagine the the next big social media platform and it's base or the next big you know Neo bank that you know maybe it's coinbase itself just you know built on top of Base whatever that is what does that look like five years from now and how does Bas enable that specifically well I hope it doesn't take us five years to get to what I want to get to I I think that we now have the pieces to um get there the next year and like I was actually just talking about this with our CFO like I feel like in the last year we built a bunch of the pieces things like the smart wallet getting Bas really cheap um getting base names live um but still a little fragmented you know like they they don't work cohesively together for instance like we shipped a smart wallet because we want to get out as quickly as possible but like it doesn't yet work in the coinbase wallet mobile so people have like two wallets it's really confusing super broken experience but that was an intentional decision we made so we could get this thing out we could learn we could iterate and then we're now working of course to integrate it into the smart into the mobile wallet and will all just work um and so my goal is by by next summer by onchain summer three like it's all going to just work and I think what that experience looks like is you see a new app that you like you download it whether it's a mobile app or a website you go to the website um you click create an account that pops up biometric you put in your biometric and immediately you've just created a smart wallet that smart wallet Works across all the other apps you want to um next if that app wants profile information about you it's like okay cool create a base name um and you create a base name that's free because it's going to be subsized for your first year and maybe it'll be 20 cents after that every year which is less than people pay for iCloud storage um and you you can start putting in information you know you could add a profile picture you have a name um you maybe add some private information like your email account or your phone number your shipping information that gets stored offchain or stored in an encrypt VA that's accessed by you and then immediately that app has access to it um uh and uh that app then can say oh you want to uh you know mint something great first mint free um because we're using a pay Master that's makes this experience fully gasless you mint your first one you support a creator that you love um next you know you're scrolling again you me another one oh in order to do this mint you need like 10 cents or five cents um you know mints just Dro 10x they were $3 before now they're you know 25 cents they're going to go cheaper again it'll be another 10x cheaper um and it's like want to pay with Apple pay great boom Apple pay first one Apple pay you paid with Apple pay you minted with Apple pay and now you have you know credit on your uh wallet to do 10 mins because you did a dollar Apple pay payment awesome totally seamless took two seconds next time oh you're out of balance um it's a lot cheaper if you fund with your debit card or if you fund with your a do you want to bring some money on chain if you bring money on chain you're going to get more money in your pocket because you're going to have a higher interest rate uh you're going to be able to send to anyone in the world boom now we get them to bring $100 or $1,000 do into their wallet they then use that to Mint in the social app they start following they build out a social Craft um it's it's all working there and then they're like oh my friend just sent me this really cool new social app I download the social app it says log in I click login I log in boom everything is there I have a funded wallet I have a social graph I can see all of my past activity it all just works I'm like whoa this is a new internet like before I would have had to spend 10 minutes creating this account and now it just works awesome now I have a second social app same thing for third fourth fifth boom I want a new Financial Product download an app Financial product Oh I want to this is a more trading one because I'm getting more advanced download same thing log in just works have everything I need there oh you want uh you you just brought $1,000 on but now you're bringing $5,000 on that sounds like you that's a lot of money you should secure this account more do you want to set up Social recovery oh here pick these three people to set up Social recovery now you're GNA need two of them to recover your account in the event that you lose it um do you want to set up a coinbase recoverer that we'll do a video call and a a a ID verification to make sure that you are who you say you are now okay great if you ever lose your pass key uh or your signing mechanism um that can recover it also we should set up two Factor authentications for you um here add another Hardware key or a second signer um for transactions that are above $1,000 you'll now need this second signer great set up boom now you go to do some real Financial products oh great I'm gonna bring in $100,000 I know that if I ever lose access to my account I can recover from coinbase I can recover from social recovery I know that if a hacker ever tries to do something on my account if it's more than $ thousand doll I'm G to have to do a second verification that's going to be more secure than my bank um and I feel confident oh this is a new Financial product that actually works better for me it's more secure it's more transparent but one of the things that is making me a little nervous is my account is public and that's really good for social but I just brought $100,000 on and maybe I have more I don't feel comfortable having on that okay cool well great you have a private Vault too here's your private Vault bring money into the private Vault your private Vault can do all the same stuff you can send money to friends you can uh invest in mem coins you can uh you know hold money in aate stable coin account and all of that just works you don't have to think about complexity um you just use this address and you have people send to private jesse bas now you have your full onchain privacy and all of this is encompassed in a simple base name that works everywhere that has all of your uh you know history attached to it can manage your privacy uh uh a simple smart account that lets you have sub accounts lets you have recovery let you have multiactor authentication and then it's running on top of a secure scalable L2 in BAS that doesn't just lock you to base but is a bridge not an island and lets you do anything you want across all of the chains across the entire onchain economy because we can use intents and cross L2 execution with all the standards that we've written to make it so you can seamlessly use your balance that's sitting on base to transact across any other L2 to transact across salana to do things on L1 if you need to and we can trust that that's going to happen in the most efficient Capital efficient possible way possible so like that's what we're goingon to have next year like I'm just calling the shot like that literally this is what we're building we started building it last year it takes a long time to build things but that's where we will be next year the Privacy stuff might take a little bit longer um but like that's the Northstar and so I think that version of onchain is going to be better than any internet product period full stop and it's going to enable more Innovation and more creativity than any internet technology platform that exists today by 10x full stop and we're going to enter this Golden Era that we've been waiting for that where we're not going to see you know hype driven by prices we're going to see hype and excitement driven by adoption and utility and people coming on chain because it gives them an opportunity to live a better life and because they they are seeing the impact of having a global onchain economy that increases Innovation creativity and freedom and so me and my teams and coinbase and so many other people in the industry that is what we are working towards and we've been working for a long time like more than a decade at this point but our time has come and the moment is now for all of us to put our heads down to ignore the noise ignore the prices to keep building to stay based and to create the future of the internet onchain amazing I I love I love the optimism it's refreshing because you know CT is just constantly drowning in this doomeris and you know this is we need more of this energy and so I'm glad that you brought it Jesse yeah thanks for having you guys loved it Jesse love the the final sort of layout of the vision the plan um maybe hopefully we can have you on again next year and talk about let's talk about next year at the next excited for it see everything live um it was great having you on um any final statements you want to make or no thanks everyone for listening and uh we'd love to build with you on base if you need help go to b.org we have tons of resources get your base name we'll automatically kind of Route you to whatever you need in order to be successful and we're excited to support you in whatever way we can awesome thanks so much for on and thanks everyone for watching stay based everyone are you currently building on polygon or interested in migrating season one of the polygon Community grants program is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon projects builders on polygon these grants are for you join the aggregated future today by applying at polygon.net [Music]

========================================

--- Video 84 ---
Video ID: 9IUUvOSIUBE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9IUUvOSIUBE
Title: 0xResearch Live Stream
Published: 2024-09-18 15:19:54 UTC
Description:


Transcript Language: Error: VideoUnplayable
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 85 ---
Video ID: mmvSVXEaSHo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mmvSVXEaSHo
Title: Can Drift Rival Binance? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-09-18 14:58:03 UTC
Description:
In this episode,we were joined by a special guest: the host of Bell Curve, Michael Ippolito! We discussed the PerpDEX sector, prediction market success after the US election, and the different ways to monetize social networks. Additionally, we asked ourselves, what parts of crypto suck? Finally, we unpacked the L1 trade, and discussed getting silly onchain.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Blockworks Research: Drift Report - https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1831773832308506984
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Mike: https://x.com/MikeIppolito_
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:58 Can Drift Stand Out in the PerpDEX Sector?
15:19 Prediction Market Success After the US Election
22:01 Monetizing Social Networks
31:14 Permissionless III Ad
32:28 What Parts of Crypto Suck?
41:03 The L1 Trade
1:04:40 L2s Are Not Good At Execution
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
one of the first and most easiest things to understand is like liquidity begets liquidity and a trading venue that gets more liquidity should have locking because it's like non forkable State and like if the liquidity is there like more liquidity is going to come and the per deck space like the exact opposite has happened there's been increasing fragmentation over time the the capital in that space is very happy to chase the next airdrop I think and CH chase the like the newest thing nothing said on ZX research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice Pacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the companies funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of zerx research today's a very very special day Michael eolo um co-founder of block works and host of bell curve the second best podcast on our network is joining yes thanks for joining us Michael no Baka you got to set the expectations much lower you gotta be like oh we brought up the B tier for this one yeah I couldn't get anyone else to join the show that's uh set the bar low man so I can hop over it um I'm also joined by regulars and not as special people Danny and Ryan who will attempt to keep up with myppo who like I mentioned is very good and we should make sure to put some pressure on him so lower the bar very true I'm just excited to be here I'm GNA try to keep up with y'all fantastic so I wrote up some topics um today's episode is going to be kind of special I want to hear Mio's opinions on a lot of stuff um as well as I want to kind of soak the fire with Ryan and drift so I think we're gonna start off with drift and Ryan recently wrote uh report on it and obviously Kyle fman wrote a 50 page report on it Ryan do you want to run through why you think drift is a winner over another order book or another professional deex yeah so just um so for some context um we wrote we saw the price of drift fall to like 30 or so cents um thought it made sense from a valuation perspective and began digging and uh potentially writing a report or recommendation for the drift token um we released our report on September 5th um the multicoin team released a report some days later though they had been early stage investors in drift as well um basically saying like both reports saying more or less directionally the same thing um that you know the opportunity for drift is is quite large um relative to its pricing on the market today um I think there are like kind of three main reasons of why we like drift as like a strong risk reward not that like I'm not saying I think it will win or it will be the like the multicoin fra uh report frame says like they think it's likely that it will be like the binance of defi um I think that that's very TBD I didn't make that claim um but there's like three things so like one I think is just salana beta I think that the market is still underestimating what fire dancer can do to that Network um if if fire dancer achieves maybe one tenth of the scale that it's promising um you're just going to have way more throughput there um and that's could drive significant fee generating opportunities for the dexes there that are you know basically technically capacity constrainted today so just simply making the pipes bigger will allow more fee generating opportunity for applications like drift um drift is is interesting in the like second reason is that it's it's interesting in the context of that increased scale because it's the only cross collateral per decks on salana today and building one of those systems is incredibly challenging so if you get fired dancer scale on salana uh I think the current behavior of current users is or so the behavior of current users is going to change and it's going to bring on new more sophisticated users and those new more sophisticated users will want cross collateral as opposed to isolated margin um when they're managing risk in these systems um um I think the third reason why we like drift is that um is that there are it's drift has an inherent advantage against other pers Dex dexes because it sits at the L1 why is that um the multi-coin report um you know they they pointed out um something that's super important but I think a little bit more obvious in that like they don't have to manage their own infrastructure the team can focus on building the product and I do think that's important um I think the more important point is that drift can has a more because it sits on the L1 has a um a more clear path to achieving D5 super app status so offering complimentary and adjacent products cross- selling their users on different products because they sit um where spot assets sit so if you think about the basis trade for example you can do it a basis trade in its entirety on drift today you can lever long perss uh you can Le uh short the spot and you can manage all that within one cross collateral system and that's that that's pretty important um drift can also incorporate various spot asset products so borrow end um spot trading uh payments things like that that's much hard harder to do when you sit on your own Island so because competitors typically sit on their own Island they're inherently capped or it's much more challenging that path forward to cross sell products so um I think like the upside for drift given those Dynamics is there we don't even like we mentioned bet in the report which we think is super interesting but um you know since we're focused on like per deas right now like we we'll keep it at that and I'll pause there I got a question for you Ryan do you have a or I guess for the for the whole group do you guys have a sense of a very strong opinion on when you're looking at something like a DEX what part of the infrastructure should basically be onchain and decentralized versus what's okay to be centralized feel like that's one of the levers that a bunch of different dexes are playing with and one maybe interesting example to look at would be dydx they're originally built on Stark net and then they migrated over to their own full stack app chain in Cosmos and you know a huge fan of dydx I love the of Antonio very bold he's been very product focused for a long time but there's also a sequencing challenge like they've had a lot of challenges you know since migrating to um since migrating to Cosmos and I think maintaining a decentralized order book is trickier like that was a huge thing for Antony I remember him saying this was just not possible to do on an L2 in the current state he found that very important to the ultimate vision of what a de was but now I feel like they're figuring out that that's much more challenging and I think it's interesting to ask the question you know what part of the infrastructure actually needs to be decentralized on chain managed by a quorum versus what's okay to be centralized do you have a strong do you guys some strong opinions there I want everything on chain that you can but like Antonio said you just can't do efficient um matching on chain like you can't run efficient matching engine onchain which is why they I assume they had to move it off chain um I mean we have a few teams now with I I can't bring up hyper liquid again like with a straight face because the past like month every episode I've been bringing up Viper liquid but like that's their whole thing you know they're trying to do everything on chain um on the other hand they are like it's like free validators it's collocated um kind of a black box in that end is like it's essentially what Mega E is doing where it's like hyper optimized but you are giving up on decentralization um they're claiming that they're going to decentralize eventually but like if you can just make you have to have a tradeoff you have to make something at some point a bit centralized because or else you just can't run everything on chain doesn't make any sense so I have uh I have thoughts I guess about the I'm I'm less in the Weeds on drift specifically but I've thoughts about the just per Dees as a category in general and I think it's an interesting question to ask whether or not um you know drift might be beta to salana and I think there are some interesting parallels from the 2021 2022 cycle to look at but perss are kind of interesting because they're kind of a classic I think value trap in a sense like usually when sentiment gets bad and people start getting discouraged everyone ends up looking back at like perss or anything that's generating revenue and being like well at least this thing's making money you know and this was the uh I don't know if you guys remember I I don't remember when the Heyday was of this but this was kind of like GMX and robbit and it was like well rit's producing all these fees and they're buying back their token and just look at what roll bit's done and now everyone's confused like why isn't that working anymore just The Narrative rolled off and BuyBacks just don't work in crypto it's not a value redistribution mechanism in crypto that works today because these markets just aren't effici and the other thing about perss as a category it's just very dispersed you know there are so many different per decks like how do you pick the best one I'm not really sure I I think that generally because we don't have very solid Frameworks for how to Value these things and I don't think that these tokens trade on cash flows or anything else rational at this standpoint you can just look at it as a game of fragmentation so any category that has a ton of different coins that you can bet on is just tough It's just tough but but I do also think I would be in the camp that one of the interesting things about salana that has uh intrigued me a little bit is there aren't that many coins on salana like for the kind of like the It ecosystem of this cycle everyone thinks it's going to be the next eth there haven't really been that many new entrepreneurs or apps building on it and there really aren't that many options that you can buy so I don't know I really like when it comes to not Financial advice but I like the salana beta story I think that's going to work for some period of time like jeto is probably a decent bet disclosure small bag old or vegeto but you know I think uh but I but perss as a category I found kind of challenged um just because there are so many of them and it's hard to differentiate yeah I I agree with you there I think that look at as someone who got into this ecosystem like pretty late 2019 2020 uh one of the first things that you learn is like um or one of the first and most easiest things to understand is like liquidity begets liquidity and a trading venue that gets more liquidity should have lock in because it's like non forkable State and like if liquidity is there like more liquidity is going to come and the per deck space like the exact opposite has happened there's been increasing fragmentation over time Capital has um the the capital in that space is very happy to chase the next airdrop I think and ch chase the like the newest thing um so like liquidity begets liquidity like I I do believe that that like that Network effect exists but I do believe that there are counteracting forces such as like the grant Dynamic like the incentivization program Dynamic like the airdrop Dynamic like those really overpower that Network effect they have historically um perhaps that changes if fire dancer can do what it says it can do uh because then you have a meaningfully differentiated Tech stack uh versus what's on the market today um combined with that cross collateral um the ability to do cross collateral there I think is potentially powerful U but no I I I I totally agree perex is historically have not have been really challenging to do I think it could have been dydx and I actually think the overarching problem there was not um like switching the tech stack a few times and uh potentially switching it again but was the issue where the dydx equity was making money EX at the expense of the dydx token holders right um I think that that was a bump in the road that really changed the path for that project um I'm pretty cogn cognizant of that when I look at these systems um I think it's probably one of the most underrated risks risks in crypto today um as far as like if you want to own a token um I didn't find a lot of that um in the purpose deck based t today where I was poking around so I think I think we've learned and hopefully you can see someone get some sustainable market share as a result yeah I wan to I want to agree with you mppo on your point around I think it's kind of the point that like price sort of drives narrative like you we get to these scenarios like with GMX back in you know 2023 um people go when the when the market is maybe struggling they look for these you know these businesses that are that are cash flow generating they look at you know price to fees they look at revenues and they get really excited about that because obviously all the there there may be more speculative bets are in the dumpster during those times and then when we see that Trend reverse it's like the exact opposite it's like well this this valuation actually really isn't that good and everything else is going up you know multiples while I'm sitting here with this you know 20% gain on whatever um and they flipflop and then we see it again you know I think recently there's been eyes on you know people like teams like a tokens like a maker again because you know Bitcoin has been sideways down um and people are of getting into that same feeling of like price driving narrative and they're like well you know all these like more questionable longer term speculative future bets are struggling again alter getting hit hard and they're they're going back and going wow look at all these businesses that generate revenue and then you know if if price starts to go up again it's like what you know what's the reaction going to be so I totally agree on that point this happens yeah like that GMX thing I remember but we also had 2022 2023 everybody tried to copy GMX and we had like maybe 30 Forks um across 15 chains it was kind of insane that that happened that's the fragmentation issue that happens in crypto because the marginal cost of spinning up something new here here are like four different categories that this has happened l2s so the first couple l2s like optimism and arbitrum you actually had a pretty long Runway of you know spinning up an L2 at that point in time was super complicated but now you got these Ras platforms like conduit that makes it like you the four of us could spin up an L2 on this podcast in 10 minutes you know that makes it very challenging that's super e that's basically bringing up on a whole bunch uh a whole bunch of new Supply online meme coins same thing right it's as soon as pump. fun happened and they were launching thousands of New Meme coins a day eventually the market was going to collapse under the weight of that Supply same thing with per texes and then same thing with the prediction markets I saw I saw the guys from Alliance sweding the other day that there are 30 new prediction markets coming online like I mean yeah I don't know how you guys feel about prediction markets post uh November 5ifth but yeah I mean that's going to be that's going to be challenging um to sustain any token values just when you have that many different options no I completely agree and it's like you said it's the issue that crypto has but it's also an issue that in general like a lot of other sectors have like with gaming this is something that I talked about on here as well but with like once launch one successful game like if you go on the App Store and you search for like Subway Surfers there will be like 55 derivatives of it and it's just the way that I think in general the world works this is like me coping about crypto constantly copying each other um I'm trying to be more positive on the podcast but I agree with you like post I guess November 5th like election season I don't see any of those prediction markets surviving poly Market I think has to survive if you raise $70 million you have to survive at least one election cycle you can't just die out um that'll be fine I think eventually they'll all like sports betting I'm not sure if that's big with prediction markets we don't really have it over here but I assume you guys do prediction Market SPS betting I was just GNA say there's a blockworks research uh dashboard on Playmarket it's got the best uh best data in the business on PO Market but yeah if you want to rip that up Buck the I mean I was looking at it the other day and I it actually looks like here's the thing that you can't really tell is it actually looks if you look at the um the percentage of different trades getting made it actually looks a little bit more distributed than you might think like something some some there's a higher percentage of people that are betting on sports on poing Market than you might otherwise imagine there there are more categories but the actual amount that's getting bet is still vast majority politics related and then the other thing that you can't really tell us how many people are coming to the site to bet on the election and then end up betting on something else so even though the metrics today are showing that people are betting on sports or something else if that election were to go away that's like the marketing for poly Market goes away for the rest of that stuff and then they're just competing with FanDuel or whatever and they're just getting smoked I I think the sports bet angle is is a going to be a lot harder than the election angle to your point like the the competition in FanDuel and DraftKings and like pick your favorite like those guys are making millions and billions and they're spending and they have official Partnerships with like the NFL with the biggest you know Sports um associations of today so it's that's a much taller hurdle than like this election Market um area that you know there are some apps that are that are in that space But it's it's far smaller and it's not really like captured by Giants today I mean if you don't have a phone app I don't think you can compete with um sports betting as well like even if you have that Progressive web app thing it's just not good enough people want to just download the app and bet through there while having beers with their friends they don't want to like be in the computer on the computer saying hey I think the Jets are going to win or something that's the only football team right know yeah that that's a great Point um and and to kind of circle this back drift um and what they're trying to do with um with um the betting Market um product that they have um like I think it really has to be differentiated like you guys said you're not going to do it in sports you don't even have a mobile app um the election stuff is going to run run over run over it's very seasonal um drift's bet platform plus Sal's blinks distribution um like I think that there's a nonzero chance of verality there within the crypto community so you know what like what's what's like the most what's super common in crypto it's like arguing on Twitter like that is the pmf today and like what like in a highly financialized space like what better experience is there than being able to read a Twitter argument thread for thread and at the end of the thread there's a salon of blink that has you bet on some like real world outcome of like what settles that argument um there are a ton of like internet subcultures that like operate on the same Dynamic of just like talking shop and like making predictions about the future of their industry or of like the you know the uh like the the culture that they're all a part of right um I think that you know you have an installed base in crypto of perhaps a few hundred thousand people uh who like to bet money and who are very ideologically driven on a lot of these issues uh perhaps we settle some of those debates in real time like on the drift platform in Via blinks on Twitter like that's not an unreasonable outcome for me and it's it's differentiated right there's no competitors there yet you have competitors in sports betting you have competitors in election betting um so this is potentially like the the BET platform there is a pretty interesting response to like the seasonality of um and the intense competition that crypto is going to see in other betting markets it's not clear to me that that like drift will necessarily capture this but I I do like the point around having the potential to go after this angle like I we're seeing some new apps around like betting on live streams like just permissionless creating bets related to active live streams and then you know users taking one side or the other that trade I think the verality in that like can come from like you're saying with blanks and other other technology that will tap directly into these social feeds of today like if there were bets on how Mr Beast like what his next video is going to look like and people could take one side or the other like he's got millions in reach and um to have people throw five or 10 bucks on that like I I think that's maybe the the larger reality audience size we're looking for versus like CT arguing over like if if ksani won an argument or not but I I think that that kind of tooling is is the way that you get there right like directly getting integrated into um the existing feeds existing socials of today rather than like trying to get these people off of Tik Tok because they they love being on Tik Tok they love being on YouTube Etc you guys checked in on farcaster frames recently does anyone use farcaster on this podast I I still check every once in a while I go on foraster it's it's died out and I think um the nail in the coffin recently has been that vitalic has started tweeting again after getting stressed out that e is going down um so he's he's left farcaster and come back to the regular World um I think like I liked foraster um frames were really good but blinks are like it's one is like foraster native and the other is you can do it wherever you want and I agree with Danny is that people don't want to go on forecaster they want to like scroll through Tik Tok and Chuck a tener thanks to Solana if that's a possibility I don't know if it is like realistically I don't know how long that would take to be an actual experience but feels like people want that yeah I think that just the Gap to get users to forecaster versus like everyone's already on CT they're already using you know they're watching stuff on YouTube they're listening wherever they're listening today and it's just I don't know that the forecaster experience is like strong enough um from a product standpoint to get people to move over in mass and I like the CT Community being what it is is like incredibly Niche it's hard to see that generating like the network effect to to get you know maybe other creators outside of that space to move there have you been recently I haven't no no I haven't but no I haven't but I I think there's a uh I think there's a tension in between blinks and foraster frames and the goal of these social media platforms which is creating a cohesive editorial experience most people wouldn't use that framing but if you think about someone like the New York Times The Wall Street Journal which is sort of the Legacy model of this there is an enor amount of agonizing over the front page and what goes into the front page and what stories do you see and what is the format and literally the font the font of these these Publications changes every couple of years and even though it's a little bit different it's the same process on everything from Google to Twitter to whatever social network and I think one of the tensions of frames something like foraster is when you allow more expressivity and creativity on uh you know whatever you're embedding into that platform it actually creates a lack of cohesion and actually what it's what it's kind of degenerated to a little bit I had a buddy ping me this the other day is that it's kind of just degenerated into people pushing and selling things you know which is originally why Facebook made that much more difficult to do um and so I think that's one of the challeng that's why blockworks was sort of interested in frames like as the you know looking at this through the the business lens of blockworks like hey uh you can link out you know and so suddenly like the initial ideas that we had like hey this is why this might be useful is like hey we can sell tickets easier here and that's great for Block works the business but that's not great for you the consumer and the user of these social platforms and so it feels like this was the first iteration of this but that's a tension I see in between you know with this whole idea um I don't know how it gets solved I think it's a great point I think like we're seeing a great example in maybe hitting both sides of that without squeezing the users too much is like Tik Tok has been incredibly successful with Tik Tok shop um I don't know why that's the case but it's it's like going back to the days of like you know QVC like sales TV where there are just some people who are willing to watch like a live stream of a Creator that's just literally pushing products to them um and I don't know if they just have the great like the perfect algorithm they like know the people that want that and and don't and maybe that's all it takes and they can differentiate that pretty easily but um I do like that like a like a frames like a blanks can can enable that um across potentially across platforms um and bring maybe that that Tik Tok shop kind of experience um sort of generally um across the board but I I you do make a great Point like it is finding the right kind of sauce to to not feel like every time you scroll through an app it's just like add add add add add that's been my experience on all social media recently at at that is it and I I wonder like that shopping thing on Tik Tok I wonder if it's obviously it'll be more um successful in Asia and I wonder if we just I know Ryan you have some thoughts on the way that we use social media and the internet over here versus they use it in the East but I wonder if it's just like the phone experience that's why Tik tok's just been more successful like the QVC style of being able to just scroll and they're just way more comfortable with it over there like if I see an ad over here I get like viscerally upset I'm like I do not want to watch this versus like if it's just become a regular part of life like we just expect something else over here versus over there how the internet has shaped culturally the you know what's one you know what's one um sort of interesting thing in podcasts is if you look at the way the podcast monetized there's two models you can do subscription podcast or you can do uh advertising driven podcasts and the I haven't checked this in a couple of years so I don't I don't know if this is stayed true but in the US versus China the way that podcasts get monetized are inverses of each other so there's a really low percentage of uh podcasts that charge subscription in the US and most of them are just monetized via ads but in China it's the exact opposite and most of them are subscription podcasts and there's almost no advertising at all and so some of this stuff is just weird like idios sycratic almost like path dependent reasons for how markets evolve there's not some first principles logic to it it's just this is how it sort of played out it could go something I would not have expected is the us having less Subs based it's yeah it's interesting because if you look at like I I just know that like if you look at patreon and the and the podcast that like do well with their free version what I think what often happens is they have kind of the free front-facing podcast experience that you can watch on YouTube Spotify Etc and then it's like the extra bonus content is behind the pay wall um and I I don't know if that just speaks more to like the American mind it's like oh now that I've watched this I like it enough to pay the money for like more stuff because I love it and maybe in Asia it's just I don't know what that funnel looks like where people are just convinced that they are like willing to pay for something straight up but that definitely feels a bit more like you kind of have to sell the product a little bit and then people are willing to actually like bite did you guys see um not to go totally off topic here but do you see those only fans numbers that ended up getting released this week that got we talked about it last week did what an incredible business they've built it's unbelievable and they return a lot of the money they do 5.3 I think went to their creators which is incredible and they still ended up with 500 million of you know net profit which is insane what it evolved into is like do we really need crypto for to empower creators because these guys are returning 80% like that's that's more than enough um I don't want to be netive about crypto I love cryptocurrencies the tokens everything but like you know if they're already returning 80% then I don't know if we really need it what do you think I don't know I it feels I agree with you it feels like a little bit of a narrative violation because the porn industry is also one of these unbanked you know actually there was a guy I think he was an OG ethereum guy but his name is Amin Solani or something like that and he built something called spank chain yeah which was explicitly for you know adult industry performers that couldn't get banking services and you know everyone kind of laughed at it it was it was it was the 2018 cycle C rocket sort of but it was very legit uh this guy's a really great developer and I think he's still very active in crypto community so sorry I mean if you're listening to this I don't mean to marginalize you I just haven't been following what's what's going on with you recently but yeah it feels like it should be a thing that works but for whatever reason only fans has been able to get around maybe it's less on the Creator side but the thing that only fans hasn't had access to is capital markets in a sense like they it's been very challenging for them to get access to like VC money and things like that and frankly it doesn't look like they needed it almost at all but maybe I think the thing that crypto is really useful is um just creating markets and capital formation around areas where you know broader Capital markets are a little bit squeamish um and Ne can't necessarily see the future on or might have these weird bureaucratic Hang-Ups around and so maybe it's less on the Creator side it's more on the on the capital side in this particular use case but it's hard to say only fans hasn't been successful and they're putting up putting up the numbers that they are so I don't know hey guys permissionless the event for crypto natives is heading west to Salt Lake City and we're bringing the biggest names in crypto together for an incredible C Miss event join me in the rest of block works on October 9th to hear for for more than 200 Industry Titans including Nick white from Celestia shiram from Igan and keoni from Mona the conversations at permission list will be covering the hottest themes in crypto including modularity reaking the Bitcoin and Solon ecosystems Ai and crypto rollups l2s institutional adoption and of course the November election that will be right around the court we couldn't be more excited about this event and it's happening in one of the most beautiful places in the US ticket prices will be increasing towards the end of jun so get your ticket today make sure to use the code so I get some credit and bragging rights from the rest of the team uh use ZX10 for 10% off on your ticket one more thing we're also hosting the permissionless re hacka font in collaboration with Biddle box the theme this year is a multichain future to build a better cross chain experience so I don't have to have a heart attack every time I bridge to a new chain all Hacker found participants will receive a free ticket to attend permissions so if you're a developer come join us in Salt Lake City team up with fellow devs and build the chain future mppo this is a question that I've had for a while for you because you're very viscerally a bull online on Twitter like you're you're optimistic about the industry but I want to understand what do you not believe in and you just mentioned like narrative violation with content creators what else in crypto you're like this this actually sucks guys we we should not be building this all right I'm framing this in a positive way intentionally but I think the way that we think about governance in doubt today could deal with some major improvements and and I I do View at a high level one of the things that crypto does is it enables cooperation um and coordination in a bunch of new senses but I think I think that crypto defaults a little bit too much to there's not enough Nuance in terms of organizational psychology and structure and I think that crypto has a bad habit of defaulting to committees and making decisions by committees which isn't good and I think that a strong principle that people should that that I really believe in is what you're trying to do when you're organizing people is to attract talent and make the best decisions possible and you just committees are often times get in the way of that if they're not structured correctly and incentivized correctly and I'm very optimistic about the future of dows but I think we're still in the V1 version of that and it leads to a whole bunch of very suboptimal outcomes and so it's not I'll caveat up by saying that I think I'm not a I'm not a hater of dows in the long term but I think we need to get way more nuanced in terms of how we think about how Dows govern themselves and it has to be more than just like one toone voting and a committee decision on everything that's what I would say do you do you have any good examples of what you think it should look like I don't want to ask like what do you think is a bad Dow um but what do you think is a good Dow or better so vitalic wrote this ralik wrote this blog post a little while ago about how he views Dows versus corporations you like um you know corporate structures and I can't remember the specifics but there were differences in terms of convex versus concave decision-making and you know if you look at the US it and and how government works and makes decisions in the US it's very different than the decision-making setup for a us-based company right um and I I think that I guess the view that I would I would give you like a hierarchy of the closer that you are to the metal of like the L1 and like these kind of money like commodities like assets that L1 tokens are the more you want a very decentralized like I think the only probably true Dows in practice today are Bitcoin ethereum and salana it's l1s that I think actually operate like Dows the rest and especially as you get further and further up the stack like maybe l1's are here and then there's l2s and then there's sort of middleware and then there's applications on top of that I don't really see why any application should be governing them eles in a structure that isn't like a company in the US I get why they're not doing it right now it's probably just for regulatory Arbitrage and people don't want to be labeled Securities but I mean come on these things are applications they're companies you're creating a product and you know I know we set out in crypto to say hey the money is broken but you know what's not broken the way that companies organize themselves in the United States it's arguably too efficient it's too good so that should basically just stay the way that it is and then the further you move down that stack I think the more Dow likee and decentralized the government the governance process should ultimately be um so I'd be in the camp of not Reinventing the wheel on anyone that's making a product and there's not a really strong rationale to be decentralized and then I don't really know what the future of governance looks like for l1s right right now it's been it's kind of opaque the way that decisions get made there are these processes but they're not you know it's it's unclear how decisions get made think you probably have to put some amount of formal much more transparent structures even in at the L1 layer I would see that changing as we go forward from here for what it's worth I like the way that l1s are run just because it's like there's very clearly a like the eperium foundation or like in Solon it's like all the engineer like that totally level of Engineers and they just run it and I think that makes sense um I know eventually we want to make it a bit more Equitable but for now like these are very early stage still in my opinion especially Solana maybe's a bit more mature but they have some issues I feel like they should just like run it how they should run it as opposed to like s swis style everybody gets to say hey guys maybe we gota actually go with mCP what do I know like I don't want to I you shouldn't ask me man Resnik you know you guys discuss it amongst yourself not with me with the business thing this is another one of those scenarios where just because of Regulation where not doing like Max efficiency of what we should be doing like there's so much stuff in crypto that's just like if there was like a little bit of clarity if just somebody would write a sentence on some official document that said hey guys you can do this like crypto would improve two to 3x minimum not just market cap but like enjoyment wise I would just be so much happier dealing with some stuff as oppos to like you said things being run like with committees or want to one as opposed to like a business I do think it's ironic to say that we need to see more transparency in like d governance systems when I think like the opinion from folks related to traditional governments is that we need to see more transparency and yet we're dealing with like decentralized ledgers where you can go and look at all the transactions and yet the governance systems are struggling to be as transparent um so I just thought that was a funny point but I agree on like in this differentiation between like these layers and like applications which are more like businesses I mean I think your point makes sense um and maybe just one other jab is that you know crypto participants are finding out that it's difficult to build a government it's like obviously that's not going to be an easy thing to do um and make it efficient um we we've everyone every culture in country around the world has struggled with that forever so yeah I so you know what here would maybe be a hot take is that everyone in crypto especially the bitcoiners don't like the Federal Reserve right it's the evil empire you know Jerome Palace Darth cidus whatever the Federal Reserve is 10 times more transparent than almost anything that exists in crypto today like they uh so what does the Federal Reserve have they have a dual mandate they say these are the two things that we care about and by the way when we meet we have minutes so you know what we're talking about we once a month we'll get in front of a bunch of reporters and questions uh we're going to show you the data that we're looking at in order to make these decisions and we're going to explain the framework with which we now do they actually do that in practice you know is there stuff behind closed doors yeah absolutely because these are human beings but that is far more transparent in terms of how the decision- making process ends up happening and the division of responsibilities than you know if unless I'm missing something in crypto like tell me but I mean that that's very clear and explicit decision making an or structure and I just don't really see a lot of examples of that in crypto yeah I think the unfortunate part is like the average maybe participant that's at that level today like in in the Bitcoin discussions it's like they know what's going on so they like they don't need the minutes like we're not at a point where like average Sally on the street is asking about the minutes from the Bitcoin chat from this month because they just don't they don't care but it's not on the level of like the Federal Reserve today um so that's part of it but obvious like you know they should certainly be taking strides in that direction if if the point is to get there so I agree with you I'm going to bring us back to one thing that I want to know about which is um how does an L1 win and how does an L2 win because I feel like i' I've wanted to bring this up since the very beginning ever since Ryan said um it makes sense for drift to exist on its own like not on its own chain and I think that it makes sense for an per X to exist on its own chain and then it ties into do we need app chains and then it ties into do we need more l1s or do we have all that we need um Ryan I think maybe we should start off with you last week you already gave a bit of a angry rant but maybe this week you'll be a bit calmer and nicer about that yeah there's a lot of endstate talk I have endstate talk fatigue um I remember in 2015 when the cloud was in its end State and like the future of AWS and Azure and gcp was margin compression um it's a very silly take in hindsight um uh 2018 right the global smartphone cycle was over Apple stock was taking it on the chin because smartphone sales had peaked and it was the end state of smartphones um I remember 2019 and 20120 when like AGI was never going to happen like maybe we get AI uh but we certainly don't get AGI because these models are only good at one specific thing and not General things so um you know there's a lot of endstate talk and um I think historically if you look at technology markets I don't think you ever get there maybe you get to this like fiveyear period of like plateauing margins or like some relative stagnation but like things change especially in crypto when Capital moves so quickly um due to these like incentive mechanisms that we talked about a little bit earlier airdrops incentive programs Foundation grants um so yeah I don't look so so then the question is like how does an L1 or an L2 win um I think that I really only have hindsight over the next like 12 to 24 months um 24 is even probably a stretch and I think as someone who's like looked at a lot of these l2s from like a valuation perspective because a lot of them are starting to look attractive versus like historical valuations um it's going to be really hard for these upstart l1s and l2s to quote unquote win or to really carve out uh carve a name for themselves in market share um I think I said a few weeks back like you can't compete on liquidity ethereum has all the liquidity you can't compete on technology because like the biggest Tech Gap was like salana versus ethereum in like 23 to 2021 and all those Tech gaps have closed we now have sub sand transactions across the board really fast block times all the wallets are generally the same um it's all about like BD and go to market right um some chains are really focused on interesting incentives if you think of blast but like that's going to be really hard because blast did have a really interesting incentive program and they got some traction and they lost it all so um look I look at the big ecosystems uh salana arbitrum ethereum base not in that order obviously um I think it's going to be really really hard to compete with them L1 or L2 um I think it really is a BD and go to market thing and um you know I have opinions on which foundations are doing the best um but yeah I think that's really all you have at this point I think to add to like you know we're seeing like a lot of the tech converge um it you know at this point if you're launching an L2 you're probably copy pasting the 50 other chains that exist there's no differentiation um to Ryan's point about like go to market and and you know attracting users and and chasing after that opportunity it's like we need to see this translation of tech and capabilities into products that users want to use it's not like oh well ZK will en this thing in the future and that's so cool and I'm going to buy it at A2 billion valuation it's like ZK enables this we built this app this is how you use it it's really great for users like have the tech create the product get people to use it like fantastic and that's how you differentiate if it's like we're the fifth ZK chain because ZK is ZK Tech is going to do this thing it's like do the thing nobody cares that you're going to do it when there's four others doing the same thing think about the ZTE the ZK Tech like kind of framing too is like this is all open- Source stuff if you have the magic ZK thing your competitor who already has Market sh can just take your ZK thing that's true for a long time but now that these now that these like top four is chains like significant user bases it matters much more today than it did when we had one1 of the users yeah I agreed and if you have the liquidity and like arbitr and optimism they make money they'll just like they're um hiring ZK labs to actually do more work for them on top of like you said they can just take the ZK Tech like you already have the liquidity the users the activity the reason I asked about the L1 L2 is I want to know if the L1 trade is dead and this is something that I don't think is dead but it it's going to tie very beautifully to another question that I wanted to ask which is at what point do you care about fundamentals versus like speculative because I think the L1 trade will always be there because of speculative reasons but I think like fundamentally I agree with you in that these designs are all converging the like like you said it's liquidity versus the tech and the tech is like okay sui and apos are fantastic dag based consensus gamechanging move language very good very secure doesn't matter that much like if no one's building on it um so at that point I feel like it's you know speculative versus fundamental so I also want to kind of hear your thoughts on that is the L1 trade dead if it's not dead is it not dead because we're just gambling I would be pretty hardcore in the camp that the L1 trade is not dead uh personally I think the I think there are a couple so first of all Ryan just to respond to your initial some of your initial points yeah I think you have the exact right take on endgame fatigue like everyone talks about it you know these podcasts don't sell themselves so you know you gota you gota have something to big idea that everyone can grasp on to right at the end of the day that's the PF that's that's the chats pmf there are a couple you know topics that launched all podcast there's the modular versus monolithic there's the endgame debate there's the ll2 these are great things that people like to not uh I am less sure that I agree with you on the tech differentiation I don't know um and I'm just gonna I'm just going to hold off and say I'm not actually 100% sure that we've solved that stuff and even if you go back to march in April of this year salana was breaking underneath the amount of transactions that were getting introduced by pumped fun and that's not that many transactions in the grand scheme I think there's plenty of room right like scaling up scaling a blockchain is really a challenge of you know managing your supply and demand like your block space Supply and your ultimate demand of transactions I think one of the mistakes that ethereum has actually made in their from a path dependent standpoint is I've actually weirdly brought too much block space Supply online like there's way too much cheap block space now on the ethereum network and they've reintroduced platform risk and l2s which is a whole point um I go on a monologue about that but uh the the demand wasn't there yet and so they have this L1 to this very tricky challenge of trying to scale the supply of block space to meet demand but demand is so so procyclical and so difficult to manage that I don't I'm not actually sure it's a manageable problem and I think the the point honestly multi coin says this a lot and I really agree with this point that we're so early in adoption in terms of regular sticky daily active users that when this cycle really comes back this is anyone's game it's just anyone's game yes you know ethereum and salana have the advantage right now on the smart contract platform side but some amount of like really sticky really good strategy you know in acquiring users I agree with you on the point that like go to market and BD are going to be differentiators and I don't really see a lot of that at that L one layer I think there's opportunity for uh for L1 which is really differentiated on that front to significantly win out and the the ultimate left curve and then uh sorry bu I didn't mean to cut you out there but the ultimate left curve here is just that as soon as just like every other category that ends up getting copied l1s are the ultimate category that gets copied and when Bitcoin and eth and salana start really ripping to the Moon again they are going to be these crazy rounds that come in they already did for kind of like the monads and the bar chains of the world and maybe those are the new l1s maybe I I'm not sure but one of these new l1s that's going to get funded that's going to do some cool new thing they're going to drop their token and they're going to be able to bootstrap enough demand and they won't they'll be able to stick around and not fail when the water inevitably goes out again and I think they'll have just like a a shot at you know there's Pro my my my view has always been I think there's going to be five or six of these things that end up really sticking around five or six different ecosystems but sorry bucka what were you going to say I was going to say because you br brought up um you don't think that there's an L1 that has kind of won over I feel like you know what's one L1 that never like we just brought up ethereum and Solana um and we're like oh like these haven't won up Tron is arguably the only one that has actually like significant pmf to the point that it's exactly that user base that you're talking about like that sticky every obviously it also has it Cycles but I feel like it's much less than the other ones like the C because everybody uses it all the time it's low value usage payments we like to call low value usage I don't know why um I guess it's not as many Fe as much fees like per but they make money on that chain and that chart is one of the most beautiful charts that like I don't know if just son is personally drawing it but like they've done a fantastic job over there so I feel like it's one that we never really bring up and we like to talk about if salon and l2s but you can't really talk about Tron it's not culturally acceptable um which is also an interesting thing but we won't dive into that today but um Ryan what do you think about the L1 trade not being dead yeah I totally think that that's true to a degree like I do like it's kind of contradictory of me right like I'll often say like the space rounds to zero right which that kind of implies like anyone can come along and win and like yeah there is a non-zero chance that like if if Facebook anoints algor Rand as the nft chain and like Jake Paul like is just like ripping it selling nfts to his folks um his fans then like algorand kind of I mean it becomes a big Financial outcome for algorand um getting wallets into a lot of hands um but I think I like put look if we all talk to Founders um I put myself in the shoe in the shoes of a founder um who's thinking about deploying in the crypto space you have like your crypto natives who like know they're going to go to where the liquidity is perhaps they're going to go to a lesser known chain because they're going to get some grant money um but by and large like if you want people to buy your liquid token and increase your personal wealth that you're going to go to a place where there's more liquidity um and again the grant Dynamic kind of kind of messes with that but I think that's like directionally the trend um and then I think of like okay you're a web 2 founder um you've been in the game for a while you just heard about this deepin thing um now what chain do I want to deploy on you want like low you want low fees but then also you also want people to be able to buy your token too because again that's like your personal wealth um that's the success of your project if you talk to any of these deep in projects they'll say like hey the biggest pain in the ass is when our like customers come to us and they say like why is your token going down because in the web 2 world if you're if like you're in business with a startup and you see their Equity going down you're like what's wrong with your stock right like you have that like kind of like supply chain risk um when um when you deal with a startup so like there's this there's this I think there's this inherent tendency for people who issue assets to want to issue them on the chains with the liquidity that's why ethereum has done so well historically um It's A Hard cycle to to Break um it's not happening in perp dexes because there's no asset issuance there it is happening like on the general L1 where there is a lot of money that can like support these token valuations I think I think of I think when I think of all the important considerations that a Founder has when entering in the crypto space very few are more consequential than that one for the success of the project I totally agree with you on that Ryan but one thing that uh this might be a flaming hot take because it's been such a absolute dog [ __ ] like it's produced zero results but these BD deals that you know get a little bit of you know like the Starbucks nft thing or you know moving DMV well all it takes is for one of those to hit and here's a funny discrepancy like if you talk to a lot of people that have a very that are either working trafi today about their sort of crypto exposure you know I've had this happen many many times to me where it's like yeah I own actually a good amount of crypto and I own like some Bitcoin and then I own some algo and I think algo is going to the moon and or some xrp and why do they do that because because these firms have spent an enormous amount of time and BD effort in the banking system and all it takes is for one of those to hit I can it hasn't worked so far but I could totally empathize with the I see the logic um and it makes sense to me that eventually one of those things could work the other thing is just on the supply and demand thing so so okay let's let's just put ourselves in the let's just put ourselves like six months in the future a more traditional bull market has resumed real demand is coming back to these chains and salana is just maxed out right it's like the like transactions are dropping left right and center and you know new founder comes and says hey I would love to be building on salana or ethereum but you know it looks like demand is maxed out here so what are my other options right like that Dynamic I think is still going to be with us for multiple Cycles I would say um and it actually is in my view a real drawback to the integrated blockchain approach like that challenge of managing supply and demand is always going to be there and yeah I think it'll be I think it'll be challenging actually for salana it's going to be it might actually be kind of a painful bull market for salana in that in that instance because they have all their activity on one layer it's going to be challenging for them because I think they're going to be maxing out a lot of their block space right at the time when they want to be attracting new apps so I think it's actually going to be a struggle I mean it has its advantages and its disadvantages as well like just being integrated having as much could and this is my drift versus dydx I don't want to C forid drift versus dydx thing is that when you're trading on a chain like even if like Solana can handle the order book capabilities but like you said when that time comes and sometimes things just aren't going through um fire dancer is supposed to be great we you don't know like we don't we just like you can assume it's going to be great but it might not be great which is why I always think like per stes these I think lending amm you want to keep on the base chain because those require liquidity and interaction with other apps and you want to like be keep it as safe as possible but per Dees I think you want it offchain like um not on like the L1 I think you can have like an app chain an L2 specifically for the per STS because or else you're taking on too much risk and Ryan this is something that like I know you discuss in the report as well which is you can't like fund managers don't want to take the risk of having downtime on a per St because they want to close their positions or they want to open new positions and it's just something that you won't be able to do um so agree with you m is that if like Solana the demand for the block space goes crazy then like some of these apps just might not work and new apps might just just not be able to come because they're like we can't do anything there's a million tokens launching on pump up on a day there's literally nothing we can do here's something I want to get your guys uh perspective on so this I think that ethereum so a word that people used to throw around a lot more back in the day was platform risk and you know when founders were getting it started you know do I basically build on ethereum or take a risk on some newer less proven Network and it was actually a gigantic moat at one point in time for ethereum because there were a bunch of new flashy l1s you know some of which were stuck around like salana some of which did not like I know Phantom is still kind of kicking but you know less uh less of the place that you would want to take a bet on and so vcs's having been around and seen some Cycles were basically just said I think pretty good advice which is don't don't risk it just why would you do that just build on ethereum if you're going to have your product yeah just why take that risk if feels unnecessary now but now with the proliferation of l2s you aren't supposed to build on the L1 anymore right that's not it's too expensive it's been the explicit part of the road map which is new apps are supposed to launch on l2s and these are now relatively new unproven platforms and one it just kind of psychologically introduces a choice which is actually not great from a Founder perspective so instead of just launching on eth now I got to I got to make a choice here right do I bet on optimism do I bet on arbitrum do I bet on whatever and it reintroduces that choice which adds friction and then also these are new unproven platforms most of these rollups I don't think there's any stage two Roll-Ups today right am I right about that I should know that off the top of my head but you know there's there's actual platform risk that's got reintroduced to ethereum and then you trade that off with the dynamic of launching on salana today which is yeah you just launch on main chain which actually feels so I think they've surrendered that moat a little bit but on the other hand I think they also um but I think in a sense ethereum is going to be better suited to scoop up some of this demand because salana is probably going to spend this bull cycle maxing out their uh their their block space which is going to lead to all these ux challenges um assuming that fire dancer doesn't magically solve everything which I'm very bullish on fire dancer but I think you have to be somewhat skeptical about it yeah how do you do you guys agree with that framing or what do you think about that that the framing is 100% correct um it's framing that um frankly like I I've heard that as early as 2021 q1 about the E the the rollup Centric road map for eth um it's very obvious from first principles that that's the problem right there's obviously like liquidity fragmentation asset issuers don't know what to issue issue their assets but like there's platform risk all the l2s have gone down um um you know within the last six months or so I'd say or or perhaps eight months um so I think that that's definitely true um no argument there to to the capacity constrained Point um my my thinking around that is like I thought about this historically and it's why I favor like quote unquote more centralized approaches in crypto um I'm not I'm not a decentralization maxi um by any means um think about what happens when an L1 reaches a capacity constrained point like theoretically like their their their fee revenue and priority fee revenue is maxed out so like everyone gets together and they say like what do we do next the this happened to ethereum and they literally said do everything everywhere else and we'll try to be money forget execution you guys can do it over there we'll try to be money that's going to be our new go to market which is a very low probability like go to market in my view like selling the product of money is extremely challenging um if it's not USD denominated money um I think that because of because because eth holds that strong ideological bias towards decentralization that path made sense um I favor l1s and platforms that are not as um ideologically constrained by that need for maximum decentralization so like what will happen to salana if they've reached Oru or apose if they've reached the maximum point of scaling well I my guess is those teams are just going to say increase the hardware requirements I think that that's fine like that's totally cool like tell the community like this is going to be a six to 12 month thing 3 to 12 month thing whatever but just like have be your machines like we can do this um we can do increased transaction throughput with beier networking and beier CPUs or gpus um so like when I'm thinking about like where to place bets um I'm pretty short the um I'm pretty short like this like ideological stubbornness of um maintaining some like low Hardware requirement at all cost because you can't move in those scenarios when you reach that Max um throughput scenario that we're talking about so like I I think that if Salon is there for any significant period of time I think they just handle it better from like a product perspective like allowing users to for their transactions to hit the chain in instead of saying like hey go do this activity somewhere else we don't care I think that that's an important consideration when investing in these things I I think they realize that now like etherium has after resnick's fourth podcast of him saying hey guys maybe we don't need to optimize for raspberry pies we can just like run on a m M2 MacBook Air or something I think they finally realize um if if the requirement is 32 e then maybe this guy can afford like a small uh MacBook mini um in terms of the l2s my horrible take which I got yelled at in like the analyst chat is that I don't think l2s are good at execution and like we got into the semantics and we were like oh like technically they're good because they have higher TPS and because they have lower fees I don't think it's worth it um I think like you're wasting so much Capital that exists on the L1 and some of these L2 like I think you want really beefy l2s like let's not lie about it centralize the sequencer Mega E Style I want a gorillion TPS like whatever I can put on the Chain I want to put on the Chain let's Max it up or I want like the L1 where it's like I don't care if it's 15 TPS because what arbit from is 50 PPS huge difference it doesn't matter I'd rather have that liquidity that like culture that e L1 has versus E2 like the l2s have like you're actually launching products you're getting silly on the chain there's money flowing around I like that a lot more than this like in between where it's like we have a bunch of mid l1s on stage one not actually doing very well um Daniel Smith yelled at me for this he said you're stupid but it's still my opinion I why did he say that why did why did mean Daniel Smith say that what I I wanna I don't want to tell on him on the podcast but did you say you like getting silly on chain yeah well it's just what are you doing on AR arum L2 that you're like like I can't remember base is different I think they're doing something interesting there but on arbitrum optimism there's nothing to do anymore like on E L1 I'm still actually like if I'm on the L uh I'm on E main that I'm still minting nfds I'm still trying out interesting stuff and the apps that they launch like the basic example is Vista some random Decks that launched on the E one a few weeks back um only went like 40 50 mil Market cap but I haven't seen something like that where like everybody on my timeline is talking about it happen on optimism ever I've never seen it happen on optimism they like fully went for um op stack we're just going to do a bunch of random little l2s on arbitrum when GMX was popular was happening everyone was building on GMX but since then that hasn't happened there's nothing interesting going on yeah it's the bare Market whatever like there's less users but on Solana it's happening like people are getting s you can legally say people are getting silly on chain on Solana you can't say that for arbit from L2 and on L1 people still get silly and I know that's like not a right way to say but at the end of the day Ryan you said there's 100,000 users I don't think that's true I think there's like 10,000 users on chain like of l1s and L on and Solana um and I think like these are very active users and Rich users and I think you want to milk them as much as you can can and how you can do that is by letting them get like do stupid stuff armed careing because that's when you earn most of your fees I support getting silly on chain um I think in the context of like salana the thing that I like the most and put a lot of stock in as far as like the team and the development teams that work on like the networking issues ETC is like they're very much in like founder mode they're not in they're not in eth manager mode where they're sitting around like oh let's just push everything to l2s like we just won't fix anything we'll just we'll just throw it all over there and then you've got these other like I think even bass is a good example Like Jesse poock he has incredible targets for what he wants to see on bass like Giga gas or like multiple gigas a second um to be pumped through on base um and I think salana it's it's been the same way it's like you have or like basically taking down the network it's just too many transactions it's killing everything else like pump fun and Meo activity like basically PE keeping people out like they can't do anything because there's so many people trading meme coins on chain like it's just it's causing issues and then and the teams are like well we need to do a networking fix need to drop a patch like right now we need to get working on it we need to develop this and and push it out right away regardless of the work on fire dancer it's like oh there's an issue let's fix it and then people go and get silly again and then they break something else and like oh we need to fix this thing like I think like that desire and focus on you know there's an issue let's let's get a patch out and fix it like right away and like just improve efficiency um capability like throughput that I think is something that I put a lot more stock in than like this sit around and decide like 10 years from now what like what does this thing need to look like it's like just fix the problems you have right now and make it better yeah I agree I agree with that as a philosophy as well here's one thing I've been thinking about what do you guys think about the stack like bundle of chains model that a bunch of l2s went down one thing that I've been noticing now speaking to a couple l2s it's like why did we do that if the whole point of this right is that ethereum is super decentralized you can borrow some aspects of that right the settlement assurances that Ethan Network give you and yeah I'm kind of in the camp of Crank that [ __ ] up to 11 centralize a sequence or make it you know and and then if you if you have that as a perspective you don't need all these different chains why do you need all these apps don't want their own chain they just want some specific properties that separate chains give you and so I one thing I've been noticing Talking to I view this as like a bundled business model the op stack super chain is a bundle um Avalanche they're not subnets anymore they're L1 it's a little bit of a bundle it's uh you know ZK sync eror Chains It's a bundle and they've they've got this business model where they're trying to use interop it's all about monetizing interop but that would be so much simpler if you just put everyone on one chain right arbitrum one or ZK era right that kind of makes more sense to me and the business model of a bundle it it looks a little bit like a SAS type thing it's like hey all right pay us your sort of monthly fee and we'll manage the the backend infrastructure for you on these chains and maybe you'll pay us for interop or maybe not but then on the you know if you have one kind of chain that everyone's on the business model is like there's just transaction fees and uh congestion fees and priority order and all this stuff which is that just looks like a better business model to me and I showed you guys before this I did a podcast this week with uh Eugene the Ellipsis Labs Eugene and Frankie from Paradigm um and that's their perspective and they've actually done a whole bunch of spe they're they're in svm they're using the svm for their execution environment they've modified little bits and pieces of it they've enshrined an Oracle and they've made it like this is the chain for Def and inad of solving the Noisy Neighbor Problem by moving everyone onto their own chain they've just solved a lot of the issues that defi apps have uh you know by battling battling it out for Block space and they put everyone on the same layer and I kind of think that's like seeing that is like yeah that that does feel like the way actually what do so what do you guys think about these like these stack kind of business models in general the stacks and bundles I absolutely hate I think it's like a combination of oh somebody else built it so I need to offer something similar um this prevailing notion that app chains is exactly what people want for some reason everybody thinks like oh we need to like accommodate for app chains when it it hasn't worked um except for like a few specific scenarios and I think this is probably like not completely true but this is my opinion I think they need a way to make their native token popular um if you're an L2 you give it up for e and you still want AR to be used somehow like I think with Avalanche this is not very very relevant because obviously they don't care about e but they used um they made subnet stake aack Avalanche like that's very clearly a an attempt at making it not maybe not money like but giving it more utility and I think that's what a lot of these l2s are trying to do is that because you're giving like you're giving e all of the moneyness um or Capital like properties and you're giving it up on ARB um or op and you want to give it like some form of utility and I think the easiest way to do that is like through either making them stake ARB or op or just making them use it on their own chain like keep putting liquidity on that chain through that I don't think it makes sense as a business model I agree with you I think it makes more sense to just why are we made doing more modular stuff like at another level the whole point of the L2 was that we stopped um the moment that you do L3 I think it's like you need to look in the mirror and say am I really doing this like do I really need to do this the modular versus monolithic stuff is just an argument about timelines and path dependence in my opinion I do actually I would be a in the long run a proponent of modular design and I think that the driving force behind that is we haven't talked about ass or app specific sequencing or whatever but it's the it's the uh which can't which should not be the acronym but it seems like that's the acronym that we're landing on here that it's just the ability to own the fees that you generate like I I think of apps as orderflow Originators and if you're originating your order flow you are going to want control over the econ like the environment the product environment but you also want control over the economics that you're bringing to the table and I think a lot of business models were built on this assumption that hey I'm just going to have all these order flow Originators bring their order flow to me and then I'm going to internalize it and keep a bunch of the value and I don't think that's going to prove out over the long run is that's what I sort of feel about but the goal has been that you have to pay that money that you're giving up with your order flow to the base chain to benefit off of liquidity or not having to build but you don't think that because we're getting all of these I guess like Ras products or because it's becoming easier you don't really need to pay for that security or that whatever that building that complexity anymore we should just keep it yeah is the ass argument a2s is a good one I saw a2s but ass does um ass is not great yeah I agree on the timeline perspective like it just it feels like we're just not quite there yet and the same I think the same goes with a lot of the modular focus and like I feel like maybe over indexing today is just people wanting to build things for something that they think is going to be like a dominating demand driver in the future even when it isn't really a viable business model today like I guess that's great from an idealistic standpoint but if you're going to just lose money money on it I don't know that it makes sense um I do feel like like there's just some ways to go like we don't even have like app users still pay to interact with every app that they use like we there's I don't know if there are very many examples of applications where like you log in and like the fees that a user would pay to like post the transaction are subsidized by that application like that business for them and they can like make posts or do whatever the app does right like trade a meme coin like that's clearly there's clearly some form of the business model in the future where you know you go the way of like the traditional digital businesses where they're they're they're obus skating all that stuff under the hood they're they're paying for those server costs and you don't have to worry about like these blockchain fees and the value that they're generating from you the user is just so much higher they're able to monetize you so effectively that it doesn't matter um but we get into all these arguments about like who's getting the fees how they're getting the fees what they're doing with them when like we're just struggling to even like get the users to pay those in the first place for what it's worth I think if we have to off youate stuff I think um if apps aren't paying rent to the base layer uh they're going to have to pay rent to somebody else like if you're an app chain and I think this is probably why Unis swap launched their own wallet and I think this is probably why we'll see a lot of other apps launch some form of front end for themselves that's on a phone because or else you have to pay fees to Ravi um to make it easier or like to any other wallet provider I don't think because or else I don't I don't see how you're going to get differentiated I don't see how you're going to get hosted this is something I need to think about a bit more I I haven't looked at app specific sequencing enough just because I think I got put off by the acronym for what it's worth I thought it wasn't very serious but it does sound relatively serious that I need to actually read up on it and think about it a bit um unless we have any other D topics that we're dying to discuss no this was great guys um Meo thank you so much for coming on um really appreciate you having really appreciate you hopping on thanks for having me guys that was a great chat this was a great chat yeah I um now this is this is my never miss podcast so I'm uh appreciate you guys making room for me heck yeah comment of the year right there [Music] oh

========================================

--- Video 86 ---
Video ID: HYG8Gm2QoKM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HYG8Gm2QoKM
Title: How Dinero Is Reshaping Liquid Staking | 0xSami
Published: 2024-09-12 15:48:31 UTC
Description:
In this episode, 0xSami from Dinero joined us to discuss Dinero’s product suite, institutional adoption of LSTs, and Dinero’s withdrawal mechanism. Additionally, we dove into the competitive landscape of decentralized stable coins, and how Dinero is growing their market share. Finally, we covered Dinero’s new ecosystem strategy and the institutionalization of DeFi

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Join us at Permissionless III. Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iii
--
Follow Dinero: https://x.com/dinero_xyz
Follow 0xSami: https://x.com/0xSami_
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:09 Overview of Dinero's Product Suite
7:09 The Differences Between pxETH & apxETH
9:21 Dinero's Differentiation From Other Ethereum LSTs
12:16 Institutional Adoption of LSTs
17:43 Dinero's Withdrawal Mechanism
19:06 Competition For Decentralized Stable Coins
28:56 The Dinero Relayer
32:03 Permissionless III Ad
33:17 Polygon Ad
34:07 Growing Dinero
38:44 Market Demand For LSTs
42:57 Dinero's Berachain & Other New Ecosystems Strategy
48:23 The Institutionalization of DeFi
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
this is my view on decentralized stable coins right I think that we as an industry um defi side crypto side whatever it is have not proven the ability to efficiently tokenize our own assets the polygon Community grants program was launched with 1 billion tokens all four polygon Builders season 1 is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon products builders on polygon these grants are for you join the aggregated future today by applying at polygon.net friend nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice Pacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of zerx research today I'm joined by Danny from blockworks research and Sammy from daero uh previously known as redacted cartel thanks for coming on Sammy what's up guys thanks for the invite so throughout the podcast we'll mainly focus on daero but before we get started Sammy do you want to maybe give a quick overview of redacted and daero the product Suite maybe Hidden Hand and Pyrex and why you guys shifted away from redacted cartel towards the narrow I I think that throughout the throughout this whole um podcast like it'll start to make more sense than me just explaining it now but I think that we launched redacted at the tail end of 2021 um we raised around 72 million between our public and private sale uh with support from Maven 11 and some others and at that time um defi was just in a different place we had this very strong focus on um creating liquid infrastructure for liquidity on chain and the the interesting thing about that is that uh we made we made very good money without having to spend a lot of money is in like tokens and stuff like that um so we were one of the few profitable D5 projects but the problem was that there was a very low glass ceiling so for example Hidden Hand um was very very profitable for us um and still is uh but you know your your total addressable Market is in the millions which is like in it's a very good business but in the grand scheme of crypto you can only reach like a certain point um and when the def5 market was hotter um it was like the biggest bribe Market out there we expanded to a bunch of different chains and markets um and then the same was true with Pyrex we did um pxt VX and I think at Peak less about deposits more about the price of convex at the at the peak uh it was around like 25 million in tvl and that those numbers like Sound small but like considering how big of an opportunity these things were we basically like came in and we dominated right um so we started very small and we succeeded and and I think in our two years of existence we never you know misappropriated any Capital we never got hacked we never um did anything out of the ordinary or I guess actually we never did any of the regular D5 things um depending on how you look at it and um and and then you know as I think like a lot of projects in crypto like start very broad they say like you know we're going to bring a billion users on chain we're going to get your mom a metamask all this stuff um and and then you see them like over two years three years just start to like become more and more Niche right uh in terms of what they're actually good at and I think we went the opposite route right um which is like what an actual startup should do is it should start very small have like one very attainable thing attain it um and then just shoot for the stars right or slowly go to shoot for the stars and that's what we're doing now and um I'm excited to talk about it you know with ipx eth and some of the other developments we have coming yeah um so from what I can remember uh when you guys first launched the white paper daero was meant to be a stable coin backed by lsds um and you guys moved away from this a bit I guess like you have a separate liquid staking product now and an upcoming collateral backed um product the stable coin product what I guess I could you talk a bit about both of those yeah so we're still doing that right um let so you know redacted was this like overarching brand um and one of the products was hit in hand one of the products was pyx and then the big one we were going for was daero and then what we realized was that daero was um a three-prong system right which it still is it's um an eth staking product pxe the stable coin which was called daero now it's called PX USD and um our relayer and all three of them play all really well with each other U that create like very Diversified yield that could like live on its own um and be sustainable without you know um token or any of these other things and that's still the goal that's still exactly what we're doing but what we realized was that we had such a big opportunity with it that um all the other stuff we were doing and spending resources on and essentially wasting time with was holding us back and we got really inspired by um the bitow to mantle pivot the um ribbon to AO pivot um where you know you have this like brand that you start out with and then you just keep firing shots and then something really lands um and then you just focus on that and that's what that's what it is right that's all it is we never the daero product is not changing um but the second part that comes is the stable coin PX USD and in order to do that um we need way more tvl uh we need uh we need need distribution because this we want the stable coin to be uh Native leverage for the um e staking product right and there's so many ways that we can do that which we're starting to like roll out now um our institutional staking product our uh branded SL white label LST product we're doing with other chains the reaking integration we have coming um so many different things but you need the you need the LST to be big um and sustainable uh before you can just like uh you know make it collateral for a stable coin and you can borrow against pxe now but um we're playing with some very unique you know mechanism designs with the stable coin that would obviously imply that it needs deeper liquidity and stuff right um so there's I think that and hopefully I'm answering your questions here but like I I think that um the approach we're taking is like the right way where we're looking for new distribution mechanisms new users where we can pull this in without having to like you know launch a new token and do some like big points campaign and some behind the scenes like you know tvl raise uh type thing where like that Capital won't actually be there if we can find you know sticky Capital with people committing twoe threeyear lockups on this eth and uh the the things you can do with leverage and debt are very spicy um compared to having to work around a system where all the capital of the system can just leave in a date right yeah I think that's a great overview and I think we're going to want to ask about kind of all the pieces that you just mentioned but um I guess looking at um on the LST side of things or the the E side side of things you guys separated out um pxe and then apx eth um in in the product so I guess can you run over over the differences between the two and what was really the decision behind kind of offering both of those two different sticking derivatives in this in this case yeah so our staking model is designed after uh fraxis FRX e um it it's essentially like a a two trunch system right uh you have a junior trunch which is pxe which is what everyone deposits into um pxe itself is not actually yielding the ethereum yield uh but it is where our treasury that we've built up over the past two years of um you know influential assets like Aura and convex and Vell and all these other stuff um goes towards incentivizing people to hold on to pxe so it's a bit more of a risk on type of yield it's significantly higher um but everyone who chooses to opt into that Junior trunch is sacrificing the ethereum meal to everyone in the senior trunch which is apx e um and apxe everyone who enters that system uh is exposed to Pure ethereum yield which uh for the past like six months for us has netted three times four times higher yield than um any other LST on the market and uh they are they are the ones sacrificing the defi yields to the pxe holders so really what we're doing is not two different lsts it's more of just um an abstraction of yield where we play with ratios um to like provide more yield to the people who want certain things because what we've seen is that um and you see it with like lrts as well right um some you see with Lotts and like Pendle right which became a big thing this year it's like some people are willing to sacrifice the yield in order to buy assets at a discount and then some people just only want the yield right and they think the yield is going to go up and um when you when you start playing with abstraction you open up like really cool doors in terms of um what you can do with yield um so that's like the best way to look at it okay yeah great overview and and then I guess to follow on I mean you mentioned um you know fra as an example or similar product I guess I'm curious for daero itself and and what you guys have with pxe and apx eth like how where's the differentiation play out for daero relative to other like staking related or LS you know eth lsts yeah um so are the the the vision we have for it is um one uh availability right um and then to diversification right so what I mean by availability is um we can the way we've created this LSD and it's not a it's not a fork of any other LSD we sort of built this own solution in house um is that it really focuses in on the validator uh side of things and it's less about actually with every with every LST you have the same tribalism that exists with l1s and stable coins and all of these different things right um and the Medan bones of all of this stuff uh is actually in what you can do with your validator right um and for us it's actually less about the output of pxe that's just where we started but for us we are able to like go to an institution um like Galaxy or laser neora we're able to go to layer twos and we're able to Output what they want which for example in the case of ipx eth is segregated yield segregated collateral segregated valid dator set which is very very key which no one's really cracked yet um on the layer two side of things we're able to provide a branded LST kind of like um like blast eth or meth or something like that um and we're able to like abstract away this whole process of actually running an ethereum node um down to our core infrastructure and it's less about pushing pxe into the masses and more about creating those really good tvl syncs and then in terms of the yield um diversification when we have our igen layer integration going live um the way the system will work will be uh ether enters the system it's staked with us it's restak into one of our partners um igen pods and all of the AVS yield which um we working with a few different avss uh to use exclusiv VR validators for this is pushed to pxe so those people who want the more risk on yield AVS yield defi yields is all going to pxe and then same as before all the ethereum yield goes to apxe um so at any point we could be the highest yielding LST or LRT depending on uh how risk on the market is if that makes sense that does make sense and I think um I guess yield Dynamics are important with lsts but with lrts I imagine they're going to be a lot more important because I feel like that market is really wide open and a lot of people are a bit worried about I their yield side um I wanted to ask you about the reaking thing but you covered it a bit so I guess I'm going to talk a bit about institutional adoption that's the Northstar for all lsds um you recently partnered with laser digital um what does that look like like how does that side work what does it look like to offer an Institutional LSD well it's a headache for one um uh but beyond it being a headache I I think that you know we've worked we've been beside these guys for a long time through um personal connections and stuff and like I was saying before all we all we needed to do was prove ourselves on a smaller scale to be able to do things on the bigger scale and uh when they came to us you know they were late to the ETF game the laser digital is the crypto subsidiary of Neo Securities right um and which is one of the biggest IBS in the world um and in Asia and um they relate to the ETF game um you could say they relate to crypto in general compared to some of the others whove have been around for a very long time despite what they might say and we we were obviously interested in building the E staking side of things and we we were building it alongside them put it on the market sort of like a test and prod thing for like six months um to prove that it works and to prove that it can scale and uh what we are doing is we are providing the infrastructure in Tech like I said our deposit mechanism our withdraw mechanism which is really cool if you guys want to get into that um our defi Service uh or like our defi liquidity that we can provide our defi yields um and all the different things that have built into pxe eventually the native leverage with the stable coin um and the Diversified yield that we're looking at with our um our RPC and um are reaking so so they're taking the whole thing and they're white labeling it right um and what it looks like is again it outputs the same token but when ether comes in from a retail depositor or any of us um it looks like any other LSD I think everyone knows how this works at this point right but for them what our system is able to do is it's able to recognize deposits coming from certain addresses for example a white labeled laser digital address right The Ether enters the system um it's segregated away from the rest of the validator set as it's building up that 32e Reserve it's staked with Galaxy on another segregated validator set um and also has a segregated um yield that that gets produced out of it the nice thing for us is that even though we are have we recognize that flow from the retail flow and we can separate it it's still producing the the same token and we can still recognize the same fees on it um as we would with any other deposit right um so really what they've done is they've taken it they've changed a few of the Lego pieces um and they've built their own sort of solution uh in collaboration with us and Galaxy and um throughout the rest of the year you're going to hear about like the different platforms that this will get you know um listed on I guess you could say or made available for subscription on um that will make it as easy as any institutional place any broker ra whatever it is um to like pick up the phone and uh subscribe to whatever vehicle gets produced um to like uh provide this ipx e product to those people right so the main focus has been B Toc Integrations um that's that's the main focus yeah I think that we get really inspired by uh paos of all people I know they have their own problems but um I think pao's actually cracked the nut with this right and I think uh in some ways like optimism is doing the same thing right where uh they recognize what they can monetize which is the fact that optimism in the long run everyone's going to get forced into you know closing down their sequencer for some decentralized sequencer nonsense whatever right um but they recognize that they can monetize something like op stack paxos recognizes that they can monetize something like T bills right and we recognize that we can monetize the ethal right um and whether we're packaging up solutions for institutions to provide or we're packaging up solutions for other chains or um like apps to provide or even if we're packaging it for ourselves to eventually do our stable coin or whatever um we recognize that it's more about creating the infrastructure than it is about creating a product with like a big tvl number that makes sense and how you mentioned that you're going to have some other Integrations this year how do you approach that onboarding institutions um what is that I guess BD look like or is it so we are actually uh not able to you know solicit a fund uh we we're not licensed Brokers we are the ones that are building and providing the tech right um and uh it's it's really on laser here to be the ones pushing and uh to find LPS and subscribers um to find people that come into this you know this will be their main eth product that they provide to all the people in their Asset Management platform um we are you know not um the ones that are able to like go out and find people we what we can do is we can do whatever we can on the onchain side of things and we can lean on you know their like however many people they have on their sales team to like go out uh understand the product and sell it to all the people that are subscribed to them right that makes sense um and before we move on to stable coins I have one last thing is um you mentioned deposit and withdrawal mechanics and something cool that you guys are doing on the withdrawal end what is it yeah okay so thanks for bringing that up this is actually one of the cooler things about our design um is that we have a withdrawal mechanism um where when ether comes into our system because we have that abstraction we don't actually have to stake 100% of the stake to maximize our yield right like I was saying we're doing three times four times higher yield than the rest of the market um but we don't have to uh necessarily um stake everything in order to achieve that yield right so what we have is this liquid uh or we have this like liquid unstaked buffer right and what we can do for certain Integrations is we're able to provide them this buffer which they can execute withdrawals against without having to wait on or without having to depend on potentially like the depth of liquidity pools to swap out or potentially like having to wait you know whatever one week two weeks to like exit the validator queue right um which is like liquidity is like a big problem that's like facing these lsts right now from doing something like what we're doing um on the ipxe side because the uncertainty with with which is a big thing in the fund world is not in existence here because we're able to like provide and satisfy those withdraws instantly that makes sense um I think had some good coverage there on lsts and LRT discussion um I think on the other side of things would love to talk more about the stable coin kind of piece of the business here um starting off maybe just generally Sam I'd love to get your kind of overview or opinion on what you think the competition for decentralized stable coins looks like today um are are there any like key steps that you know daero needs to take to ensure that PX USD is adopted compared to all the other you know Alternatives that are out there today um you know die go you you can run off the list um do you guys have you know a specific approach in mind when it comes to like incentivization rewards um to encourage people to to start adopting and using um pxd um so we have a few ideas in mind I'd say that you know 90% of the teams Focus right now is on pxe um and working and scaling that so I don't want to get too into um PX USD because the thing with stable coins is that the the landscape changes every three months right and I think that the only one great tool that stable coins are is uh a means of Leverage for the collateral that you want right um and that's what we view PX USD as more right like I could come and say like you know we want to um get integrated into visa and master card and all this stuff but like that's not actually what we're aiming to do what we're aiming to do is be the most efficient debt solution and own all the leverage and margin around pxe um and also use that as a tool to like play with the leverage between who's staking in apxe and who's not um so we're working with different Oracle partners for our big pxe pools and big pxe Integrations for that um and and really what we want to do there is own the margin around pxe more than anything right um and if we can continue to scale PX SE and grow it out to um the size that we know it can get to um then I think it'll be a very useful tool rather than having to depend on um an A or a maker to do this for us right um I think you'll find that like over the next few years a lot more people will launch their own sort of like Niche smaller stable coin which isn't about solving the you know US dollar Cris shortage crisis in different countries but is more about acting as a means of Leverage for their products makes a lot of sense I like the way you describe it um I I think it's it's a different take than we've seen um maybe more generally in the space to basically use the stable coin as as a tool to kind of enhance the overall product Suite that you're offering um which I think makes a lot of sense I I guess I'm curious then um more generally just about the stable coin sector like do you see outside of just using you know PX USD as like a tool in relation to the to the platform in general like do you see uh a future path for decentralized stable coins as compared to you know like their centralized counterparts like today we see you know tether and circle sort of dominate the kind of overall stable coin Market um do you see that picture changing or is it really like does it really just come down to building a great product suite and if PX USD is is implemented well kind of as part of your protocol and how it performs um that's all you need it to do it's interesting because like we kind of want to be um at the Forefront of this uh in terms okay this is my view on decentralized stable coins right I think that we as an industry um defi side crypto side whatever it is have not proven the ability to efficiently tokenize our own assets we haven't even been able to like you know maximize the tokenization of BTC or eth um or any other major cap right so how are we as an industry able to bring on T bills and all of these different things uh into the market right um if we can't even tokenize our own native assets right remember nft loans what a mess those were right um and I think that we want to be at the Forefront of being able to like uh of being rails for this stuff right so both bringing onchain assets to the real world and bringing real world assets onchain right um and if we can do that and continue to like build out our infrastructure then I think decentralized stable coins sure they have a chance right because um we we just need to be able as an industry to get better at like tokenizing stuff and proving Demand with people who actually need over collateralized leverage right you know we U maybe not us but like the average person doesn't need over collateralized debt this is not something that like really serves much utilities and they need uncollateralized debt right um which they can go get anywhere in the real world um relatively easy right uh whereas with us if we can like bring the institutions on board get them for familiar with how operations work on chain build out the offchain infrastructure around it Prime brokerages and all these different things that can satisfy their needs in terms of margin then I think that decentralized stable coins do have a chance because we need them to be able to access eth on chain um in a compliant way in order to eventually access these these tokens right um right now they have access to these rwas and all these other um like assets but they can't necessarily do anything with them after they mint them right you'll notice with like a lot of these like wa stable coin type projects is that they manage to strike like some huge tvl deal with someone and they just hold the token in their wallet right there's no there's nothing beyond that right um and the only way decentralized stable coins can beat those types of products which you're minting at 101% 100% CR um is actually to like provide that utility in a compliant and um efficient way for these guys to access right um so I hope with stuff like ipx eth we can continue to like build those veils where they can access stuff like eth in a very easy way and then eventually be able to access those stable coins and make more of a dent on the pie chart okay so I think you answered it kind of within your answer but I I guess maybe just to drive the point home it sounds like in terms of a differentiating factor here for daero like you describe you know these R projects bringing you know US dollar yields on chain but they're kind of separated from the rest of the ecosystem for example so you know clients can come in and get exposure directly to that but then they don't have you know the ability to then get access to eth and other products and then you've got you know DEC centralized stable coins that are on the other side of that where you know you can you can make use of um the opposite piece of that puzzle do you guys see yourself as really an opportunity to bridge that Gap and just provide this kind of seamless exposure to kind of both ends of that yeah ex exactly I think I the end goal is if we can provide um a decentralized stable coin with a centralized stable coin experience then we've probably cracked the nut right um and if we can continue to like enable our collateral of choice which is pxe um to act as that form of um centralized collateral um then we can probably very efficiently do so right that makes sense I um I want to bring it back to what you mentioned about that and um leverage and PX USD and I just want to understand how you guys are I guess like the thought process behind that and why you think that's the most important bit about PX USD um is is in terms of the collateral yeah and like how that approach of because what you mentioned is like you want to use it as a tool for debt and leverage um okay so if you are uh in the real world if you're holding um some asset right um a lot of people will block you know who necessarily is the one providing margin for this right if you are an issuer of a like a like a like a steth for example right um so much of your protocols value AUM tvl whatever you want to call it um is in the hands of some Liquidator that you don't even know um and their forms of liquidations are extremely extremely inefficient right um it's a means to an end for Liquidators on chain right now right um and you leak a ton of value by just giving up you know a was doing this right um or a recognized this with with gho right um by you know letting other stable coins come in and being the Liquidator they were giving up a ton of value to the stable coins when they could have just done it themselves right and recognize those interest rates for themselves and I think that you want to be able to like own enough of the stack to where you have no systematic risks or dependencies on other protocols um because a lot of them are doing very funky things with like you know margin which I think we're better off just like owning ourselves um even if it is less efficient or less um less liquid than some of the other stuff um I think it's important to own parts of the stack that you consider core right once you reach a stage of like a Ste or a w there's no um there's no reaking or anything that can like bring more value to it you can't like you know start a new curve pool and juice it the way we can right now in the early stages right it really does just come down to um uh like margin right people start using it as collateral and they start doing other things with it and once we do get to that stage we want to be able to be the ones that issue all those loans against it so that we can make sure that that value doesn't leak elsewhere um the same way that we own all the yields internally and we own the institutional product internally um and I think you can do that without going down the rabbit hole of let's do our own decks and let's do our own L2 and let's do our own whatever pers platform I think you can just recognize like your road map in terms of what this assets like um adoption will look like over time and recognize the key things of that adoption that you would want to own and like monopolize um so that you don't have to depend on anyone else for adoption I think that makes a lot of sense and this one I think the last uh part of the product Suite that I want to ask about is the relayer um I guess let's start off with what does that look like and how it fits into PX USD and pxe so I'm going to I'm going to avoid this question for now uh just because we made some developments on it recently and I want to confirm with like our advisers that it uh works right now we have some like really cool stuff like um that we're working on on that side um that I just want to that we will publish like probably before like the end of the year um but I want to make sure that everything like I don't want to like promise the world here um so I'll probably like I'll probably skip out on that but like the main purpose of that also um in terms of like the niche that we're trying to like Target there is more in the account abstraction realm um so that we can like take the stable coin uh what we want to do is like make it the stable coin like a a universal gas token for like any L1 or L2 right and obviously that doesn't sound like it would need to be a thing right now um but I do think that as more layer tws pop up um more side chains pop up more layer ones pop up who knows what'll come up off of salon l2s and all of these different things I think like the tribalism and um segregation of like uh network activity that's happening all these things that you could really crack like some huge like potential multi multi-billion dollar problems um just through uh like a account abstraction um so that's kind of what we're thinking again thinking long down the road map with like pxe and PX USD eventually I think our relay and RPC um can solve like a real problem because we have that block space to play with if pxe works out kind of related to this question how does the remainder of the product Suite play with daero um and E L SD the E LSD and the stable coin like how does Hidden Hand and Pyrex fit into all of this does it fit into all of it um those those products are a means to an end right um I think that we can lean on um the influence we get from Hidden Hand as well as like the liquidity we get from some of the older Pyrex products as a means to Bringing more yield to the products um I don't think they're like crucial to our growth because I think that um if we scale the way we want to scale scale obviously um then those will just be tapped out in terms of what we can do with them um so we view them more as like stepping stones um in terms of proving our ability to work with other groups and as well as uh using it as you know Diversified revenue and uh as the same using it the same way like other people use it you know like rocket pool is one of our biggest users um that and Stat originally when they had their huge liquidity mine was using Hidden Hand a lot um to like get liquidity going and uh we view we view Hidden Hand the same way that the advantage is that we just don't pay any fees hey guys permissionless the event for crypto natives is heading west to Salt Lake City and we're bringing the biggest names in crypto together for an incredible campas event join me on the rest of block works on October 9th to hear from more than 200 Industry Titans including Nick white from Celestia shiram from IG and keone from Mona the conversations at permission list will be covering the hottest themes in crypto including modularity reaking the Bitcoin and Solon ecosystems Ai and crypto rollups l2s institutional adoption and of course the November election that will be right around the cor we couldn't be more excited about this event and it's happening in one of the most beautiful places in the US ticket prices will be increasing towards the end of June so get your ticket today make sure to use the code so I get some credit and bragging rights from the rest of the team uh use ZX10 for 10% off on your ticket one more thing we're also hosting the permissionless fre hacka font in collaboration with blebox the theme this year is a multi-chain future to build a better cross chain experience so I don't have to have a heart attack every time I bridge to a new chain all hacka found participants will receive a free ticket to attend permissions so if you're a developer come join us in Salt Lake City team up with fellow devs and build the multi-chain future polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open-source ZK Tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases empowering developers to grow in a unified web of interoperable chains with the a layer the a layer is a machine for Network effect don't worry about boost wrapping liquidity just build anywhere in the a layer to tap the liquidity and users everywhere to support the aggregated future and boost scrap quality project the polygon Community grants program was launched with 1 billion tokens All For polygon Builders season one of the community grants program is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon projects for Builders on polygon or projects interested in migrating these Grant are for you join the aggregated future and feel empowered to grow in an infinite web of unified interoperable chains apply today at polygons. technology grants just in terms of growing like the level of integration of of you know the LST and even the stable coin throughout maybe defi or other protocols and and raising General liquidity of them um increasing access um those are obviously very important so I do you guys is there anything specific in terms of like the go to market the strategy and kind of um pushing for greater usage integration of these throughout the space look like so I think our main um ideology ideology there lies in the fact that um we can lean on the fact that other people need native yield um and lean into their distribution and their Runway to like push these this product out to their users um without having to actually run um an LST system which is quite complicated and expensive right um so all the go to market for the rest of the year you'll see we'll be dependent on not us bringing pxe to scroll or something right um and us having to incentivize it and do everything like that um but us partnering with a layer two um what's one that we announced we haven't announced any yet but okay like mode for example I think our community knows that the op stack ler too um mode can provide native ethal to all of the users on the Chain without having to actually like even interact with pxe right um but yet we recognize all of those all of that tvl and we recognize all of those fees because they're using our stack right um so that's kind of how we're thinking of like the go to Mar and we're working with you know 10 plus different layer twos and layer ones on um enabling this right now um and I think like the ipxe announcement is sort of like the the wind we needed behind our backs um to like really push this out to prove that you know these guys can work with us so can you yeah that makes a lot of sense and that's I mean that level of um partnership integration whichever word you want to call it with um l2s and different chains is pretty impressive honestly I was not aware um I guess kind of piggybacking off of that that topic um how are you guys thinking about revenue and fees for the protocol um it it sounds like there's a 10% yield tax on PX e as well as some Redemption and instant Redemption fees um is that something where we're looking to at some point return that to the Token holder base or is that further out and for the time being it's you know it's just being acred to the protocol as a whole yeah so um we for every product we've ever put out Hidden Hand um Pyrex whatever um always we have a split you know usually 50/50 one for Opex and one for distribution um to the to the users who um are participating in governance right so with with butterfly which was the old token we had like a 16 white or 16 we lock mechanism where people could uh lock their butterfly and then every Epoch every two weeks they would get um the eth that was collected amongst all these different protocols that we had distributed to them now with daero the problem with like locks not to go on a rent the problem with like locks is that it really hurts like liquidity profile um so it's really hard to like get volume going you know we had like with butterfly we had like 90% of the supply locked at times and and then like the other 10% was basically just like uh was like us like providing liquidity so um uh like locks are good in theory but like in practice they get pretty complicated um whereas with um the industry standard of sorts now which is just like the single side stake mechanism which like you know most like protocol uh design experts will be like oh it's just a leak of value or stuff it has it there's a reason everyone's doing it and that's what I've come to realize to I was pretty vocal about like single side staking mechanisms suck but I realized that uh when it comes to you're you're always your second product which is the token never never confuse the two your token and your actual product um uh sometimes like a single side staking mechanism Works um in terms of getting the metrics you need to actually um push it along to other venues for people to and stuff right and um because we're doing just like a single side stake uh we can't do the distributions anymore but this the same fee distribution still stays in place uh but it'll be passed back via a BuyBacks instead of um just straight e distributions for now okay yeah that makes sense um I think kind of going a little further there um you know I think as a whole and as a category we've seen you know there's a lot of demand for liquid staking and staking just in general um I mean you can go and look at Lio and coinbase eth and things like that right there's there's a ton of demand for like stake eth and and similar um but we've seen a lot of the providers um and especially smaller providers as well struggle in terms of the valuation um within this kind of category is that something that you see changing or is it you know do you guys have to really you know beef up your product stack and offerings to um make sure the market understands that and and you know maybe rates you appropriately I think it's not my place to talk about our token price but I can talk about like the general LST LRT pricing because it's just a mess right um sorry were you gonna say something I was just gonna add on to that by saying I think like less so daero um right you don't have to speak specifically on Dao itself but just in general like what is the what what's the right move are there Right Moves for LSD providers in general to to kind of go about it um so I think like the most obvious um example is um like something like jto versus something like uh ldo right um and then even something like um like ether five where that fits into the picture right and I think what you notice with all of them is that uh Lio for example had really good growth this year um it pulled in like a ton of tvl uh but the market prices um the upside potential of eth compared to Soul much lower and that's why you see something like jto sort of um get the attention that it does right and um same with reaking you see that it's just a directly a a lever play beta play against igen layer success right um so it often comes down to what is the main dependency for this token uh with Lio it's eth with jto it's soul with with ether F it's it's Aon layer um and that's like what ends up pricing the main um the main Crux of all these valuations which is the um what's the right word for it uh spec speculation side of these tokens right which which dominates majority of their valuations right and then the the core value of it uh in is um you know usually 10% or less um is like you know how you can pass the value that you generate back to the users but what what what the what people fail to recognize when it comes down to like how much are you Distributing back to the users in terms of BuyBacks or fees or whatever is how much you actually like spent to attract that Capital um to you know eventually divide it up it's it's like profit versus Revenue right um Revenue can be really high but your your Opex uh could also be extremely high which like in the case of Lio like worked um back then because you know they spent heavily heavily to get steth to where it is today and the market was just in a place where they were able to get by but now you're seeing those effects now like you know you can't dilute a token 20% 30% in a year and expect it not to come back to the market right so Lio they make a ton of money in fees but the amount of money they had to spend to get there well eventually and right now it has caught caught up to them right um you could say the same about rocket pool um and you know with jeto yeah you could say the same about jto right it's just like uh it doesn't matter you pass the fees back or not I think what matters more is how much you spent to like actually attract those fees yeah I think that makes a lot of sense and we saw that also recently with arbitrum uh spending like $85 million on their incentive program and they made back $12 million in revenue and it's like okay you saw an increase in activity but um I definitely agree with you on that I have one question related to Bar chain that I want to ask because you guys obviously have a relatively close um relationship I guess my main question is will bar because I know they have a bribe mechanism is that related to Hidden Hand at all um and broader what is your strategy with bar chain and maybe even other newly launching chains yeah um so I work really closely with bear chain um I'm helping run their uh Build A Bear program which is like the in-house incubator um help them like basically from the beginning with the design approval liquidity and everything um those are the homies and uh the the with bear chain specifically uh Hidden Hand is not uh correlated to the be chain bribe Market because it's just a completely different design um but uh with uh Dao's expansion onto bear chain it I imagine it is like a second Slash new home for us um I think that we'll be able to play like the proof of liquidity game very well just considering how we did the curve and convex and AA and fome and all other all the other gauge mechanisms that came before that um but I won't talk exactly on like what it is we're going to do with them yet just because I want to respect um the privacy of the partnership uh for now and I think that um you know it because of being like a second home for us like we're doing we're spending like a ton of effort and resources there to like make sure that we're like one of the dominating players when it comes to um proof of liquidity uh but I don't think that Hidden Hand will be there but just for like other daps probably but not for bar core um but we'll be releasing some stuff on what we want to do to like play a role in the be chain Corp uh when the time is right for them yeah that makes a lot of sense and I think similar similar to the be chain kind of um partnership or strategy that you've got going on I want to go back to you you mentioned earlier Sammy that um there's a lot of chains maybe upcoming or that are out now and and kind of exploring um LSD offerings like through through their chain um is this something that other LSD providers are not going after as heavily and so you've been able to kind of insert yourself here um into this you know particular segment of the market or is daero like just sufficiently differentiating itself to where these you know these new chains are are coming up and saying like we just need to use their product um well the thing is that like in show me the incentive and I'll show you the outcome right um obviously I think that just the way you could just go on defi llama and assume that you know maybe they'd want to use a ether fire or Renzo for something like this but I think that the way our system is designed is that it is the most sustainable and safe way for them to actually like Implement something like this without having to run their own validated is just because of the way our code base is designed right um and it has the least dependencies on things um so that they could like spin this up right like in some ways um when they when they choose to work with us on this they can even choose who validator set is that's operating it so in some ways like they don't even have to be in a group chat with us or something in order to do this right um it's really just them like using the infrastructure um we we're very very very steep back and um we're working with layer zero on it um that like handles all the messaging and and bridging between the two things um and there there's a few different players like involved in it it's obviously not just us um that's like making this happen um but I'd say it's sort of like a group effort to like enable this feature for a bunch of layer tws compared to us like going to every Layer Two and being like hey like you want to spin this up and collateralize your LST with us right it's it's actually not you know if someone does a x there xchain right if xchain wants to release X eth um they could they could theoretically do it right now um using the Branded LST solution without actually even having to like contact us that's like the power of it right compared to um you know integrating so deeply into like someone else's code based like another LRT or LST provider um and you guys are in the industry you know like like how these things work like roll up as a service type conversations and stuff like that um there's no there's no dependency on us for them to operate this and scale this uh which is what makes it so which is what makes it so appealing for them and why we've been able to get like a head start on it and you know with other lsts uh or lrts like their heads are just in different places which I think are all the right thing some are focusing on doing their own L2 swell fracks whatever ethery payments thing I think that's dope um Lio is like doing a i competitor I guess um rocket pool is just like you know the pure descent everyone has their own little niche and I think that that makes sense uh but for us I think like taking a step back from all of those guys and just like uh plugging holes that need to get plugged for different players whether it's an Institutional player or in Layer Two is probably like the easiest path for us to get to a billion in TV yeah I think that's I think what you just said is a really powerful take away on on kind of the strategy here is setting up a a product ecosystem to where like you don't need to directly have handshakes and conversations with um every chain or project or team that that would want to make use of your tool um that's really powerful if it can just reach some mass and and just continue to expand there from you know from its you know use as a as a meaningful and and useful product Suite so that's awesome Sammy I have um this is not related to Arrow but or reded but I want to kind of ask you guys have been around for quite some time now late 2021 um and you've come a long way and I think um like from I guess Pro um protocol owned liquidity to institutional lsds um it's become more institutionalized and like all of defi has become a bit more institutionalized how do you see it going forward um like the ecosystem in general as someone who's like dayto day every day in def5 what do you see the next year looking like and are you happy with where it's going it's a good question I I to me I think that these okay you have to be like very like um agile in in crypto right as like a developer and sometimes you just have to go where the bid is right um that's just the fact of the matter and uh right now you have this Dynamic that exists in crypto where defi which used to be like the most exciting thing in crypto is like living in the middle of the curve where like on the left side of the curve um everyone loves salana meme coins and um and uh they they play that game kind of like nfts last cycle and then on the right side of the curve you have the andos but you you also have eth and BTC right um and that's where the two pockets of liquidity live right now and every single D5 project exists in some of the layer twos too they just exist in the middle of the curve where they're not able to attract the more risk on Capital they're not able to attract the more risk off Capital um in some ways like the defi bull Mark the bull market came too early for defi because we didn't solve the hack problems we didn't solve the interoperability problems we didn't we didn't solve any of the problems with defi right um which sucks uh but I think to answer your question I think that you'll see a lot more D5 projects um the ones that are serious of course start to go down this route of like being very conservative and safe and appealing to the institution whether it's a angle of compliance or not um I think you're even starting to see that from a narrative perspective to you know there's this like a big crash the other day and you see like the the sentiment on something like a is like wow a just works you know that's just like the sentiment on a now right and like it eventually it'll that will uh just uh Blossom as a narrative right um and you know maybe like uh the very crypto native person who's on Twitter all day doesn't appreciate something like that uh but you could obviously imagine these people that are you know backing someone like uh like us like cartel to do a like an ETF competitor can appreciate something like that right like just bulletproof protocol that exists and makes a ton of money um so I think that you'll start to see this like uh I won't call it a pivot but I'll call it like a Sidetrack where a lot of Protocols are just like you know slowly uh existing and becoming more and more bulletproof and um eventually reaching the state that they want to become to in terms of immutability and decentralization but you'll see a lot of them sort of start to take this like Sidetrack of appealing to the Institutional Investor and giving them what they want so that they can eventually come back onto the main vision and prove to the retail Market that you know look who trusts us right like they trust us they trust our code to do whatever it is they want to do ipx ether AA treasury if that comes back or something um so like you know we can provide the same we can provide the same thing to retail right um I think that that's what you'll sort of start to see in a very indirect way with a lot of protocols I think that makes a lot of sense and I I know Danny has as well but I've been thinking about cash generating protocols as well especially after the crash it feels like it really hits you like oh some this needs to get something needs to back it up and I agree with you I think eventually we'll see more and more protocol shift towards that um before we wrap it up Danny do you have any other questions no other questions I think uh Sammy great great conversation I think you really hit the nail on the head on a lot of points here I wna ask Sammy do you have anything I guess any place you want our listeners to go to what should they do to learn more about daero or participate more in daero yeah we got hit by uh we changed the token ticker and the Twitter and the Discord and everything like that so I I'll use the opportunity to tell you to go to our new Twitter and not get confused or distracted by any of the scams that are out there that are taking advantage of that which is um tanero din ER _ XYZ on there there's the link tree that has like all of our official links and stuff um and also just has you know you can go on the Highlight section on Twitter now and just see like all the cool developments we have going on that's like our main um Avenue of um distribution in terms of news um and then you can join us on Discord and chill with us too if you want there all fantastic I'll make sure to include those links the new links as well um Samy thanks for coming on thanks for the invite guys it's pretty cool a pleasure I you guys have some really good questions compared to others are you currently building on polygon or interested in migrating season one of the polygon Community grants program is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon projects builders on polygon these grants are for you join the aggregated future today by applying at polygon.net

========================================

--- Video 87 ---
Video ID: loETTfodAns
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=loETTfodAns
Title: Onchain Economies: Empowering Today’s Content Creators | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-09-11 15:14:41 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research Analysts discussed FriendTech’s renouncement of contract ownership, crypto payments and onchain economies, and the recent growth of Sui and Aptos. Additionally, they wondered if crypto can still fulfill its promise to empower content creators. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

FriendTech Renounces Contract Ownership: https://x.com/friendtech/status/1832581118165709140
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
5:12 FriendTech Renounces Contract Ownership
13:32 Can Crypto Still Empower Content Creators?
20:12 Permissionless III Ad
21:26 Crypto Payments and Onchain Economies
29:17 Recent Growth of Sui and Aptos
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
it's really hard to compete in the L1 Market it's extraordinarily crowded there's not a clear wedge in the market um other than these current ecosystems compounding their current markets there's also like this problem in crypto where Founders get very religious um you can think of things like eth alignment um as like one of these like religious beliefs where people will ignore like the writing on the wall and just like stay like stronge headed in One Direction nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice bacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of zerox research where I'm joined by Danny and Ryan from blockworks research to talk about all that is happening in the markets or rather all that is not happening in the markets um before we get started Danny do you want to give a little overview of what you think is interesting yeah um I think the markets right now it's it's a it's an interesting spot like I'm not a macro guy but you know I sort of follow the macro scene and experts in that area and I think we've got kind of some maybe Rocky times still ahead of us potentially um but I you know it I think if you look forward and you look at the potential like positive things on the horizon with potential election maybe changes in in regulatory stance or um kind of just going into the end of the year and into next year you know we we've been messing around here at at these levels and like Bitcoin has kind of been grabbing and maybe going slightly lower and we've seen alts like take hits um it does feel like at least personally for myself you know if I had extra cash like things that I like and I'm looking at like I would I would maybe want to be picking some of those off the floor I don't maybe now is near that time to do so or maybe it comes in another month I'm not really sure but um I think you know alts have been hit you know fairly hard from the highs earlier this year um so this is just one of those interesting times when there's a lull um things are down and you know for stuff that is compelling it's you know we could go lower and we could go higher and that's kind of always the case but it's you know compared to the valuations that we saw earlier in this year they they are significantly lower today um and so it's like a much more there's there's a little bit more of an attractive opportunity here um for certain alts and things in other tokens um that maybe you wouldn't have wanted to buy like in March at you know Peak valuations and in numbers yeah it'd be insane if anybody here bought anything in March man that would their portfolio crazy right um yeah I generally agree with you I'm not going to Mack RAR but does things do feel more attractive than they were in March is are much lower and they continue to go lower and lower it's unexpectedly um Ryan what do you think you grew out this incredible stubble over the past few weeks obviously um has it come with extra wisdom what are we looking at I mean the product cycle has certainly slowed uh I think that's the most interesting change in the backdrop um seeing fewer and fewer projects come to Market um perhaps the devs are tapped out there's some bright spots potential potentially in like game f social fly um that we're hearing about deal flow on the on the VC side of things but that's going to take some time um I mean look this wasn't um this wasn't completely unforeseeable we spoke about uh you know two or three months back about how um J uh July and August are terrible months for volumes and in a market that needs like constant attention and New Capital to like maintain current valuations uh given that summer lull it's not a surprise especially like you know given the the large um participation from some governments and institutions M the mount gox redistributions Etc um I mean look it's all it's all the regulatory story right now right if you're trading this um if you have a sub1 12mon time Horizon it's very much a regulatory story I think that the correlation between Trump's odds of winning the election and um Bitcoin have been oscillating but have been more positive that than not so I mean I think from a trading perspective like that's all that matters going into the end of the year fair enough one thing you brought up there is the product cycle and specifically that we're still seeing interest in Social fi I um I was thinking about that quite a bit yesterday and and today um obviously friendtech renounced contract ownership today which uh means that I think they're done developing the contracts it's kind of a crazy thing to do after making 50 mil on fees um and raising God knows how much from Paradigm and then saying hey guys you know what we gave it our best eight months out we're done um but I was thinking about it and how would you guys have done frch um such that it did not die out obviously there's some interest in this product of um both speculating on people's prices um based on their Cloud as well as paying for um access to chat to them um I as far as I understand there's a traditional alternative to that chatting thing um where you can pay for time with Founders uh correct me if I'm wrong um and I think that's speculation of people's prices um we have we're seeing it a bit with fantasy top but yeah how would you guys have done it is this something you think about do you ever think about racer and his tweets or is it is it done what's the consensus I don't think about racer um I do think about the product and other products that could be interesting um I think there's something difficult here in that like I think there are elements to both parts like the the private chats um getting access to that um the speculation on like the price of the keys is interesting as well um I don't know if the specific Curve Model like pricing model that was applied here and having only that made the most sense like they added some features later um that probably too late but um you know maybe the opportunity to have flat pricing models for just pure access without the speculation as well as the speculative options like I think probably just having a bit more optionality would have helped early on the other problems that they had early were just like the slowness and like bugginess of the application itself it was pretty god- awful to use early on um I think fixes kind of came slowly but um when the traditional like opport like options exist to like do this type of thing it's it's hard to want to use like a bad product experience so certainly figuring those things out especially like when you're getting the investment like they had the money um to fix that stuff um but I think playing around a little bit more like I just don't I don't think that the iteration was fast enough like I think when you have some like initial success like that really quickly like the goal should be then to like very quickly take feedback or just come out with like new additional features that maybe people are clamoring for especially like on the Creator side if the creators are seeing things that like they think is helpful or the users themselves like you know how how they find more value in in actually using the app um and we just we just didn't see that happen and I think that's where the key failure was um but I think they had like all of the some of the elements were there in terms of like getting people interested it and it would just there wasn't enough like additional change to like keep things exciting and keep dropping features that maybe would make the thing more successful in the longer term because you can't like the pricing model like would not make sense like let's say you get Iggy iselia or Kanye West to like drop on this app somehow like if they've got a million people like the prices of their keys are gonna instantly shoot to yeah insane numbers if they don't have some way to like you know if you could have a flat rate key for you know 50 bucks that anyone can buy and it's like a some specific type of access like you see with other platforms like like a patreon or um you know other Creator fan type relationship platforms like there are ways to to kind of capitalize on that relationship without having it be purely speculative but I think you know probably some interplay of those two ideas and maybe you know dropping the different ideas on designing the like Bonnie curve itself or like that that pricing curve um I think that came a little too late as well I mean with 44 mil they definitely could have hired a bunch of really good devs and then have figured it out Ryan what do you think yeah I think there are some important lessons um that the industry is actually like picked up and is taking to new projects um I think the first and most obvious one um it's actually like a very common uh Playbook and software technology social media markets is um vampire attacking and existing social network so if you look at like all the great social networks they're very much a vampire attack on an existing social network so if you think of what Facebook did it vampire attacked college campuses and the existing social networks there LinkedIn is company social networks industry social networks um um there are countless examples but I think that that's one thing that frch did that um I think web 3 Founders are focusing on crypto Founders are focusing on on a go forward basis is like let's tap into these open apis let's provide like a very seamless bridge to like this community and like bring the whole thing over instead of trying to build it from scratch which is much harder um the other thing is asset issuance and you've seen this in you know subsequently with pump fund or fantasy top is that if you give people a place to issue interesting assets um it's pretty attractive from a speculation uh perspective and this industry is quite good at monetizing and creating these like little speculative environments and if you can get it right like with pump. fun um or with fch like it can go really far it could be it generate a lot of a lot of Revenue so asset issuance as like being a core social primitive on a go forward basis I think is something I think it's really important if you're looking for Founders building in the space like that's that's a tried and true I think product feature um I think yeah I think it's pretty obvious that the pricing curve was bad um they should have had a more diverse set of pricing models to choose from as a Creator I don't think it would have been smart to allow them to choose the pricing model themselves like just there you know it's kind of um there's too much granularity there but if you had a set of like five different pricing models or something like that could have been really useful and then um I think you're seeing this play out in early uh early stage markets today like the Texton based interaction model is a really hard one to monetize so like Twitter for example um the story of Twitter is that investors for a decade have been like how are you guys going to make money and like it's still happening today obviously it's not a perfect story with you know just what's happening with ad revenue on Twitter post Elon but it's way harder to monetize a Texton um social network versus something a little bit more Dynamic which is why you're seeing like pump fun getting to live streaming and unlonely you know solely focused on um on live streaming and video um they're just more um immersive forms of media and I think it's quite clear that in like the history of social media networks like the more immersive the media the stickier it is so so yeah I think that there are like really good less I think frch was um it was obviously a success for the people who participate in it or who built it um and I think it was like a really good lesson um for this space and you know we're going to pick up those valuable pieces and make something really interesting going forward okay I have a few few things I want to ask both you guys first of all what do we think of crypto's Promise um to empower the Creator the content creator um I like the reason I'm asking this is because I saw um Ryan's favorite at Jason post about only fans is 2023 Financial figures and based on this only fans lets creators keep um 80% of the revenue that they generate and they take about 20% um something along those lines I think um which is not bad at all in fact I would say that's pretty good and like compared to what was frch I think it was 15% so there's really only like a 5% difference over there like frex fees were 15% um so a I'm not sh like what's the I guess two questions is what's the bull case for um crypto as a tool to vampire attack um content creation platforms um given that they're already giving a decent amount to content creators and B is yeah that's really it I think it's just a like do we even need it at that point if only fans is giving 80% back and not do because I I would have assumed they would do like 5050 um 80% is quite a good amount what do we think yeah 80% 80% is a very nice margin um it's hard to compete on that the your margin is my opportunity story like it's it's way less there than I thought is it actually 80% is that a fact well it's based on I mean I assume Jason wouldn't lie he's a very nice guy yeah calanis yeah yeah so he says users spend 6.6 billion um USD 5.3 billion of that goes to creators so that's 80% yeah I mean yeah the the story really loses it's um the your margin is my opportunity story really loses its power in that scenario I think that for empowering creators like I think it's too broad of a bucket um I think that you have to if you're making one of these Creator monetization platforms um you have to focus on creators who are under monetized it's not clear to me that many creators are under monetized um I mean what better Creator to focus on than like the only fans person then like like yeah there really isn't a better one right like they probably have tough banking relationships they would benefit from more PTP stuff um yeah the only like the bull case for crypto here is that I have heard um just like people say that one of the issues that people might have is that only fans that like takes away creators earnings um so I guess that's the bull case of crypto is that once it's paid out you can't take it back you can't like claw back um and obviously like as decentralized and like as like trustless as something is it's good um but I don't think the opportunity here is like oh creators aren't being paid enough like 80% is good 80% is a lot more than I expected and I don't think that anybody's going to like meaningfully be able to beat that unless they're like running on loss running out a loss yeah I think um there's an open question here as to whether right obviously costs of like building out any sort of business to compete with that are gonna you know you're GNA need devs you're going to need marketing team etc etc so that's going to be tough but I guess there's sort of an open question on whether using like crypto rails um having like creators have self- custody of their payments like automatically not needing to manage that for them like there may be some ways in which you could design an app similar to this where you sort of save money on the operating costs by kind of via the use of the tech and and having that that kind of earnings flow um work as intended like on chain without having to like you know take the earnings and then dib them out to creators Etc however it's done today right um and manage those Bank relationships um so that's certainly an opportunity I do think as well like I wanted to comment on the that 8020 relationship I know for like live streaming platforms I guess what I was to say is I'm not I'm not super surprised that it's higher um than maybe like other platforms because I think if you look at like a twitch for example like the live streaming giant they I think many contracts after after a certain amount they Chang this program all the time but I believe after a certain amount of of subscriptions a a lot of contracts or maybe historically are like 7030 um although I think like Prime Subs are maybe 5050 so um and I would expect obviously like their operating costs like running the live streaming service hosting all those those videos and things like that's got to be way higher so um it sort of makes sense to me maybe that like a kind of private content that's kind of created and provided by the Creator itself like they should get a bigger cut of that versus like a maybe a twitch or YouTube who's hosting all of these like massive servers and storing tons and tons and tons of video data um so like directionally I can see it I think you know if there's an opportunity for kind of some some decentralized service to e out that margin I mean you make a good point right it's like can you get them another 5% maybe is that can to be enough using it not sure are the questions around like losing access to their funding because of banks um enough to maybe some traders to consider going centralized route using apps maybe so hey guys permissionless the event four crypto natives is heading west to Salt Lake City and we're bringing the biggest names in crypto together for an incredible campas event join me and the rest of block works on October 9th to hear for more than 200 Industry Titans including Nick white from Celestia shiram from Igan and Keon from Mona the conversations at permission list will be covering the hottest themes in crypto including modularity reaking the Bitcoin and Solon ecosystems Ai and crypto rollups l2s institutional adoption and of course the November election that will be right around the corner we couldn't be more excited about this event and it's happening in one of the most beautiful places in the US ticket prices will be increasing towards the end of June so get your ticket today make sure to use their codes so I get some credit and bragging rights from the rest of the team uh use ZX10 for 10% off on your ticket one more thing we're also hosting the permissionless recka font in collaboration with blebox the theme this year is a multi-chain future to build a better cross chain experience so I don't have to have a heart attack every time I bridge to a new Channel all hacka found participants will receive a free ticket to attend permissions so if you're a developer come join us in Salt Lake City team up with fellow devs and build the multi-chain future over the weekend I saw um Ryan Bergman tweet about how he wanted only fans on chain and there is one that exists it's on Solana called only one um and then he was like oh no that one doesn't work I need it to be on uh l2s because the onchain economy is stronger and I've been thinking about what that means the onchain economy like being stronger on l2s and I don't really get it like what at what point could be stronger such that like Solon has more Dex volume um compared to other l2s compared to l2s um there's just more money velocity on that chain as well like you can already feel it there's more happening on the Chain so I don't is the argument that like gambling and um content creation doesn't go well together because Vegas shows that that's not the case so I don't I don't really what do you guys think I think it's a good point um that you make no no it's non it's nonsense I think that's was just like I don't know that's just like eth certified talking points um I think that the more relevant question for payments is like where should payments be um and we're going to kind of venture outside of the Creator thing here but like where should payments be at crypto scale is like it's going to be really good for trading there's going to be people taking risk there's going to be people paying priority fees to get into blocks um crypto is you know necessarily constrained it's a constrained environment um it's not you know AWS where you can just pump through transactions like there's only so much space per block so like where should payments be should they be where high frequency trading is or should they be in a different environment I think that there's like it's all probabilistic but I think there is a case to be made that like if you want a P2P payments app like it might be best on an L2 or it might be best in like a similar structure to the way a Visa does it today where these where low value um where low value transactions are not competing with high value transactions um is that no L2 what was that like that's the point noos L2 right NOS L2 it's there's nothing else on that with payments yeah yeah payments and then they have that new nosis pay card I'm sorry I cut you off but oh yeah it's I mean look you have if you think about how people trade on NASDAQ it's um I think it's like a it's um people they're like a billion hits per second on NASDAQ um that's like opening orders can cancelling orders filling orders and then there is um you know the comp of Visa payments transactions per second where it's like 11,000 or something like that I've heard 50,000 who knows um like why should they all be in the same place um if I'm a validator and I'm a leader and I get to decide who goes in a block like I'm definitely going to favor all the really high value things uh if you think of like like skoric things aren't always bad they're pretty useful for onboarding people to new technologies so when you think of like your banking your checking account versus your investment account like that's a pretty useful separation um I don't know I wouldn't be surprised that in some future State you see like checking account like products that are clearing payments on an L2 um and you you see like an investment type account where it's like only hitting like the salana L1 that would make sense to me I think that's the ideal scenario for l2s I agree with you it's just like just having completely empty space that you can do whatever low value thing the only issue is that you want like obviously we'll figure it out as time goes on and we'll figure out what the good like um compromise between trustless and uh making something very performant but I feel like that would be the only issue like I wouldn't want to keep my money on something that is potentially like stoppable and that I can't escape from um but I'm sure we'll figure it out there's no need to think too much about that yeah I do think I mean it's it's not maybe directly relevant to the point but I do think like kind of pontificating about what that looks like in the future I don't know that that really matters for like the app developers today um you can you can build only fans on chain on any decently fast and cheap chain today and if the product is successful then cool and if there's a problem down the line where you shouldn't should be on an L2 or not or on this place that place like then you can move it like we've SE apps have like dydx has gone from being on chain to do it to its own chain like there's apps today that are exploring with like all these possibilities or moving from one to the other for them I don't think it matters just make like an interesting product um yeah and get it to Market and get people using it and I like this talk from Ryan about like where it should be like it it doesn't matter that much like maybe from a cost pers perspective sure like you should obviously be concerned about that today like if it's going to cost you a million dollars a month to post to a certain location maybe don't post there post somewhere else um or if it's going to make you know the user experience awful then you know look for a different spot but otherwise I think it's you find the right spot for it today and then if you need to move it later then you move it I just thought it was so funny that like this guy basically told the people who built what he was asking for like hey man why did you do it over there and it's like I bet sure I'm sure they had those considerations in mind right like they wanted it to be cheap and fast so that like a lot of people could use it and that's that's literally it they were like oh yeah like we just wanted someplace cheap and fast but you didn't consider the onchain economy man shut the hell up well it they used to I mean the the eth like the Hardline eth perspective was like oh we have all the tvl um it hasn't been true in the case of arbitrum right like if you're sitting on arbitrum you have less tvl there than salana so they even have that argument anymore um and it's like kind of a bridge is a bridge is a bridge you can Bridge from eth to arbitrum I can Bridge from eth to salana like who cares if your app is good enough then like like you're saying people will be willing to move their funds over it it works in the Trad markets too like if I want to use Robin Hood I got to deposit if I want to use Fidelity or XYZ place like I got to move my money there I don't want to on theerum Too Much I Feel Like We Do every week um but yeah I agree with you I mean my like biggest thing is I feel like we're wasting the capital on ethereum like there's $45 billion on that chain and if you're not using that chain that that money is just being wasted like that's the most money that we have on chain and if you're an app developer you should want to access that and like you said if if you build up arbitrum versus if you build on salana you're still accessing the same like there's only 10,000 people on chain and everybody knows how to use Bungie and across and dbridge um you don't need to whatever no more no more ethereum talk um I think we're going to keep it short today the second thing that I want to talk about is SOI and Aptos um so's just been doing fantastically like off the bottom I I don't want to pull up charts on ZX research that's not really what we want to do but I do want to give Danny the opportunity to talk a bit about which one did you shill sui or Aptos which one do you like better which one do you think can give you the next 100x you write me out the script and I'll I'll load it up for you um yeah I mean I think there's some I think there's some key points like of interest um we've seen regardless of the price action I'm kind of ignoring that as for part of the intro to this discussion but I think we sawu I think as like an onchain ecosystem um onchain economy perform I think fairly well earlier on like maybe months back um relative to Aptos but I think recently over the past few months like that has come closer to equalizing like they're doing um as far as last look relatively similar like Dex volumes um looking at fairly similar tvls like within at the same ballpark at the very least I believe um so you know I think the question comes down to there's some similar Tech at play not that they're like the exact same thing per se but um you're dealing with you know the that the move language across both you're looking at fairly similar onchain economies today um we've seen like the market sort of chatter about you know Aptos conferences being empty but s you know events being you know full houses I don't know if that's still the same with the recent Aptos Soul um Korea event maybe that place was a packed house um and and maybe that changes that that thought going around but um I do think one thing that is very difficult is there's there's a ton of similarities between the two um and at this point in the game like a lot of the apps are going to be the same you know copypaste things that exist in all defi ecosystems today right you're going to have your lending markets you're going to have your dexes you're going to have your lsts you know you name it um and there's not going to be anything super duper unique at the moment um outside of maybe what people are thinking about building into the future um you I thinku has at least an interesting idea of going after this gaming vertical with the Play device um kind of similar to you know what salana explored with the Saga and now the Saga 2 um going after like a unique market and um trying to kind of capture users in that way and kind of tie them into the ecosystem but um It's relatively early and like the metrics I I think wouldn't really swing you super hard one way or the other nor would the tech yeah I um for like to play apas advocate um they've been focused on um real world asset stuff I think majority versus SOI like you said like sui took that I mean SOI like they did this fantastic incentive program probably the best case of an incentive program I've ever seen back in October 23 so it's been nearly a year now uh 180 mil in SOI I think I'm not sure if it's in dollars or if it's in literally like SOI tokens um on chain and it like obviously like you said both chains they don't have really have that much um for what it's worth I think apos has a bit of a more welldeveloped um ecosystem like there's a very clear um you know Solana had jeto um and like it also had a bunch of other stuff but like jeto was the like the Solana app um especially like going in um to 2023 2024 I think abdos has a few contenders like that and the big one is like faila um obviously there's other stuff um Luke recently wrote a report that is out outlining all that as well but I think the SOI ecosystem has been relatively a bit like less um welldeveloped even though they have more TV on that chain so it's a bit surprising but like I said I think that's mostly the incentive program and they've done a really good job um but more so what I wanted to ask is there's very clearly like the move language is semi attractive um Ryan would love to hear your thoughts on how languages um might become more important um but more so what I wanted to ask is how is the how do you view that new L1 coming in because we hear about this all the time is like there's another opportunity like Solana um will there be another opportunity like Solana and I'm curious as to if you guys think that Aptos and sui could present this or if any other L1 could present this and what it would require both of these teams and these blockchains are very well funded um the language in it self technically makes sense it's like at Le as far as I understand it's relatively easy to write um it's not rust in its popularity or solidity and like its tooling but it is like uh purpose buil for smart contracts so I'm wondering that's I'm I guess I'm just wondering like should I go 100x long Su optos or no and if I do when should I do it you're not going to get another chance like salana because um the thing about salana was that it kind of came to Market before people like applied this like L1 base layer valuation premium to everything that came on the market so you know the ability to buy one of these things at a 200 million doll fully diluted valuation is not going to happen [Music] um and I think that look on a forward-looking basis so okay so what does the next salana mean does it mean like you know I think that was more of a bait thing that I said I guess I just more so meant like do we have another big L1 trade where you can capture 20 30 40x or whatever you're looking for um yeah I mean it's pretty interesting like I look at what's happened with pump. fun like no doubt we're going to play the the the rotation game and we're going to do different apps and different ecosystems until we get tired and lose all our money um the pump fund thing has lasted on salana for a long time in crypto time and it recently like kind of left to BNB and Tron and it's my understanding that it's kind of rolling over now and like I think the problem with these other ecosystems there's just there's not there's nothing else novel to do the only place where you have novel experiences is arguably eth salana arbitrum maybe Bas um I definitely put base there yeah so it's like it's really hard to compete in the L1 Market it's extraordinarily crowded I think I might have said this on the Pod a week or two ago but like how do you compete nowadays like there's not a clear there's not a clear wedge in the market um other than these current ecosystems compounding their current markets um maybe one wedge exists so like I when I think of these wedges like historically they've been like e has had the liquidity um it's hard to compete impossible to compete with that um salana had the Speed when everyone else was slow and the low fees that was their wedge into the market um there's also like this problem in crypto where Founders get very religious um you can think of things like eth alignment um as like one of these like religious beliefs where people will ignore like the writing on the wall and just like stay likeon strong-headed in One Direction like perhaps like that's Mega eth's wedge into the market like if arbitrum is just like we're not going to increase our block times because you know for whatever reason our current technology stack is you know God's chosen stack um perhaps like that's like a way that one of these l1s compete because like realistically like if you think of something like Mega eth coming to Market and let's say that was actually able to attract more liquidity because it's a juice system um it's like very like good for Market to provide liquidity there um arbitrum would just juice their Tech stack too and compete but like are they going to do that like I don't think so because it's not in the ethos right so like potentially that's a wedge yeah potentially that's a wedge it's just like the bias of a lot of the market this like kind of like religious bias towards like like the their current Tech Stacks or like current road maps um but other than that like there's not a lot of wiggle room for new l1s to like come to Market um so like do I think that Su and aptose can achieve like billion dollar market caps like it's way harder today um to get there I I think it's more likely that current ecosystems keep compounding with the ex with the exception of like the Str stronge headed ones that um are really committed to their MO road map at the expense of evidence we're also going to get I I agree with you mostly I and I what my thing is that I feel like we're also going to get more exciting um l1s later this year um be chain for whatever it's worth I feel like they're trying out some new stuff and they have a really strong Community um whatever that means pre-launch but like at the end of the day they they are like a bunch of people posting random stuff and they they did shut down the test that in the initial cry because everybody was sibling it so they'll have some interest same with monad um whatever community means pre-launch we'll see what happens after launch but it is interesting and it's at least like equal L I do yeah I want to add to that I think um I like Ryan's point about the wedging and I do think that like if you look at like a moned or a mega eth versus something like an apos orui um we have sort of a different kind of Paradigm that we're looking at like osui I think you're you're you're looking and comparing to like how do they break out in comparison to salana um the the other like altel one fast cheap chain and they've taken that like you know maybe another another one or two orders of magnitude further right cheaper and potentially faster um but we see salana like continuing to compete there right like they're they're trying to pump out fire dancer and get more TPS so it's like that's that's going to be a battle an ongoing battle that they're going to have to play at and it's going to be difficult with like a user of soul today it it's so cheap that I don't care like I I don't care to save Pennies on my transactions by going over and like using Aptos orui instead it it doesn't really matter to me for a moned and like a mega eth I think Ryan's point is pretty good like you know base I will say is you know they do have some pretty interesting targets Like Jesse poock himself has posted some pretty crazy Targets in terms of like Mega gas per second for the chain and like significantly increasing throughput but like we're not seeing arbitrum come out with proposals to get to 10K TPS on the Chain today they're doing you know they've got all these other like orbit chains that you know I think that's sort of their their method of scaling is kind of the L2 model but instead it's l3s um so there I think there's a possibility that like a manad or a mega eth like if they come out with like these evm aligned like 10K TPS chains like they have the opportunity to kind of do the soul play and that you come in and be the fast cheap alternative but like within the sort of religious like evm aligned Community to where you might actually have the ability to move over more significant capital from you know l2s and even the main chain today because people think it just like fits the religion a little bit more um and they have the opportunity to build out these unique apps that we have on soul today that that don't exist on on l2s yeah I agreed and I think that like attempt to go okay I feel like a lot of people don't like the evm and they're like oh solid is like old so we don't really need it but I don't think the attempt to fix that is to say oh like here's actually just like another language that is exclusively smart contract Focus that's like kind of has a very small community and not fantastic de Dev tooling um it makes a lot more sense to do whatever arbitrum is doing where they're like they have stylists where they have like you can write in Rust C++ C whatever um Solana you can write in Russ relatively popular language um as opposed to going with like a very Niche um safer they they're as far as I understand it's much safer and much harder to hack but even then I'm not sure if it's if it's worth it yeah it's it's unclear today right if the language enables anything super novel in in defi right like whether or not we'll see really significantly more interesting apps via the use of the move language that the other languages can't can't do for some reason um that's kind of up in the air so that might be a potential future you know Value Point for them but we you know we don't see that today so it's hard to say yeah I will say all of these massive you know l1s they've they've got plenty of money and like you're saying like if you can get people that write multiple different languages to come and build stuff on your chain like that's great uh ultimately you just want to have devs come and build like unique interesting product experiences on your chain because that's why users are going to come and Bridge their money over and like use stuff you know salana had all these teams come out of the bare market and build unique things that weren't happening on eth and you know that's kind of a piece of their success um ultimately for like an Aptos foru for a manad for a mega eth like they need to you know put some of their Partnerships and and capital to work and like get devs to want to come and build in their ecosystems and build stuff that's unique for what it's wor I think Solana didn't have that many interesting apps and it still doesn't it just had like a massive repricing event just because it was beaten down um but it is still the second I guess most like um Innovative ecosystem with yeah I think in their case like the just the speed and throughput improvements were were sort of enough to kind of fill that Gap like you know they didn't have 50 brand new Incredible experiences but with just a few and just having them be greater from a user user experience perspective like I think that was just sort of enough but it's not enough anymore right like you can't you know eptos and S aren't going to make it just off of that alone yeah I agree with that yeah I think that's it for today guys Danny do you have anything you want to add uh don't get chopped up NFA d as always don't take any advice about 100x long or short ad um trade with leverage keep stop wide um don't Focus multiples are irrelevant double down down it's all going up so don't worry loses is for losers we have guaranteed fouryear cycle don't it up NFA just look at the chart for 23 and then mirror that onto 24 and there you go y exactly um let's put the one second chart over here for whatever our producer is um trading at the day um guys thank you so much for coming on to my listeners to our listeners to the xerx research listeners you make it possible make sure to come to permission list it is in October um early October when the leaves are turning and um you can use code 0x10 to get 10% off Ryan will be there Danny will be there I might potentially make an attempt if Ryan says can you please come B um unless he does that I will probably not come fantastic all right we're good I won't be there but another Dan or Daniel will probably be there we got plent of Dan we'll have one Dan [Music]

========================================

--- Video 88 ---
Video ID: iVKOHzEUqIM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iVKOHzEUqIM
Title: Intents Trading: Why AMMs Are Going Out of Style | Aori
Published: 2024-09-05 16:16:14 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Joshua and Roee from Aori joined us to discuss limit orders as intents, Aori’s based architecture, and onboarding and incentivising solvers. Additionally, they compared limit orders as intents and AMMs. Finally, Joshua laid out the end goal of Aori.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Join us at Permissionless III. Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iii
--
Follow Roee: https://x.com/Roeelir
Follow Joshua: https://x.com/joshuagunnn
Follow Magic: https://x.com/magicdhz
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:37 How Does Aori Work?
7:19 Limit Orders as Intents
16:05 Permissionless III Ad
17:19 Polygon Ad
18:09 Onboarding Solvers
23:11 Aori's Based Architecture
31:04 Who Are the Main Users of Aori?
40:19 Limit Orders As Intents vs AMMs
43:46 Incentivizing Solvers to Fill Orders
51:48 Reclassifying AMMs
55:58 The Aori End Game
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 89 ---
Video ID: 37YQixZp7Jw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=37YQixZp7Jw
Title: The Open Networks Path Forward | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-09-04 16:09:18 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts asked themselves, can TON survive? After Pavel Durov’s arrest, what’s their best path forward? They also discussed MakerDAOs rebrand to Sky and how previous rebrands in crypto have worked out. Additionally, they debated whether or not Ethereum L2s are parasitic. Finally, they speculated on when, if ever,  L2s will move away from using Ether as their primary gas token.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Magic: https://x.com/magicdhz
Follow Daniel: https://x.com/_dshap
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:23 MakerDAOs Rebrand
17:25 Are L2s Parasitic? 
28:47 Nillion Snippet
35:45 L2 Gas Tokens
51:26 Is the TON Thesis Invalidated? 
1:05:49 Ethereums Attempt to Create Money
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 90 ---
Video ID: GtJLKYt6LHc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GtJLKYt6LHc
Title: Dill’s Big Bet on Modular Crypto | Ted
Published: 2024-08-29 17:01:01 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Ted, the Co-founder of Dill! We discussed their various design choices, why they started building Dill in the first place, and how they plan to realize the full vision of Danksharding. Additionally, we unpacked their onboarding strategy, and their place within the current data availability landscape. Finally, Ted gave us his vision for the future of modular crypto, and how Dill aims to bring it to fruition. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Join us at Permissionless III. Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iii
--
Follow Dill: https://x.com/dill_xyz_
Follow Ted: https://x.com/ted0x1
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:43 Getting the Inspiration to Build Dill
5:26 Design Choices: Sharding Architecture 
17:51 Design Choices: Data Availability Sampling
22:34 Design Choices: KZG Commitments
24:54 Realizing the Full Danksharding Vision
30:12 Permissionless III Ad
31:26 Polygon Ad
32:17 Dill's Onboarding Strategy 
37:26 Dill's Place Within the Data Availability Market
46:56 The Bet on Modularity
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 91 ---
Video ID: 9EaCddoHuys
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9EaCddoHuys
Title: The Edge In Liquid Markets | Noah & Felipe
Published: 2024-08-28 17:31:38 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Noah and Felipe from Theia joined us to discuss their perspective on liquid and private token markets, how they reconcile fundamentals and valuations, and their thoughts on malicious MEV. Additionally, we cover how they view activist investing in crypto. Finally, we dive into token design.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Noah: https://x.com/TraderNoah
Follow Felipe: https://x.com/TheiaResearch
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:50 Why Focus On Liquid Tokens?
9:10 Token Only Teams vs Token & Equity Teams
17:34 Permissionless III Ad
18:48 Reconciling Fundamentals and Valuation
26:48 Dealing With Malicious MEV
33:06 Activist Investing In Crypto
38:37 Token Design: Less Is More
43:40 Looking Towards the Next Three Years
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 92 ---
Video ID: BDOvPSa7PCc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BDOvPSa7PCc
Title: Fig Talk: Is the Top In? Crypto's Q4 Catalysts & Headwinds
Published: 2024-08-22 15:29:42 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Boccaccio is joined by Kez and Tolks to discuss the current state of the market, focusing on the summer slump in meme coins and the broader implications for fundamentals. They analyze the controversy surrounding PumpFun and the concept of "extraction". The conversation then shifts to the rise of prediction markets like Polymarket and the growing popularity of Hyperliquid. Finally, they examine Ethereum's gas fee situation and whether if the rest of 2024 is optimistic. Thanks for tuning in!
--
Follow Tolks: https://x.com/_tolks
Follow Kez: https://x.com/kez4twez
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:51 Was that the Top? 
9:13 Altcoin Market Opportunities
16:39 Permissonless III Ad
17:53 Polygon Ad
18:45 Gwei Costs & ETH Sentiments
25:19 Did PumpFun Ruin Memes?
41:11 Generational Top of Polymarket
47:51 Rise of Hyperliquid & dYdX Fumble
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
-- 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 93 ---
Video ID: BBxdzypLalg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BBxdzypLalg
Title: The Modular Thesis Is Dead | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-08-21 14:32:12 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research Analysts discuss Drift’s new prediction market on Solana, how to differentiate decentralized social apps, and the various business models used by social media companies. Additionally, they make the argument that the Modular Thesis has died. Finally, they dive into the idea that Ethereum should compete with its own L2s.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Drift’s Prediction Market Announcement: https://x.com/DriftProtocol/status/1825537656014721406
--
Special thanks to our sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Join us at Permissionless III. Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iii
--
Follow Nikhil: https://x.com/0xnikhilchat
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:01 Drift Announces A Prediction Market On Solana
6:02 Permissionless III Ad
7:16 What Happened to Farcaster?
13:39 How to Differentiate Decentralized Social Applications
26:08 Social App Business Models
31:20 Moderating Social Media Usage
35:07 Modularity Has Died Out
45:09 Does the Market Still Care About Real Yield & AI?
59:37 Ethereum Should Compete Against Its L2s
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 94 ---
Video ID: W7YJ8e2yZ58
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W7YJ8e2yZ58
Title: Crypto's Answer for the Global Web Resource Race | Andrej, Grass
Published: 2024-08-15 13:33:06 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we dive deep into GRASS, a revolutionary decentralized network for web scraping and data collection. Andrej, from GRASS, explains how their platform is democratizing access to web data for AI development. We explore the technical aspects of the GRASS network, its innovative approach to data collection, and its potential impact on the AI industry. The conversation covers topics ranging from data poisoning prevention to the intersection of crypto and AI, concluding with insights into GRASS's future plans and expansion into mobile platforms.
--
Follow Andrej: https://x.com/0xdrej
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_RyanRConnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Timestamps
0:00 Introduction
2:11 Global Web Resource Problem
16:50 Permissionless III Ad
18:04 Polygon Ad
18:55 Live Context Retrieval 
25:15 Data Labeling & RLHF Program
32:59 Crypto & AI Intersection 
39:43 Why Solana & Business Future
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
-- 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 95 ---
Video ID: ZGlSKExUJHU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZGlSKExUJHU
Title: The Pump Fun War Zone | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-08-14 15:09:08 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our Blockworks Research analysts jump into the trenches! They discuss recent Ethereum ETF flows, future bullish catalysts on the horizon for Celestia, and the various ways MEV is being captured. Additionally, they discuss Ethereum L2 token distribution methods and how they might improve. Finally, they dive into the Pump Fun war zone.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to your sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Mims: https://x.com/0xMims
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction 
1:09 Bullish Ethereum ETF Flows
8:39 Future Catalysts for Celestia 
16:54 Will Established Chains Switch to Celestia DA in the Future?
23:49 Are L2s Too Generous With Their Token Distribution?
32:08 Nillion Snippet
42:00 Capturing MEV
52:50 The Pump Fun War Zone
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 96 ---
Video ID: V7zBeCqbSUs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V7zBeCqbSUs
Title: What Went Wrong with Multichain Crypto | Stan & Zon, Initia
Published: 2024-08-08 16:22:14 UTC
Description:
In today's episode we dive deep into the unforeseen challenges that have emerged in the multichain landscape. Joined by the founders of Initia, Stan and Zon, we explore the complexities of crosschain interactions, liquidity fragmentation, and user experience hurdles that have hindered the promise of a truly interconnected blockchain ecosystem. The conversation then shifts to innovative solutions, like the interwoven rollups, their Vested Interest Program (VIP), and enshrined liquidity. Our guests also share valuable insights from their recent testnet experience, offering a glimpse into the future of modular blockchain architecture and how it aims to address the shortcomings of current multichain systems. Thanks for tuning in!
--
Follow Zon: https://x.com/itsalwayszonny
Follow Stan: https://x.com/sinitias
Follow Nikhil: https://x.com/0xnikhilchat
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:41 What's Wrong with Crosschain
6:09 Interwoven Rollups 
13:19 High Throughput Demand
13:57 Scaling to Thousands of Chains
23:31 Standout Initia Use cases
29:40 Permissonless III Ad
30:54 Polygon Ad
31:45 Hub Vision Tradeoffs
45:06 DA Layer Support
47:56 Enshrined Liquidity & InitiaDEX
58:41 Lessons Learned from Testnet
1:05:12 Betting on Modularity
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
-- 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
our layer 2s can support evm move VM or wasm VM this module which lives in the cosmos SDK part works with any of those VMS by default which means as soon as you launch your app chain you have IBC you have cctp you also have full layer zero support so you can essentially onboard from any chain anywhere um just from day one we're just trying to figure out ways to create alignment within the ecosystem we're really trying to like make modular monolithic again to a sense like putting all the these different pieces back together in a way that's cohesive for everyone the polygon Community grants program was launched with 1 billion tokens all four polygon Builders season 1 is live right now and features 35 million in Matic to support the next generation of polygon products builders on polygon these grants are for you join the aggregated future today by applying at polygon.net set on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice Pacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of ZX research today I'm joined by Stan and Zan from inisha thanks for coming on guys thanks for having us before we get started do you want to tell us a little bit about what you're building over at in sure thing um so my name is z um I'm one of the co-founders of inisha um essentially inisha is a network for interwoven Roll-Ups um and what that means is we are holistically trying to rebuild how multi-chain networks should look feel and operate along the architecture stack the product stack as well as the economic Stacks that bring these things together um one of the advantages of this is essentially we're building a layer one a layer two solution as well as um like the optimistic rollup framework and the communication channels that work between them all um and so we have the benefit of seeing the rise of things like the cosmos ecosystem the way that rollups has developed on ethereum and then essentially building a solution um that takes all those pieces into play and builds what we think the longterm solution should be for a multi-chain world perfect that makes a lot of sense and um what inspire you guys to build Ana how did you get started what were the problems that I mean you discussed them a bit but what were some of the I guess the more overarching issues that you were specifically looking to build for yes so I think Zan and I are obviously heavy users in like the evm ecosystem and um also the cosmos ecosystems itself um yeah I think like just look going through some of our like d gen activities defi activities we share a wallet that we like Farm different things on as well um just kind of looking at like how assets move as well as like how users interact with different applications especially when they live on different chains we just have not had like a really good experience to it and like to this day there's quite a few solutions that kind of try to you know improve this experience but there's not really been a single solution that kind of unifies every aspect of the stack itself um and so you know having Z and I having experience in the cosmos building in the cosmos ecosystem we kind of looked at some of the existing tools such as like the cosmos SDK right which allows for users to build super modular super um flexible and customizable infrastructure and we kind of also took some inspiration from you know the evm places as well to allow teams to build rollups right basically removing the pro problems of like running your own app chain running the validator set bootstrapping liquidity boost trapping security um and try to really bind all of this into one cohesive I guess like solution for not only the developers themselves but also the end users that are looking to interact with different applications on different chains yeah I think we've seen like an overload lately of like generic evm layer 2s with slight changes on the way that we prove those layer twos um and I think yeah I mean that's awesome in long term we're all going to move towards ZK but um the problem is that there's no apps um and all these layer twos are exactly the same thing and so what was always interesting about the cosmos SDK was that it's just this crazy flexible stack to build something unique at um and that's true today like there are so many unique Cosmos chains that like change the way that transactions are actually processed that change maybe the way that transactions are ordered you have things like Celestia and be chain and dydx V4 that all live there but it's just a pain in the ass to actually build a cosmos chain most notably you have to build a layer one you have to deal with the validator set you have to inflate your token Supply you have to deal with the pairwise dependency problems of IB C you have to run all this peripheral infrastructure and with inisha you have essentially the most lightweight way to launch a full-fledge cosmos chain because our rollups are essentially full Cosmos chains where you rip out some parts of the stack like the validator set you plug in our optimistic rollup framework and then through the layer one you're given literally everything you need whether that be instant bridging over IBC and layer zero um Native usdc and cctp access um fungibility across every one of these rollups so you don't have three different usdc or three different eths uh you have the same token that can go across all of them and then a whole bunch of ux that kind of binds these things together so what does it look and feel like for end users to interact with this application or that one what does it look like to actually Bridge around these layer twos um and just really building all those pieces uh cohesively so that even when we we do have thousands of rollups in the future we have a very simple user experience for newcomers as well as people who know the space already perfect I um I want to get more into what type of rollups you guys Envision building on initia but before that one thing you guys mentioned is interwoven rollups interwoven rollups and I kind of want to understand what that is exactly and what I guess differentiates it from regular rollups yes I guess zon touched a little bit about this earlier um so initia I guess l2s we call them initial for mini initial um they are optimistic rollups themselves and so one of the big problems with rollups in general is basically liquidity fragmentation and as well as like end user fragmentation right if you bridge some tokens through like the optimistic Bridge you have to wait usually seven days or whatever the challenge period is to bring it back out um and interact with like another L2 or maybe even the L1 itself um and so like I think one of things that we really focused on or Tred to hone in on while we were building this like like full comprehensive Tex stack is to make sure that users are able to almost in inmediately um interact with different chains with different assets even though these assets are living on some of the l2s themselves um so what does it look like to be able to get instant liquidity instant bridging um how do you really get for example usdc from different chains right so a lot of the l2s themselves they don't immediately support cctp on day one um and they probably will likely never support cctp if it's not like a large chain similar to like arbitr optimism and so how do we enable some of these projects that are building presumably app chains in the future actually get access direct access to some of these toolings whether it's Oracle access native usdc Bridges things like that and so all of these come out of the box in the ecosystem itself and so from day one if you launch your little app chain or like minisha itself you're able to get connected with the rest of the greater inisha ecosystem yeah one other really cool thing about that is we last week announced a project that we've been working on with the layer zero team um so together over the past few months we built out a cosmos SDK module um that supports basically a layer zero endpoint and so because it's a cosmos SDK module it can come out of the box on basically every single one of our layer tws by default and since on inisha um our layer twos can support evm mve VM or wasm VM this module which lives in the cosmos SDK part works with any of those VMS by default which means as soon as you launch your app chain you have IBC you have cctp you also have full layer zero support so you can essentially onboard from any chain anywhere um just from day one I think interen also speaks a lot about the ecosystem that we're building so when you launch a rollup on ethereum um generally I think that you are fighting for yourself um it's like one versus all and you have to do a lot of work when it comes to like Integrations other people to work with like Partners to have but uh in my opinion when you build a rooll up on Anisha um the ecosystem is very tightly coupled in the sense that there are plenty of applications and teams that just want to work with each other that want to help each other win that is our whole goal with like building an Isa like how can help layer twos win um and how can we make sure that everyone is fighting together so that we can grow the brand I think that's one of the big things that Cosmos also faced there's essentially nothing that unites any Cosmos chain and so it's basically Game of Thrones out there um but some of the mechanism designed that we've been fiddling around with with something called inisha VIP essentially um tries to unite the entire ecosystem with the init token um and I think that'll go long way into creating like one big cohesive ecosystem that has thousands of different chains that still all care about like growing together very cool and you know you mentioned this briefly Zan about the various different virtual machines that initia sort of supports so you know what does uh what does your team sort of Envision in terms of the types of rollups that we be launching on top of initia uh whether this is you know different virtual machine rollups or even different classifications like your general purpose rollups app specific consumer love to get a little bit of an idea on how you guys you know sort of foresee the different types of rollups coming on top of initia and is there any active effort on curating like a different variety since as you mentioned in the ethereum ecosystem there was a pretty high density of like general purpose rollups and it is exactly like a Game of Thrones out there so we love to see how are you guys cating that landscape yeah so firstly on the virtual machine side um so our opinion is that virtual machines are tools like this should not be the main show point of a layer two rather it's like use whatever VM you care about what works best for you in your application if you really care about security or if you're a new developer or game developer maybe move is the best for you um if you like rust and you also care about something that's strongly typed maybe Cosmos is the best for you if you want something with a lot of access to developer tools or you're forking a project from somewhere else and editing it maybe solidity is the best but really it's up to you and whatever you think your application will work best with when it comes to like what types of rollups we really Envision application specific rollups happening um I think general purpose ones are fine as well um but application specific rollups can take advantage of the cosmos SDK underneath to really change the way that their app chain um behaves to advance like the user experience as well as just the technical experience of that rollup like you look at dydx or any of the other Cosmos chains like osmosis or some of the lending markets like there's been a lot of tweaks to how the transactions are processed or the ways the transactions are ordered um it's a lot more unique than being able to just change the way that your gas token um is used and I think that's what's interesting about Cosmos compared to other rollups right when you launch a rollup right now on ethereum you get the exact same copy paste Fork um no matter where go and so having that flexibility is just an entire game Cher and so we're starting to see application specific rollups um across all the different VMS that we support um and I've been working really closely with about nine teams um over the past three four months to curate basically a day one ecosystem that will be live it's already mostly live on testnet right now and will be live day one on mainnet so that when initial launches there's already a suite of applications that have unique interesting value propositions that can drive users in rather than you know farming a lending Market with points for the 10th time um but really just seeing like reasons to actually use these products that you can't do elsewhere nice no that's really cool and you know you mentioned which I completely agree that virtual machines are more or less a tool for the actual developer itself uh a means to an end uh but but kind of going off of that point there you know you're starting to see a lot of things in the ecosystem like Mega eth Labs trying to paralyze the evm you've got the ref team uh trying to bring this to the ethereum ecosystem you got l1s as well like monad and whatnot that are trying to pursue this uh how is the initial ecosystem looking like like are there any interesting rollups that are looking to bring some of that high throughput framework to developing rollups in Anisha and how do you see that affecting the you know initia ecosystem as well yeah so I think uh by default rollups on Anisha have about 10,000 TPS and 500 millisecond block times so they're already pretty fast and because their application specific um you know throughput and demand is split naturally amongst the app chains so congestion shouldn't be as big of a problem because we don't have one Global shared State I think Global shared state is like the ultimate endgame I'd love if monad or Mega eth was the solution but I just naturally think we're going to hit uh demand in the future and crypto will grow enough where we're going to need tens or hundreds of monads or Mega eats and so we're starting from the opinion that there will be thousands of chains let's ensure that they're all connected by default and this is a very um similar to how web 2 evolved right like we had these big monolithic services and then we realized okay we need to go to microservices everything needs to be on a different machine and they need to talk to each other well and I think web 3 is going to follow the same way like there's no way we can put everything on one chain probably inshah um and so I think um yeah basically all these applications will have their own chains they'll be able to retain their value and they'll build something unique there no completely agree with that as well I mean you don't want like Facebook's uh you know volume or activity to impact like some small business just because they're taking up a bunch of activity and you know with what you mentioned about the world potentially having a thousand chains or thousand rollups what is anisha's plan for for making that happen for onboarding some of these rollups onto inisha what is the general process look like and is there a general like go to market strategy that you guys are looking at for you know bringing the world's rollups onto an istia yeah so I think Z briefly mentioned this a second ago um basically a Goen Market or like General ecosystem strategy is to start with a core set of really interesting Unique Products something that's not like your typical Fork from another chain right um if you kind of look at like other ecosystems that have done really well for example arbitrum optimism Etc um basically these ecosystems really started to get off the ground when a few core products did really well right so for Arbitron was like GMX and maybe treasured out um for optimism it was V Drome as well as synthetics um for other chains it's usually one or two types of projects right so we kind of Envision a similar type of um I guess like ecosystem strategy you want to make sure that these initial let's say our nine group a group of nine initial projects kind of sets the Cornerstone or like the pillars of the ecosystems themselves and then you have a bunch of teams combining these types of pro protocols themselves or you know building something on top of these protocols so that's how we kind of initially imagin um I guess like growing the early ecosystem itself um and then as we start to shift into you know where we're a little bit larger where there's quite a few more projects where it's like for example not humanly possible for us to talk with every individual team right and that's kind of the world we kind of Imagine um we kind of expect some of these initial teams to BAS Bally work very closely right so if you're like a payments team or you know doing something related to cards or like consumer type applications maybe you talk to one of the existing teams that are already building something there um and so we do have a team that's for example focusing on building like consumer products as well as like a payment processor type of M show as well yeah if you look at some of the launches of recent l1s not the ones that Stan mentioned you'll see uh quite a few fumbles actually and I think that's because two things one is is saying that you have like thousands of applications or like hundreds of applications that are ready to deploy and then mayet comes along and you know you get maybe 15 uni V2 Forks um and nothing else and that's just fumble number one because when users come to bridge in there's really nothing to do and I think a second fumble that we've seen a lot is cannibalization of early Builders and the early ecosystem so bringing in external teams that have kind of a household name within defi like pancake or sushi swap um and then having them basically eat tvl away from native applications um and have early users Farm These tokens like sushi that really don't have a lot of upside potential left um I think it's really important to have early ecosystem users get exposure to applications and Native things that are being built in the ecosystem to have the opportunity for those wealth effects to exist and crypto like that is just one of the best ways to grow ecosystems and Brands is exposing early users to these types of applications and that's something that we've focused on so we've been working with these nine teams that are going to launch their own tokens their own products they're novel they're new they're not from other ecosystems um and it's been a pretty difficult process just because we're all working with a new Tex deack here we're all trying to figure this thing out together but I think in the long term it'll be a lot more beneficial than bringing over existing projects I think that makes sense yeah the best way to i' say onboard more users is to just give them something to do and then have them have be natively be native how much help are you guys providing these nine rollups like what are some Frameworks that you give them so they can onboard users so there's quite a few things that we do um I'd say we do all sorts of things when it comes to the tech sides so spinning up the rollup like working with them when it comes to building contracts um figuring out ways to change the cosmos SDK clients um front end help design help uh we give a lot of ux tools as well so like our block Explorer comes out of the box for all these rollups um the way that you connect to any evm wallet Cosmos wallet inapp wallets that's all something that we provide like the bridge interfaces to move around all these rollups we also provide those um and and also when it comes to like go to market how should we frame this project how should we Orient it um how do we do the comms for them um how should all this stuff kind of come to light some of them are totally capable of doing it themselves some need a few pointers we're just here to help to bounce ideas off of um and hopefully help each other win and so aside from that I think we're also doing something called initia VIP um that is stands for vested interest program it's like a multi-chain economic framework that we've built that will hopefully um help bring users to applications and create a long form system of retention as well as generally push the init token into all of the layer twos on inisha to create that hardness of money um that you kind of see with eth on ethereum right now every single roll up on ethereum uses eth as the gas token it's like the canonical coin that you put in a lending Market or on a DEX and if you look at other multi-chain systems like Cosmos um adom is nowhere like no one cares at all about that token and so how do we create a similar phenomenon that helps these layer twos is totally value positive um and also creates that kind of hardness of money for the in it token and that's where we came up with initia VIP which stands for bested interest program and the quick abbreviated version of how that works is essentially there is a large um sub percent of the initial token Supply that's allocated as rewards for layer twos um there is a governance vote on the layer one that allocates these rewards so it says uh okay 30% of this month's rewards go to this layer two 30% to this one 40% to this last one and then on every one of those layer tws they can set a kpi for themselves so something that they care about incentivizing within their ecosystem whether that is uh volume on a perpetuals market or borrows on a lending Market it is up to the layer two to set it themselves and then there is a second distribution parameter which is init balances on that chain so whether it's in your smart contract system or the wallets of your users and the initial layer one essentially distributes init tokens two users of your Layer Two based on those two parameters the kpi as well as init balances um and does so through a special vesting system through escro and it that essentially requires users to maintain their usage or engagement on the layer 2 over time to unlock those rewards and so we do this is basically like a programmatic grant system but also as a long-term way to encourage engagement just using the applications that you would use already but also earning these additional rewards and creating new use cases for the init token across all the layer twos um you know we're in the business of building block space here so we can't be relying on in it for gas to do anything I think burning tokens typically doesn't work when it comes to like actually creating strong deflationary effects and so use cases is one of the most interesting things that we can try and essentially Force into the ecosystem oh it makes a lot of sense and you know you see different ecosystems that have this like with salana souls used obviously for mem coins you know with arbitrum it's you have defi you you got pockets like treasure down whatnot where you have like nice syncs there avalanch it's Enterprise and gaming so with Anisha for example and using the init token what are some standout use cases that you've seen like you gave some of the examples on of like how other ecosystems are doing but like how are uh some of the initial role pullups creating those very like specific ways that the IND the token can be utilized for for example are you guys seeing like you know hey payments are going to be really big on Anisha because of all the high throughput is it going to be gaming what are the specific things that really set up uh some of the rollups that are on top of Anisha set them apart from all the other ones the thousands of them that will be coming uh you know throughout the various different Cycles yeah so I think as a product category in itself defi or like Financial related products is always the biggest right in like a very Financial type of product Financial World um yeah so like I think a large portion of our products themselves also you know fall under that category I think there's some interesting products in the sense that they have very different mechanisms recently poly markets been a really big thing general interest in different types of prediction markets with different mechanisms um how you can apply those to like potentially even order book like structures in general like prediction markets or even amms are not the perfect solution for like prediction markets right or like vice versa um due to like liquidity mation like just general liquidity ineffectiveness with the regards to like how much you're actually able to trade or bet versus like the underlying liquidity itself um so we have a team that's called Contra um that is building something that they call a glab which is a gradual limit order book kind of slows down time um kind of also prevents like front running as well as just like General liquidity sniping of users who are providing liquidity and kind of allows users to make a market on a specific item they're interested about whether or not you know a presidential candidate would drop out of a debate or like some sports betting or whatever it is um it's similar to poly markets I think like one of the big downsides of poly markets is just the general liquidity provision and like Whoever has the greatest amount of information available to them at a given time they're able to take advantage of like the underlying LP right so if you know for example an hour Biden or whoever is going to drop out of the race you're you have much more I guess like you can take much more advantage of the underlying liquidity um whereas like this is not possible in like a glob like structure and so I think that will help retail much better and you'll be able to make very interesting um use that as like a very interesting D5 primitive to build other things on top similar to how how kind of like unisoft introduced like the lp token itself like liquidity provision and that really basically brought in a Renaissance for like dii yeah there's another product called Blackwing which is pretty awesome they're building a move Layer Two um that is focused on trading but what they do is they use this concept called um Limitless pools which essentially collateralize any LP token anywhere to perform leverage on the assets and they use their chain as basically an intent Hub so that you can basically perform leverage long or short on any asset on any chain all through their front end and you know user flow which is basically like the end game of trading and perfect for the meme coin cycle that we're in right now like any coin makes it off pumps fun on terium now you can perform leverage on it if any token on Thruster on blast is there now you can perform leverage on it and the same applies to any of the other dexes or things within inisha or the cosmos world you can just perform leverage on basically any asset and that is like the biggest unlock for any Trader um and it's all on chain there's a product called Milky Way they are the first um and largest staking and LST platform for celestial on the modular ecosystem and they're moving into a reaking platform um through their initial layer to so they're building out uh restak um services for basically anything within the modular landscape so things like Sovereign rollups those don't have the biggest security guarantees being able to provide security for them using the underlying token of Celestia um as well as adding things like in it in there as well um there's a product called cisha they have basically built an onchain Perpetual Monopoly game um that requires coordination of people to basically sabotage um other landmarks or like buildup landmarks it's really cool um the team's awesome and they've just been building this pretty fun onchain game that I think is going to be really good for a bit of the consumer angle when we hit main net um especially with all the social Integrations that come out of the box um you can see like this TW Twitter person or these groups are forming alliances to basically take down this country or that um and I think that's going to be great there is a team called Zar they have been building um some of them are from redacted cartel and they've been basically building the nft hub for the modu ecosystem one of the biggest problems within Cosmos or multichain worlds is that it's kind of difficult to deal it's already difficult to deal with fungible tokens what happens when these are non-fungible it's going to be a bigger pain in the ass and so they've been doing a lot of work on like cleaning up that ux making sure that people can trade nfts from anywhere um as well as some other um prediction stuff I was trying to avoid a certain word um and then there's a team called lunch they are building basically a payment platform that stand mentioned as well as like a full mobile app that you can basically do anything in defi with which is great for for new users who are touching crypto for the first time um yeah those are some of the main ones there's a couple others um that I'll happily sh if you want but uh happy day you have some other questions too hey guys permissionless the event for crypto natives is heading west to Salt Lake City and we're bringing the biggest names in crypto together for an incredible campas event join me on the rest of blockworks on October 9th to hear for more than 200 Industry Titans including Nick white from Celestia shiram from Igan and Keon from Mona the conversations at permission list will be covering the hottest themes in crypto including modularity reaking the Bitcoin and Solon ecosystems Ai and crypto rollups l2s institutional adoption and of course the November election that will be right around the cor we couldn't be more excited about this event and it's happening in one of the most beautiful places in the US ticket prices will be increasing towards the end of June so get your ticket today make sure to use the code so I get some credit and bragging rights from the rest of the team uh use ZX10 for 10% off on your ticket one more thing we're also hosting the permissionless fre hacka Fon in collaboration with bbx the theme this year is a multi-chain future to build a better cross chain experience so I don't have to have a heart attack every time I BRD to a new CH all hacka found participants will receive a free ticket to attend permissions so if you're a developer come join us in Salt Lake City team up with fellow devs and build the multi-chain future polygon Labs is developing the next generation of Open Source Z Tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases empowering developers to grow in a unified web of interoperable chains with the a layer the a layer is a machine for Network effect don't worry about bootstrapping liquidity just build anywhere in the a layer to tap the liquidity and users everywhere to support the aggregated future and boost scrap quality project the polygon Community grants program was launched with 1 billion tokens All For polygon Builders season one of the community grants program is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon projects for Builders on polygon or projects interested in migrating these grants are for you join the aggregated future and feel empowered to grow in an infinite web of unified interoperable chains apply today at polygon.net honest um if they set their own keep kpis how does that how are you guys approaching that yeah so basic basically the layer two is every Epoch or like every voting period they submit like a criteria on chain and so this comes in the form of a proxy contract that they submit on the L1 um everybody is able to view this it's completely transparent um and so if you deem like you know this proxy contract to be not consistent with like the kpis that they actually sent um anybody's a able to actually challenge this proxy contract or challenge this input um and then it gets thrown to over to basically L1 governance decide whether or not this is the correct calculation if it isn't then the new person submits like the new version and act for the VIP if it is correct then it proceeds onto the basically the voting period slash um reward distribution period perfect that makes sense um Z one thing you mentioned was uh making in it money like um I think that's like the goal for all modular ecosystems and you also kind of talked about what you don't want to be like which is the cosmos Hub which makes a lot of sense uh and what you do want to be like which is um I know we already kind of discussed this and like you kind of run over it but I just I feel like this is the biggest topic if you're a modular guess I don't want to say provider but provider how did you guys exactly like start thinking about this how did you approach it what is like what were some of the options that you considered before the VIP and before like everything else that you guys designed are there any like very clear tradeoffs that you I guess went through yeah so I guess like we do want to be the cosmos Hub in some sense I think like the original Vision I think the implementation was whoa whoa whoa whoa crazy I think the in the initial like Vision to have like this Hub that connects all these chains together these different products together is like a very interesting vision and I think it's like an ideal Vision I think what was bad is it introduced more fragmentation than like the amount of connectivity it was supposed to actually bring into the space itself right like nobody everybody kind of wants to live in their own little island fight for their own liquidity like we don't like you Etc there's like a lot of politics involved um and so that basically kind of ruined that Vision itself or like the implementation of it um and if you look in modular ecosystem itself like the whole idea of modellismo by chains you're also splitting like the underlying techn infrastructure stack itself and so we kind of thought about it like I think it's very good to split these different types of different parts of the text stack itself and kind of like optimize each individual section separately and have teams that are best at doing for example data Avail availability execution Etc um the biggest problem is now you have these disjoint parts so how can we really connect these parts together and that's kind of where it started with the text stack itself um and we kind of built like this architecture that would kind of basically unify all this different types of technology as well as like different ecosystems itself um and so like the last step in general after looking at like both the product and the underlying infrastructure is like how can you bring the users together right like I think a lot of the reason why if you take a look at the US currency for example people use the US dollar or like are willing to accept the US dollar in places where it's where your own home country currency is not stable is because everybody accepts it right everybody understands that you'll be able to redeem value for it and it's the same for like BTC or usdc usdt and some of these countries as well and so how can we kind of replicate some of these characteristics right like make it a store value make it used as like the underlying denominator for different types of debt or like different types of use use cases itself um and to do so you kind of have to get this into the hands of everybody who's invested in your ecosystem so this is why we call it like vested interest program right we want everybody to have a vested interest in the success of the L1 or like initia itself in order to do so you have to have some sort of financial incentive that's tied to basically this interest right um and so yeah we want to make sure that you know reserve a large portion of the supply to the actual end users who are using these applications making sure that the ecosystem is suceeding right in a lot of cases if you look at like Grant incentive programs that are given by foundations what happens is you know some of these projects are given an art is token Grant um but this token Grant never actually ends up going to the end users that use these products itself right they kind of just go into the the project treasuries and they're never released to the users or like the project teams may try to sell these token incentives for eth or something else like that right um and so we want to cut out a lot of that middleman problem that comes with some of these inefficient Grant processes and so that's why we Tred decided to build like an onchain mechanism for a way to distribute grants or like a way to distribute incentives to not only the teams that are building these awesome products themselves but also the users who are making sure that these products stay alive and have actual incentive to use them even aside from the you know monetary incentives that are given um yeah so that's like kind of how VIP started and then we kind of slowly built up the mechanism over time how can we ensure that you know there are no weird edge cases where users are trying to game the system what happens if you know there's like a malicious Mantia who submits the wrong kpis as you asked earlier um basically looking at all the different types of cases and really looking at this problem in like a principle agent manner yeah I think we're just trying to figure out ways to create alignment within the ecosystem we're really trying to like make modular monolithic again to a sense like putting all the these different pieces back together in a way that's cohesive for everyone and so that's the financial alignment SE section VIP then the other piece was product alignment so what does the block Explorer look like what does Connect into wallets look like what does moving around these chains look like we built all of those as Anisha to kind of create this like cohesive experience over thousands of chains and then of course there is also architecture alignment so everyone is using basically the same minisha stack uh you can obviously change different parts of the cosmos SDK side but they're all still Cosmos SDK which means that there is a thread of underlying infrastructure that allows all of these layer twos to naturally communicate with each other through IBC there is the layer zero module that naturally connects them as well and then there's also the initia layer one and we've also built something on the initia layer one called enshrine liquidity um this is basically one of the ways that we remove this problem for layer twos that are trying to make sure that they have access to liquidity and so not only can you use IBC or layer zero but we basically baked a hub of liquidity into the layer one itself so that it is directly accessible for these layer twos but also acts as a multi-chain router so on our layer one we basically built a DEX into the chain um and you can stake in it X LP tokens directly with validators so things like init usdc in it e in AA whatever we want that gets whitelisted and this basically can be a multi-chain router as well so you can send usdc from one rollup and get eth on another because there's this massive liquidity pool that can facilitate those swaps as those flows are going through nice very cool I like the line that you also said about making modular monolithic in some ways uh it's kind of like in cloud services as well where you know before with uh with different sort of like Cloud compute machines face Faceook was kind of running their own stuff a lot of other companies were running their own stuff and it was very modular and like AWS gcp Microsoft Azure kind of rebundle a lot of these different services so I can see inisha kind of being like that for a lot of modular stuff which is very cool but going into the stack a little bit uh from from mantias I think you Zan you briefly touched on this but there's already you know many different virtual machines that are supported you know ranging from cos swom solidity move are there any plans to support more in the future like of course we're seeing a lot of mcoin trading activity on the salon of virtual machine you see eclipse coming to the ethereum ecosystem uh any ideas there on like expanding the sort of VM support that um you know Nisha has yeah so essentially any VM that works on top of Cosmos SDK we can support because uh what's technically happening is that for all these VMS and their tokens and their date it's all being stored on the cosmos side and these VMS are kind of like execution environments right and so if you are sending a cw20 Cosmos coin to a move funable asset on a different initia rollup they're actually turning into Cosmos coins getting sent and then turning back into whatever virtual machine coin it is um so theoretically we could put whatever VM that works on Cosmos at the moment though we're not seeing demand for other VMS I think the svm is very popular right now but that's mostly because people like building on Solana they like the ecosystem there they like the users they like the liquidity I've never heard anyone say I like the svm specifically like the svm damn that's a good language and framework to build with it's more so yeah we just like Salam so if that demand shows up I think we'll work towards adding it right now I think we are seeing specific demand uh between Cosmo aom solidity and move and it's very tangible why so if you think about move you only have two places to build Aptos and SU um I wouldn't say either of those are very web three onlined um and neither of them even have native usdc support yet you also can't use metamask like I don't think their target audience is uh the onchain defi users and so if you are building a product that wants to take advantage of the move stack you don't really have a home and so by building your own stack and your own chain within inisha you can do that and you can onboard from anywhere and you can use use whatever want the same goes for cosmism basically anyone that wants to that builds in Cosmos kind of wants to build their own chain but it's still difficult to do so now here's the most lightweight way to do it and then solidity we've seen people build evm l2s for the past you know three years um but now here's a way to do it while staying connected to everything um and being able to have more flexibility than ever before I also think that's kind of like why we really get a lot of thought to the architecture itself and like it's like completely modulized or like in some sense Plug and Play right like if in the future we kind of see demand for sbm or a whole new type of VM like we can Al always replace it right or like add on that as an extra optionality for us developers who do want to build in that VM in same same vein like right now I think the majority of liquidity probably lies on optimistic rollups right if we suddenly see a much more advanced version of like a ZK rollup and there seems to be a lot of interest and a lot of Demand by both not only developers and us users we can always Implement that into our architecture so I think like one of the things that we really try to consider for is not to necessarily support everything at once um we kind of want to build an architecture that is future proof in some sense um you can kind of fit in the things that are needed when it is needed at the right time it's also one of the main reasons we focus so much on like the product and economic pieces as well like the point of those and good product and good ecosystems is to hide the architecture no one actually cares about the infrastructure we just want to work and so as long as we can add new stuff change that around the product stays the same no users are affected like these economic Frameworks are well thought out I think we're in an awesome place for the next five 10 years 100% yeah we just need more apps uh but uh you know kind of follow up to uh Stan you briefly mentioned uh sort of ZK rollups so I know that minisha are are optimistic are there any plans to support ZK rollups going forward obviously polygon you know they're sort of uh with they agir they're really trying to hammer home that they want polygon cdks to be uh utilizing ZK proofs um you know ZK sync as well with their hyper chains they really want to go down that path as well so kind of curious on how you guys are thinking about that as well U if they any plans there yeah I think it's similar to supporting like the svm itself we can always do it when the time comes when there's an sufficient demand for by not only the users and developers s we're not like a very strong like a team that does ZK research for example right that's like not our main um core competency or strength um so yeah like when there's demand and when you know it's at a stage where we think it's like sufficiently usable in some sense what whatever level of ZK that is then we will be able to incorporate into our system or we will look into exploring incorporating into the underlying tech tech stack our goal was just get this thing production ready and out as soon as possible and so optimistic rollups have just been studied they work everything is good with them let's use that and then we can always put in ZK in the future once it's ready 100% that makes sense most of the L2 activity anyways to date are on like optimistic based rollups as well so that makes a lot of sense uh I know that you guys for for like da layers primarily are supporting Celestia feels like there's a new DA layer popping up uh you know uh every week you know besides excluding Igan da you've got like nuff Labs which is like popping out near da you've got like people rumoring that other major l1s will start to just rule out their own you know base layer as a DA solution as well so is there any plan that you know as this da landscape becomes more and more broader is there any plan to support other da layers besides Celestia or is it kind of the same question where like if the demand is there if somebody asks sure but if there's no demand then no need oh you guys didn't know about initia da I'm joking um basically I think da as like it's pretty fungible right like all these da layers they do a good job at what they're supposed to do um I'd say the main reason to pick one da layer over another is like have they done an air drop yet or not um and so our opinion more so is like we are trying to build this system that works right and so we don't care for Choice overload existing like we're not going to have 10 Bridge providers we're not going to have 10 Oracle Services we're not going to have five different da layers we're going to pick one hopefully the best one integrate them very well and deeply into the teex stack and then that's it like we don't have to deal with it again so at the moment we just use Celestia for da we just have uh a system for oracles where our validators post fresh prices every single block we just use layer zero and IBC for messaging and and that is the current game plan right we just want something that's well integrated that works that binds all these pieces back together and then um some of those choices that I think are relatively redundant just don't need to be made people can just focus on building their App instead of choosing between this this and that yeah I think like already in a modular ecosystem everything's super complex right like not just even using the chains itself but like the underly technology so like sometimes when there's too much Choice like choice choice overload it really like hampers the ux not only for developers but also end users so we just kind of make very decisive pointed choices if those happen to be wrong like we're always open to like considering like using different types of Technology Etc but for now as Z kind of mentioned a lot largely a lot of these are like fungible in some sense so we don't really see the need to you know potentially switch to a different service or another provider that makes sense um you guys mentioned this a bit back but I kind of want to dive a bit more into it the enshrined liquidity and the initia de um why did you guys decide to go with this approach um and what are the I guess other designs that you considered because this is there's I guess two more that have done this but I kind of want to understand like exactly what your approach is from your end yeah so I think um there's a few reasons one is I think we removing some of the lwh hanging fruit you know when ecosystems launch you always have like X decks X lending Market um they're not really doing anything interesting so if we just do that then hopefully people will build something else that is interesting and they have been doing so which we like the second is there's a very real use case for it um through a multi-chain world right like there is need for a deck that can support all the tokens from all the layer tws that can act as a router across them all and that can also just put productive assets to work and so that's one of the reasons that we built the in Shrine liquidity system so that you can stake these LP tokens and we see it mostly being used for just major assets so things like eth usdc usdt um any other major coins that we think will be useful across all the layer 2s and yeah just by enshrining that system you've put productive assets to work you've built a hub of liquidity that that's accessible to every layer too and then you've basically connected all of them because now you can send from one roll up and get another you don't have to deal with the process of like okay let me first figure out which uh usdc token I need to send to this other Layer Two now I find it out now I bridge to that layer two now I can swap to the eth that I need it's all just kind of like one seamless multi-chain World um I think that's like a huge Improvement of the current existing ux and I think we've seen this idea of taking LP tokens for a while actually so bear chain is obviously one of the most popular ones with proof of liquidity um but it actually started a long timeo with balancer uh balancer you could stake 8020 Bal we pairs uh for governance power and basically the idea was like okay that's a good way to get governance power as well as derive some use case out of it so let's Implement that on the layer one level I think a lot of it also falls down to Capital effic efficiency so if you kind of look at like P as staking systems a lot of that state capital while it's there for like Economic Security it's not usable right you can't use it anywhere else um you can't really utilize basically the core asset of your ecosystem in other places where users may want to go in and out between different assets and so we kind of thought about it and you know this seemed to be like one of the a good solution to allow users to not only provide liquidity for supporting the chain as well as like boost strapping the economic security of the chain but also provide liquidities for other you liquidity for other us users who are trying to move between different types of L2 products and so that really improves the um underlying efficiency another thing that we kind of can do when we have this Dex that's built into the chain itself is really adjust liquidity of different assets depending on like what is needed right um maybe the ecosystem in some way forms around Tia as like one of other major assets right so you probably want to incentivize a lot of the liquidity to go for Tia so that there's like a seamless experience when users are moving these assets across l2s um on the other hand maybe usdc is like the second most popular asset on across these different types of mantias themselves and so by having the decks actually be built into the chain itself we're able to use L1 governance to actually shift this um shift incentives right like the staking incentives to liquidity providers who are providing across these liquidity pools and so it's a little bit more flexible in the sense that we don't have to rely on some random like third party token like sushi token or like a uni token um like another separate token to be able to you know adjust the liquid adjust the liquidity to the needs of the rest of the initial ecosystem yeah staking is already like a huge sync of a token supply for like every layer one ecosystem right now tying that into liquidity just makes a lot of sense because you're already Distributing all these staking rewards so might as well distribute them for something productive um as well as security at the same time I think it can also act as a very cool gas station actually it's one of the things that we have on Anisha is something called J in time gas um and that's basically if you're on a layer two that uses a different token for gas um in the same flow of like trying to send your transaction if you don't have those tokens we will automatically get you those tokens using your assets from anywhere else within the ecosystem and the way we can do that is two things one skip API which is like a API system that sits over a lot of Cosmos SDK chains that um allow ows you to say I'm going from X token to Y token and it'll figure out the correct path and the second is the initia de which can have in it X token staked there or just sitting there and so if there is H say whiff in that Dex and this later to use as whiff we can route usdc from any of the other rollups to buy some of that whiff to then use it as gas while you're making that transaction and so we can really clean up this experience that was created by my frustration using Cosmos because right now on Cosmos every token Every Chain uses a different token for gas you send some usdc to a new token or a new chain and then you can't pay to move those transactions then you have to go to osmosis to buy the gas token but then you don't have osmo on that chain so then you get stuck again um and I I've done that a few times and just given out and so I want to make sure that ux problem is solved that makes a lot of sense you briefly brought up uh skip Zone and uh I'm kind of curious with all the different uh initia rollups that are coming out you they obviously going to be you know infrastructure that's needed like RPC nodes oracles Etc um is your team planning on using like skips like Slinky uh sort of service for you know being able to uh you know for allow for any validators any nodes to kind of you know run their own Oracle more or less and kind of curious how you're planning on solving that problem I know different ecosystems have different plac for this but because he brought up skip uh love their team so it was just curious on your thoughts there yeah so um I went to college with both Magnus and Barry like we were all in the same year together so known each other for a while and they're definitely epic Builders within the cosmos ecosystem um and so we do have skip slinking on the layer one which means all of our validators get fresh prices every block they post to the chain and then we have a relaying service that essentially relays these prices to the layer twos so that they can be fetched atomically as well and on all the layer twos there is a uh mle prioritization system that exists there as well and so these Oracle prices happen at the top of every block even if the layer 2 is congested they will show up at the top of the block which is wonderful like now every Layer Two just has atomically fetchable prices very cool now I love that because there are a lot of ecosystems like op stack rollups polygon cdks Etc where there are these smaller roller providers that either have to roll their own Oracle solution or pay a hefty price to chain link and uh you know sometimes that's just a really tough position to be put in between so that's really cool that you guys kind of offer that through Slinky for sure that's one of the things that we we're talking about like making modular mono ethic again there's just so many choices right oracles n VI SDC bridging da providers interoperability all of those are kind of just enshrined into the initia system across the L2 and the L1 and then it's all just there and works and so you don't have to make those choices you can just focus on your app one thing I'm kind of worried about with the I guess making modular monolithic is the wallets um this is while I was trying out the test net I realized that you can use both Cosmos ones and evm ones and you guys have your own native wallet as well I want to understand how this works with minous specifically if it's a different VM do you have to use a different type of wallet how seamless are you guys looking to make that because I feel like that's the number one um potential difficulty Point as we kind of mentioned earlier both the ntia L1 and all the mentias themselves are Cosmos SDK based chains so actually all the signing has actually done on the cosmos side rather than the VM side um so you can use metam mask for example to sign on like a move minisha or use Leaf to sign on on like I don't know evm minisha or whatever um the only downside you will see from like these existing wallet providers is you won't be able to carry like your token balances for example you'll just know that you're signing the message right um but that's like a third party like you're using a third party application what they decide to support is a little bit out of our hands and so that's why we've built the initia wallet itself it's like how we envision The multi-chain Experience like how you should be able to move your assets between different types of Minas that are built with different VMS um how the swap should look how the send should work how should the user names work across a interchain system where there's like multiple different types of chains themselves um and then like how you like resolve a lot of the addresses on each of these chains themselves as well and so yeah that's kind of like why we built the the initial wallet itself we do allow for example metam Mass rabby Etc um because you know users are familiar with like Ravi on evm so maybe they prefer that even over like a a wallet that we think is better for the ecosystem but we give the users the choice to do this one of the things Dan mentioned was that if you are signing with an EPM wallet for example on a move minisha or Cosmos minisha you might not be able to see your tokens in the Wallet balance but that's one of the reasons we built the initial wallet widget which is what people use to connect their wallet with and if you just click that after you connect with Rabbi or something you can see all of your balances across all of the layer twos on initia as well as the L1 so making sure that there are product helpers and tools in place to solve some of those problems that are out of our hands because for example I only use rabby and I plan on to continue using Rabbi and so I want to make sure there is a solution that works for me that's good that makes sense um I know it's kind of potentially a bit risky to talk about the incentivized testnet but I want to bring it up because I went through it I actually quite like it um I think you guys took a cool approach with the Jenny and I kind of want to talk about not what it is right now but what you guys would have done differently from week one like because it's very cool I actually really really did enjoy it like compared to other incentivized test Nets I thought it was fun um but is there anything that I guess I want to get both of your takes on this as well is that something you would have done differently because we have a lot of them now a lot of incentivized death Nets and people might find it really helpful yeah I get this the I guess there's a few things that I think we could have definitely improved on um I think I generally like the mechanism like your onchain tamagachi kind of pet if you don't feed it it will die Etc I think that's kind of fun um it's kind of the reason why we decided to implement this um I think there's two things that we were kind of plagued with in the beginning the first was obviously we didn't expect so much interest in the test net when we first launched so there's a lot of bots a lot of just general users as well um and so the chain was very clogged in the early days right and obviously people were spamming the faucet to get test note tokens um and then trying to try out the test Nets I think like we probably could have worked a little bit better on basically like um basically estimating the demand the initial demand and like how much throw put we would have needed as well as just like you know gaing the faucet a little bit more heavily instead of just allowing anybody to claim x amount of x amount of gas tokens um yeah so I think like those were like our biggest troubles in the first few I guess like first week of test net maybe Zan has some other ones as well yeah so I'd say okay definitely demand was a problem there was 140,000 requests per second hitting our RPC nodes within the first few days like that was just existing which is insane that's like that's so many requests per second everything broke um so that was crazy and because our faucet had social logins it had a capture and it even had proof of work which means you have to use computational resources of your device to like prove that this is not like a little dinky um thing it's like a real device and all of that got destroyed by Bots by people everything else and so we had to implement gitcoin passport which did a great job at gating people that are uh presumed human but it also cuts out a decent chunk of users that for example have only used Solana or only use Cosmos so I wish we had had the forethought of building like a much more robust system around fet so that anyone would be able to access it but I still don't know how to solve that problem um the second thing would be um staggering some of the launches so we had a bunch of mishas I think we have maybe four or five um that are live right now on testnet um I would have preferred to do maybe a couple for day one and then roll out some of the others as test night goes along um so that there's just new interesting things to play with every time I think the program did a very good job at what we wanted though which was getting people in trying out Anisha and then pushing them to use layer twos and already explore them like our whole goal at Anisha is like help layer two teams win and so one of the first ways to do that is help these layer twos test their applications get feedback get early users and funnel all the users that came to farm our test net into trying out those layer twos is like the main goal that we had um and it worked 140,000 requests per second is insane um I I mean you guys obviously I mean I don't even think you underestimated demand I think just like you didn't expect I guess a bot swarm in the end um did you guys end up upgrading up grading it so that it can handle all of that or did you only do gitcoin passport fixes and then I guess we made a lot of RPC updates um we switched to basically this thing that we call the Giga RPC um with a team called new metric um and that is much better at handling demand and throughput right now the the basic Cosmos SDK client has like all sorts of mutex locks which means that like when you're dealing with aquarium you can't do other things at the same time which is insane I don't think the problem is that a lot of Cosmos chains just aren't used to their full extents and once you have enough demand everything breaks and so we had to deal with a lot of those problems and it also means that in the future we know that there's so many things to fix um also one of the bigger problems was there was um I think 40,000 people that ran validators on like toaster ovens which means that in in Comet bft right it treats basically all nodes whether they're active or inactive as the same and so traffic doesn't get directed just to the active nodes which means if you have 95 or 99% of the network on these toaster ovens that cannot handle the throughput of the chains or of the chain um when transactions get sent to them they're just going to get lost which created a big problem of like just transactions just getting dropped or lost because they weren't going to the real active validators and so we had to do um create like a private validator ring and then a guardian node system around that um and that was like a major unlock um it also means that I think we're g to have to rebuild comet bft in the near future that's been done a few times now I feel like everybody faces that issue with the comet BFD and stuff they have to impl their own version of it people are doing a good job now though like um Dev from osmosis he has been a godsend he has been just going hard at fixing a lot of comet bft so I'm pretty eager to see the next release before we wrap it up I um obviously you're making a really big bet on modularity and rollups and we've had a few lines um making modular monolithic again is a good one I want to see I want to kind of understand how you see that develop over the next few years thousands of rollups yes but what does that look practically and I guess how do you convince people to that and you guys are making some steps on this but at the end of the day Solana is monolithic and more fun to use I would say than something like the cosmos at this point so kind of want to get the modular shell plus the Thousand rollup feces from you guys yeah I think it's the modular mullet in some sense right like you abstract everything away on the front end and then you kind of have like the modular back end um how we add a little bit to that is making sure everything's actually interoperable within this backend um ecosystem right so making sure that your assets are freely movable fre freely movable in like a smooth manner as well um making sure that you have like the necessary tooling as a developer like the stuff that you would expect to be really basic right like kind of the vision in some sense um if you want to make like a comparison is like to the iOS ecosystem right you don't need as an app veler you only need to focus on building your application itself um everything is there for you if you need access like inapp purchases if you need access the camera or whatever like these are not products built by you they're built by somebody else um but you're able to very easily access it and integrate to your application and we kind of Envision a similar thing for web three where if you need an oracle if you need Oracle data if you need native usdc if you need cctp if you need some sort of bridging like that's all given to you already right you just need to look into where where I where to use it um and so in similar vein we kind of really Envision this ecosystem where all these applications you're not really flipping through chains right you're just flipping through different applications that lie on one single individual platform and so that's like our kind of our thesis with regards to like how we envision um a user using applications in a modular ecosystem yeah I think also like salana is awesome suie is also awesome you have all these fast throughput chains and like I said earlier I just don't think they're going to be able to get to the scale that we need still do you remember when the dupe airdrop happened I couldn't claim my tokens for like days that shouldn't be happening on the world's Global Financial system um and so I think just naturally we are going to have chains because one it's better for isolation of traffic and two um people want to retain the value that they create like ultimately I want to own all the different parts of my tech stack I want to vertically integrate it and I want to make sure that um I'm getting every piece of value that we're building out here like the that's just the natural movement that these applications will take into like building their own stacks and so ensuring that every one of these Stacks can come together nicely as a nice ux and interface they have everything they need um and then we create these interesting incentive design mechanisms with initia VIP is the best way to go about like the long-term future of crypto where there is going to be thousands of apps but they are all going to be interwoven perfect last up where do you want our listeners going to how can they find out more about adisha and is there anything specific that they should be focusing on so twitter.com sorry x.com initia fdn or go to initia doxyz those are the places to to learn more um take part of testnet if you'd like we have part two going right now it'll last for about three more weeks and then we should have um mainnet not too long after that so come hop into the ecosystem get chatten check out some of the rollups that are being built on the interwoven stack and then we'll see you at mainnet soon TM Z Stan thank you for coming on I really appreciate it nille do you have anything no all good thanks for making modular monolithic again guys thank you for are you currently building on polygon or interested in migrating season one of the polygon Community grants program is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon projects builders on polygon these grants are for you join the aggregated future today by applying at polygon.net [Music] w

========================================

--- Video 97 ---
Video ID: gM5Z1ZBXQTk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gM5Z1ZBXQTk
Title: Finding Bullish Themes in the Crypto Wreckage | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-08-07 16:07:36 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Blockworks Research analysts try to navigate the crypto carnage. They discuss Coinbase’s recent earnings report, and potential solutions for a crypto index. Additionally, they cover the dominance of stablecoin provider business models, how to potentially gain exposure to these businesses, and whether or not PayPal can compete with established giants in the space. Finally, they present the bull and bear cases for Avalanche adoption.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Stablecoin Volumes Chart: https://app.artemis.xyz/stablecoins?chain=solana

Reth: Accelerating Base, Optimism & Symbiotic: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1819042025200820294
--
Special thanks to your sponsor, Nillion!

Stay up-to-date with “Humanity’s first blind computer” by following Nillion on X: https://x.com/nillionnetwork
--
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Nikhil: https://x.com/0xnikhilchat
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:39 Is Jump Crypto Closing Shop?
5:31 Coinbase Earnings & A Potential Crypto Index
14:51 Gaining Exposure to Stablecoin Providers
19:33 How Can PayPal Compete in the Stablecoin Sector?
32:59 Nillion Snippet
40:35 The Avalanche Bull vs Bear Debate
56:08 What is Reth?
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 98 ---
Video ID: qHUDNHNEJxw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qHUDNHNEJxw
Title: Bringing ZK Proofs to Developers Everywhere | Uma Roy
Published: 2024-08-01 15:18:15 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Uma Roy, Co-founder and CEO of Succinct Labs, joined us to dive into the world of zkVMs! We cover Succinct’s Prover Network & SP1, why zkVMs are needed, and the importance of being open source. Additionally, we speculate on whether or not all rollups will eventually become zkRollups. Finally, we discuss Succinct’s go-to-market strategy, the market for zkVMs, and Succinct’s vision for the future.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Join us at Permissionless III. Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iii
--
Follow Succinct: https://x.com/SuccinctLabs
Follow Uma: https://x.com/pumatheuma
Follow Marc: https://x.com/marcarjoon
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:24 Why Are zkVMs Needed?
4:58 Tradeoffs vs Other VM Environments 
8:21 The Importance of Being Open Source
11:41 Decentralized Prover Networks
17:31 SP1: Primary Customers & Cost Improvements
22:51 Permissionless III Ad
24:05 Polygon Ad
24:56 Will All Rollups Become zkRollups?
28:32 Succinct's Go-to-Market Strategy
35:03 The Market for zkVMs
38:07 Audits, Proof Generation, and Succinct's Vision for the Future
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
the existing Paradigm is you have to have this team of like 30 to 50 people who are all like very specialized and then you hand code like a ZK system for the zkm so you like write this very complicated circuit it's very hard to audit and the problem with having this team that's built this very complicated ZK circuit is that if someone else wants to take your technology and use it as a rollup stack or framework it's very hard cuz like they can't modify it I think that's why when you look at the existing landscape of rollup stacks and like Ras broadly you'll see that op stack and the arbitrum stack is really popular because like it is very easy to modify it's you know um they they've been used a lot and so I think the yeah existing shortcomings of ZK rollups today is that you know it's really brittle and not that flexible the polygon Community grants program was launched with 1 billion tokens all four polygon Builders season 1 is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon products builders on polygon these grants are for you join the aggregated future today by applying at polygon.net on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice bachio Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of zerox research today we're joined by Uma the co-founder of sixin thanks for joining us Uma hello thanks for having me um before we get started do you want to tell us a little bit about what you guys are building over at sixin yeah um so at the synct we're building um the tools to make ZK easy and accessible to all developers uh in particular we're building a ZK VM a ZK virtual machine called sp1 that allows any developer to just write normal rest code and then use ZK and we're also building a decentralized pro Network so that any developer using sp1 can generate proofs using the pro Network without having to have their own infrastructure and get proofs provided by a wide variety of these provs on the network what inspired you guys to build six what were some of the problems that you guys wanted to solve yeah so my co-founder John and I we had been working in the ZK space for a little bit uh in particular had been working on some particular applications and use cases of ZK and we had seen firsthand that ZK was really really difficult um you had to write these custom circuits it required a lot of specialized expertise you had to have a deep knowledge of cryptography and it took a really long time to take all these things to production and we realized that ZK wasn't going to go mainstream or get adopted if it continued down that path um and the holy gra of ZK has always been that people can just write normal code and it just works um and we we also really believed in that vision and that's what inspired us to build sp1 which to just make ZK really easy and accessible to any person not just someone with an advanced cryptography PhD that makes sense um and the SP sp1 is a ZK VM how does what does that exactly look like and why are ZK EVMS needed historically in ZK uh you've needed to write your function that you want to prove as this thing called a circuit um where you basically write your function in terms of these like primitive operations like additions and multiplications and you know maybe some other Primitives but it looks a lot like coding with assembly so it's super low level it's very difficult it takes a long time with the ZK virtual machine what happens is you have normal rust code it gets compiled to a particular bike code format so in our case it gets compiled to the risk 5 Isa so similar to how solidity in the evm gets compiled to the evm bik code and then we provve the execution of risk five um with your particular program with a set of particular inputs so instead of proving your particular function or comp computation we have a circuit that proves risk 5 and then any program any risk five program can be proven by our virtual machine uh and why that's really powerful is now uh you can just write normal code compile it to risk five which is a standard uh compilation Target supported by uh rust's compiler so it's like a very standard Target we didn't have to modify the compiler or anything like that and then any rust code can get proven within sp1 that's awesome so kind of um cuts down a lot of the development time you don't need to know circuits to write it you just need to know rust or maybe some other kind of like llvm but um so when you were making this what did you notice any of the tradeoffs it has over other VM environments or other types of like CK proof generation yeah so the main I mean the dream of Just Right rust get appr proof is it is kind of the dream um and so the tradeoff or like historically why it hasn't been done is that it's been really slow so of course it's like similar to any normal program where if you spend a lot of effort you write it all in assembly it might end up being faster than if you just write it in like a higher level language um and so historically ZK PMS have been much slower than if you wrote circuits um one of SP one's like biggest Innovations was that it was actually really fast and performant and so it kind of made ZK BMS actually practical for the first time for real use cases and and there's like a bunch of techniques we have in sp1 to make that possible uh both on the ZK algorithm side um and also on the performance engineering side um I guess one of our biggest techniques is this usage of or this notion of pre-compiled where basically one key realization we had is that for most workloads that people care about for example uh verifying you know the ethereum state transition function for ZK rollups or verifying a proof of consensus for bridging uh or really any of these things uh most of the time and most of the Prov overhead comes from very repetitive cryptographic operations like hash functions and signature schemes and those can be really expensive in a zvm because you are spending a lot of Cycles doing this very computationally intensive thing and we realize that um if you are able to have a specialized circuit for that particular operation and have that within your VM you can kind of get the best of both worlds where you have the performance of circuits where you need it and then you have the flexibility of the VM so for us uh in our zkm sp1 we have pre-compiled for catac and Shaw uh these are like very common hash functions used in ethereum Worlds and for a bunch of signature verification schemes and that makes our VM super super performant and actually practical uh so in practice we've actually found that our VM ends up being a lot faster and a lot better than even the circuits we used to write uh because with our VM also we can optimize it a lot because it's so Broad and it's such a big platform uh that every Improvement to it improves so many different use cases that we can spend a lot of engineering effort optimizing it and so in practice we've actually found that it's a lot better than circuits and it's a lot easier to build in because it's just writing normal code uh so it's actually kind of strictly better than old Paradigm um yeah in both in all Dimensions like latency speed cost and developer experience that's awesome it's not often that in blockchain you get like something like peretto efficient with you know the tradeoffs are like so much more worth it um I can definitely see how those like pre-compiled will make things a lot like faster and easier just a quick couple questions on that um do does succinct make all of the promiles can other people make their own and if they can make their own are they allowed to share it with the rest of the network as well yeah so sp1 is fully open source and one of the reasons we made it like that other than of course that being really important for security and auditability uh like if it's not open source who knows what you're actually proving um is that we wanted anyone to be able to contribute a pre-compile um to sp1 and actually a few external teams have already done this for like their specific use case so for example if you have a particular workload it has a very specific computational bottleneck you can write your own pre-compile and then incorporate it into sp1 uh for right now actually the CNC team has written all the pre- compiles uh that are used um because honestly there's not that many functions that are bottlenecks um and so the current ones we have are kind of enough um but in the future we hope we're like super happy to take external contributions from other teams uh for like commonly common pre-ms that we think will be beneficial to a lot of people related to you guys being open sours it's actually something that I read that you guys touch up on is that you're modularly architected I kind of want to ask about why this is important and I guess how other ZK VMS have gone wrong or they've done wrong in terms of being close Source yeah so I think first first of all being open source is just really really important for security and auditability like if you don't know what the constraints are then how do you know what's actually getting proven um and so open source from that perspective I think is a must have uh open source is also really nice because as I said now the community can add their own pre-compiled they can modify it they can build on top of it so for example um some people want to verify sp1 proofs on a layer like Bitcoin or something like that or you know different execution environments and because it's open source they can take the proof system they can maybe modify parameters and it's just really customizable and flexible and I think for example you've seen being fully open source and modular has really helped something like the op stack take off and kind of become the canonical rollup deployment stack um because it's easy to customize um you know there's no risk of you know there's no licensing risk or anything like that and so um for us like we view it very similarly like um our prover network is kind of like where we think we'll be able to provide and users with value so like sp1 is open source but running it on your laptop isn't really a fun time I think most people will want to use sp1 via the prover network uh so we feel really good about that and we think that open source just makes it so that there's more Community around it it becomes the canonical shelling Point VM you can have a ver ified in a bunch of different environments you can have a rich community of like pre-compiled um and yeah I think that's why we open source is really key to like our strategy yeah that makes sense so it's kind of like you it also helps to bootstrap The Proven Network that you're you're also trying to build right now um and then you know speaking of that I think that's like something that's probably missing from the industry right now like a let's just say like a decentralized Prov Network like is that something that you can talk about a little bit more and maybe even like more generally for the audience the proof supply chain yeah so I think today generally um if you want to use a ZK um generally like most teams are running their own provs in the cloud and one aspect of ZK is that the proofs are self-verifying so there's no trust assumptions with teams just running provs in the cloud right like that's totally fine they can't generate false proofs um but I think there's a lot of advantages of a network um one is that you know it is important in the end that it is decentralized for like censorship resistance and liveness guarantees and things like that I think more importantly um if it's decentralized and there's kind of like a competitive pricing mechanism for all um provs in the network uh it'll lead to like better price competition and then also drive down the price of proving uh so I think that's another thing that's not talked about much for Prov networks is that it can actually reduce costs and reduce latency by inducing this competitive environment between a bunch of different provs or kind of competing against each other to generate proofs for people so in that sense it kind of looks like a Marketplace uh with really good decentralization liveness guarantees and like price guarantees um and yeah I think there is no currently live prover Network um we're working on building one uh as a part of you know sp1 uh today I like to say that we kind of have a prover network with one prover which is us uh so if you want to use sp1 you don't have to use it on your laptop in fact I recommend you don't use it on your laptop because again that's not going to really be a fun time uh you just change one environment variable you can send proofs to the pro Network um and we'll generate the proofs for you and send them back and then as we get like further along that we're going to we've architected in a way where uh we're not the only we don't have to be the only provs on the network and as we go further along that path and develop it out more we're going to start onboarding more provs and yeah actually making it a real network with like many many different people participating what does that onboarding process look like onboarding new provs and what's the timeline for that I think that's something uh we'll focus on over like the next few months um in terms of onboarding I think it's actually pretty simple uh you just talk to our um our networks like so generally what happens is you have an application that's trying to use ZK whether it be a rollup or a bridge it sends a request to RPC dosc doxyz uh that gets stored and then if you're approver uh you can like talk to the RPC you can claim proofs and say hey I'm going to uh claim this proof and then I'm going to actually generate it and then once you generated it you fulfill um the proof and you say okay I submitted my proof the proof gets verified and then you get payment for it um and so I think the onboarding process will look like pretty simple you just have to like basically have methods for claiming and fulfilling and then actually generating the proofs um and then different provs can also for example do like Hardware acceleration of sp1 or really optimize where they're running the sp1 pr so for example you might have like a better costs if you're running your prover is not in AWS and stuff like that um yeah so I kind of like imagine that is uh how the onboarding process will play out um and for for The Proven Network have has any thought been given into like what what fees that the provs will be rewarded in and um is will will there be any like staking to make them accountable yeah so one important thing in the network is that the provs so the provs you don't have trust assumptions on the provs right because like they can't generate a false proof unless there's a bug uh but the hard part is making sure that they don't grief the system so it's bad if approver says hey I'm going to generated proof and then doesn't actually end up doing it um and there's a few different mechanisms for ensuring this like accountability and ensuring there's not these like griefing attacks basically and we're kind of still thinking through the mechanism design on that side it's so that's still pretty early but we have some interesting ideas that um yeah maybe we will talk about in the next like few months oh okay that's interesting um uh do you think that it will be more I don't know if you can answer this but do you think it'll be more you will use an internal kind of staking mechanism or maybe you'll use something like iron layers reaking um I think for enan Lay um generally for Igan layer reaking you have like existing ethereum node operators just running more services but I think proving is a very very Specialized Service that maybe it doesn't like if you're an ethereum node operator it also makes sense that you'd be running nodes for other networks I think proving looks pretty different from that right like you may need gpus you may need like specialized hardware and stuff like that so I'm not sure that reaking based networks necessarily make the most sense um so yeah I'm not sure yet um as to like what exactly that'll look like that makes sense um I kind of want to talk about the sp1 and who you view as the primary customers for is it rollups and app chains and if it is is it new ones um existing ones I think our primary customer for like the next you know year or so is rollups I think every rollup is going to be a ZK rollup like I I've you know talked about this a few times like the current Paradigm of all this optimistic rollup and kind of this like infrastructure soup that's needed to get them working like you have liquidity layers and then LPS on top of the liquidity layers and then like a bunch of different Bridges with like varying trust assumptions and then you know all this stuff I think all this stuff fundamentally doesn't really work and it's also really expensive like people like to think ZK is expensive and um I I mean the costs of ZK are rapidly coming down because it's like we're making progress on the algorithms of Technology but the cost of like all this you know Mosaic of infrastructure is not coming down because fundamentally there is like this cost of capital uh there's this cost of having Capital locked up for seven days and then there's this cost that needs to be paid to all these infra teams and it introduces like a lot of friction so I actually think optimistic rollups are very expensive people like to say oh today it's free well I think that's a total myth like it's not actually free it's just the costs are much more hidden and then paid by the users and it's like a lot more off fiscated as what's actually going on but I wouldn't be surprised if it was actually like eight figures or even like low nine figures for big chains being paid out to like all these different teams and all the LPS and all the layers and all the bridge fees and stuff like that um and so for me I think like yeah the current Paradigm of optimistic rollups is not really going to make it um it doesn't really scale which is maybe not even that surprising cuz it's not I think like true scaling right like ZK is actually scaling it's like actually verifiable compute the optimistic stuff's more of like a it's like a clever trick um and yeah so I think every Rob's going to be a ZK rollup I think the only way ZK rollups are really going to work is with a ZK VM like the existing Paradigm of writing a complicated circuit uh specialized for the evm that's like impossible to upgrade when the evm upgrades it's like really un auditable it's like hundreds of thousands of lines of code like I think that doesn't really work and so I think every ZK rollup is going to use a ZK VM and then I think like we want to be the best ckvm and so yeah I think for the next you know year so we just think we just want to convert all rollups to using sp1 like that's our our biggest Focus um I think there's also other use cases like Bridges and interoperability so for example polygon's AG layer protocol which is like an interoperability protocol is built using sp1 I think they're doing like a lot of really awesome work bridging obviously is in like a similar category and so we're working with like Celestia and ail to bridge their da layers to ethereum using sp1 um and then there's a bunch of like Oracle use cases so I think those are all big use cases but I think rollups will be like rollups are a really high volume use case that I think we're very excited about that makes sense I have two questions uh following up from that one is one thing you mentioned is that ZK costs have come down quite a bit and one thing I feel like I hear pared a lot is that ZK is expensive ensive and like optimistic grows are cheap can you I guess paint more of a picture of how much ZK costs have come down and how that's like what has happened over the last year year and a half maybe that it's become drastically cheaper yeah totally I mean I think even with sp1 I think we originally released it in like February or March and since then we ourselves have improved our own performance and cost by like 5X and we have like this long list of ideas and notion um to improve the costs by another 5 to 10x by the end of the year and so I kind of see that every day very viscerally like we wake up in the morning we go to the office at 10: a.m. and our number one priori is just like make sp1 cheaper and faster and better and like every week basically we improve it by a little bit um and we have so many ideas on how to improve it way more so I think like for me actually like I've seen even the cost of sp1 go down by 5x in a few months and I see like what we're working on to make that that Trend continue so I kind of like know it to be intuitively true um in terms of metrics for example uh for the existing ZK rollups uh so like ZK sync polygon zkm scroll the proving costs are actually pretty small um compared to like fees paid to ethereum for da or like you know verifying proofs on ethereum which can be expensive it's like 200k gas or 300K gas um and so the proving costs are actually already pretty small I think it ends up being like maybe between 0.1 Cent to 1 cent per transaction which is like pretty cheap um and yeah I think that was totally Unthinkable even like a few years ago and I think it's only getting like cheaper and cheaper hey guys permissionless the event for crypto natives is heading west to Salt Lake City and we're bringing the biggest names in crypto together for an incredible can't miss event join me in the rest of block works on October 9th to hear for more than 200 Industry Titans including Nick white from Celestia shiram from Igan and Keon from Mona the conversations that permission list will be covering the hottest themes in crypto including modularity reaking the Bitcoin and Solon ecosystems Ai and crypto rollups l2s institutional adoption and of course the November election that will be right around the corner we couldn't be more excited about this event and it's happening in one of the most beautiful places in the US ticket prices will be increasing towards the end of June so get your ticket today make sure to use the code so I get some credit and bragging rights from the rest of the team uh use ZX10 for 10% off on your ticket one more thing we're also hosting the permissionless recka font in collaboration with bbx the theme this year is a multi-chain future to build a better cross chain experience so I don't have to have a heart attack every time I bridge to a new chain all Hacker found participants will receive a free ticket to attend permissions so if you're a developer come join us in Salt Lake City team up with fellow devs and build the multi-chain future polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open- source ZK Tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases empowering developers to grow in a unified web of interoperable chains with the a layer the a layer is a machine for Network effect don't worry about boost wrapping liquidity just build anywhere in the a layer to tap the liquidity and users everywhere to support the aggregated future and boost quality project the polygon Community grants program was launched with 1 billion tokens All For polygon Builders season one of the community grants program is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon projects for Builders on polygon or projects interested in migrating these grants are for you join the aggregated future and feel empowered to grow in an infinite web of unified interoperable chains apply today at polygon.net ZK well you said that everything will be a ZK roll all rollups will be a ZK rollup um we'll talk a bit more about that later that sounds interesting but I just wanted to ask what you think of current ZK rollups and you said that they you mentioned a bit that their VMS are having issues and they're overly complex but in general like how do you view that space right now yeah I think with existing ZK rollups obviously their teams are like super talented they started like a while ago um but the existing Paradigm is you have to have this team of like you know 30 to 50 people who are all like very specialized you know experts in cryptography and then you hand code like a ZK system for the zkm so you like write this very complicated circuit it's very hard to audit um it's very hard to upgrade right like the evm is always upgrading like every six months to one year you have to keep up with that and I think the hardest part is that now we're in this world where there's like app chains and people people want to really like customize their rollups and the problem with you know for example having this team that's built this very complicated ZK circuit is that if someone else wants to take your technology and use it as a rollup stack or framework it's very hard because like they can't modify it um say they want to add a pre-compile like good luck that's that's not really going to work uh say they want to even adjust the gas schedule it looks very complicated so I think that's why when you look at the existing landscape of rollup stacks and like Ras broadly you'll see that op stack and the arbitrum stack is really popular because like it is very easy to modify it's you know um they've they've been used a lot and so I think the yeah existing shortcomings of ZK rups today is that you know it's really brittle and not that flexible and I think that's also even problematic for the teams because like if you know a significant portion of the best Engineers on your team have to spend all this time in overhead um maintaining the ZK stuff that's l less time that they can spend on like making the sequencer better or you know improving user experience or you know doing other things um and so that's why I think basically every rollup will become a ZK rollup because that's kind of inevitable like I think that's the technological endgame it has so many benefits for interoperability and therefore like user experience but the way that's going to happen is not going to be through the existing way of people doing zare rollups it's going to be through ZK VMS and I think like op stock uh for example will have like a ZK option in the future uh where there's like a full ZK version um of op stack and like people can just use that and it's like write it in Rust you want to add a pre-compile okay cool you just like write it in Rust yeah I want to e Echo that um that Trend that I do think that the current optimistic rollups will become ZK Roll-Ups in the future I mean I think it's already like built like they're making it easy in their modular stock to like switch off the type of proofs that they use so yeah I agree with that um curious to know like vers maybe versus other rollups so maybe with to syncs specifically um what type of Hardware is syct using to generate the proofs um for us today sp1 can be proven on CPU and also GPU um so we have like both CPU and GPU provs um on our prover Network right now uh we're doing GPU proving so it's just like cheaper and um more cost efficient or yeah cheaper and more cost effici and then also faster um yeah uh Curious to hear how you guys are like approaching go to market for six how do you incentivize people to build using SP sp1 um what like incentives do you have planned I think so far there's honestly been like a lot of really organic interest in building using sp1 like I think a lot of these rollup teams really realize that um they kind of will like need ZK or will need ZK and so we've been working with a lot of rollup teams um for example polygon I think is one of the bigger Partnerships we announced recently where polygon's new protocol agair is built with sp1 uh polygon obviously has like a ton of ZK expertise um they wrote this Library called Pony 3 that's like an implementation of fry and Starks which is kind of like the underlying proof system behind sp1 and we use that Library so we've been really happy like collaborating with them in like an open source capacity but I think as they were building agare they realized you know writing custom circuits for agir in plony 3 or something like that was going to take like a lot of time and a lot of effort and really the hard part about building something like AG is making the protocol good doing the BD for it you know making the ecosystem and yeah it's a pretty non-trivial protocol to like get all the pieces correct um and so I think they realized oh we can just write once we have the protocol for us to be able to write it in Rust and just use sp1 to generate proofs is like such a no-brainer because it's fast it's cheap and now like two Engineers on our team can spend a few weeks writing it instead of having to have like this huge team of like 10 or 20 people spending months writing it and not having it be maintainable or upgradeable um and so I think with polygon agir like it really solved a real problem for them um and let them go to market a lot faster and have like a much smaller team working on it um and I think for a lot of other use cases we've had it's like very similar where it's like Oh either we'd have to hire like a really big team or we wouldn't be able to do this at all and so S1 solving a real problem for them and I think we're just very focused on like solving real problems for people um similarly to the rollup teams I think optimism especially has built their stack in this very like modular futureproof way um they are big Believers that like okay when the ZK Tech is ready we'll plug it in and that's kind of like why they architected their stack in that way and so we've also been working with them on getting like SP an sp1 version of op stock um and again I do think that solves a real problem for them uh in the future of like with inter operability and um you know their longer term plans to make all these like op stock Ras chains feasible um so yeah I think overall like our go to market is really focused on solving real problems for like real customers um and it's really nice CU it's very easy on our end we don't have to do that much like all the developers just write rust so we obviously try to help people and provide them support but yeah most of the hard part isn't usually the sp1 integration it's like actually just writing your program that makes sense I um so you guys are building with OP stack to integrate sp1 and this is like I know the arbitrum team is obviously also working on there and to do some Z um proof system I um kind of want to ask a bit maybe this isn't particularly related to like it's more about rups but how do you view that does it make more sense to I guess start off as an optimistic rollup and then move on to adopt ZK proofs or well now we're coming to a point where costs have come down drastically or do you think it makes more sense to approach it like let's get it right from the very beginning that ZK is the endgame approach I think for example with op and arbitrum they were able to like go to market a lot faster cuz they started as optimistic rollup or I guess in op's case they didn't have fault proofs for a long time so they just kind of started as a rollup and then um they got to Market a lot faster they got a lot of tvl they built out like deps they have like users and network effects so I think that makes sense and now I think they're going to transition to ZK rollups um you know hopefully using rtech um and ZK VMS broadly so I think that like go to market totally makes sense I think now with ZK though for example say you're building a new rollup or a new rollup framework or like an app specific rollup I think it just makes sense to start with ZK from day one because the technolog is already ready uh and it's honestly like maybe even easier to build it than having to build out this whole optimistic fall proof system like the optimistic fall proofs are actually pretty complicated like the op team's really really smart and like full of really amazing engineers and there is a reason it took them such a long time to get fall proofs working it is a very complicated system and so I think if you're an existing team that has like already brought your product to Market has existing users in network effects transitioning absolutely makes sense to ZK now but if you're a new team it makes sense to start with ZK from day one because I actually think it's like an easier experience like we provide something that's out of the box you just write rust and it just works um I I think you actually see this a lot in like the Bitcoin rollup ecosystem where like if you're building a Bitcoin rollup today I think everyone 's doing ZK because there's like they kind of have this like technological leap frogging frogging effect where uh for example in the United States first people had PCS and then they had mobile phones but then if you look in the developing world no one really ever had a PC they just straight went straight to mobile and I think with the Bitcoin rollups it's kind of like they never did the optimistic stuff because it was like their ecosystem obviously came alive I think a lot later um they're just all doing ZK from day one and so that's I kind of Imagine that all the rollups starting now would that you know we will'll really Leap Frog and just start with ZK from day one because it is like kind of the end game of all this stuff and it's also much simpler I think that's great and I guess it must say something like you know optimism is looking to use sp1 polygon is using it for the arer and like you said they have a team full of experts so I mean I think it speaks volumes when they're using that using tools that succin develops to help like speed up their process and go to Market faster for themselves so I mean with that in mind um what would you say the market for ZK VMS looks like in a few years is it a like a winner takes all or do you see it being like a highly competitive space maybe like an oligopoly or something like that well I like to think it'll be Winner Takes all and like we'll be the winner um I think there's a lot of like kind of weak Network effects from a VM where for example like if we have a really rich community of like pre-compiled like that's really nice or if we have a really rich community of Integrations or you know even for example like the security story like oh this has been used in production and we like kind of start to trust it um I think for example you kind or you there's a lot of developer tooling around it I think you kind of see that with like the evm to a certain extent um and you kind of see that with like any developer tool that there's like these you know once a bunch of developers use it it kind of snowballs into more and more developers using it um and having you know really great developer experience that you can like comp compound and refine over time um and then I think there's like also weak Network effects from like the pro Network where it's like the more proofs the pro Network gets the more efficient it can be the more provs you'll have they'll invest more in like optimizing their proof generation costs and then um you'll get this really nice flywheel where like they will have the cheapest proofs and then more people will use proofs and then you kind of get this like flywheel Network effect as well um and yeah I think that's like what we're trying to build both with sp1 and like cultivating this really rich open source developer community and then also having this Pro Network where it really drives down cost and latency and then enables more people to use like more proofs perfect I um we touched up on this a little bit but I kind of want to get more color on how a rollup would integrate s sp1 um could you expand on that a bit yeah so if you're a rollup like what does it mean to become a ZK rollup you need a implementation of your state transition function uh in ZK uh and so I think for example we work with a few new rollup teams like Tao and Sovereign and there's some other ones where from day one they're coding their state transition function in Rust and they're already like proving it with sp1 from day one or they have that very top of mine from day one and then you need to make your Bridge basic basically verify ZK proofs so you have your Bridge contract on ethereum and then it needs to verify a ZK proof of your state transition function and then it'll have your rollup State Route and then you can use that to like bridge in and out of ethereum so if you're a rollup team you want to integrate with sp1 you just need to implement your state transition function in asp1 generate proofs integrate some sort of like sequencer to like call to the pro Network get the proofs and then submit them on chain and then also you know modify your solidity smart contracts to accept S1 proofs and um yeah get use that as a source of truth of what your rollup is uh on ethereum um have have the pre-compiled been audited in um for bis sync or anybody else yeah our whole system is audited uh we've done a couple audits with two really top tier ZK teams um that have audited like scroll and axium and like a bunch of other rollups before um and that definitely includes the pre- compiles um like we care a lot about security and obviously if you're using pre- compiles it's very important that they're correct and then we've also um hosted a public audit competition uh with Cantina which is like run by spearit so this was like a public competition anyone could participate uh I think there were like you know dozens if not more participants to like look at the code and find you know any potential vulnerabilities um yeah there was actually a lot of really smart people across the world that participated it was super awesome to see um and like super inspiring that like totally random people um studied our system understood it surprisingly well uh it is pretty complex and like they um yeah had a really great understanding um and so yeah those are that's kind of like the audit security um overview of sp1 and does it does it make it easier too because it's in rust or is that just another layer of of complexity added oh to audit it yeah um I think like the like so rust is a memory safe language um I think mostly for auditing though that doesn't matter too much you're mostly auditing like the circuits and like making sure it's constrained properly uh so the circuits can be expressed in like whatever language really um I think it helps it's in like plon our circuits are expressed with like Pony 3s system for you know constraining those things and that's kind of like standardized so I think that helps a little bit um but yeah I don't think they're rust helps that much with auditing okay makes sense what do the sixin end game look like what is your like apart from sp1 and the prer network what what else are you guys focused on what else is coming up I think for us like we're just really laser focused on getting sb1 to be like as cheap and as fast as possible getting it integrated into every rollup stocks or really making that vision of like every rollups a ZK rollup with S1 come true um like every application in crypto that wants to use DK uses sp1 um and then yeah building out this Pro Network to make the costs and latency of proving like as cheap as possible and also decentralized um so I think already that's like a lot of work um and we're really focused on that um I think something I'm excited about in like the longer term though is that ZK I think has a lot of applications even outside of just crypto and blockchain so rollups is just like the shortterm one to twoyear plan I think on the three to five year time Horizon you could imagine a lot of use cases outside of crypto even in web to so for example today you know you have these like Credit Union companies that are like issuing you your credit score and right now like they have basically no accountability right where they can just like modify people's credit scores with without you know any recourse and it'd be really nice if there was a aspect of verifiability in that where you know that they're applying updates um according to like some set of like known rules that we've all agreed upon that are like transparent and verifiable so you can imagine like this idea of like verifiable servers just beyond rollups being like really important uh for a lot of companies um that are you know really trusted today um there's like a tested image editing where like I think we're increasingly in this world where it's like really hard to tell like is an image coming from a real thing a real camera or is it just coming from like mid journey and so you could imagine that in the future you have like all these cameras basically signed that hey came from real camera and then you do these like verifiable Transformations on top of it so I think there's a lot of like really interesting use cases Beyond Roll-Ups in crypto that I'm really excited about in like the longer term um and yeah excited to see like come about that that Vision where you know it it's used less outside of the blockchain network more for those kind of use cases you described does that would that require its own network or are we talking like client side proof generation some of that might so for example for the verifiable server they could just use the pro Network like they don't really require privacy they just want verifiability you can just use the pro Network for privacy use cases um that would require some amount of client side proof generation for tested image editing there's not really privacy it's just like verifiable transformation so that doesn't really require um clide proving but then yeah there's also a bunch of other interesting privacy focused applications that have client side proving as well you said client side proving for privacy how how would that work would it would you need like proof aggregation or like how exactly would that work yeah I think basically you would generate a proof um you know in your web browser on your computer or in a mobile app and then that proof like wouldn't be that succinct and then maybe but it would you know hide things and make them private and then you could send it to the Prov Network to shrink it and make it more succinct I kind of Imagine That being how like client side proving would play out is you basically like do a really fast proof that's not that succinct because there's in general this trade-off between Pro time and like um how it's distinct and like short it is so you you do a private proof very fast not that compressed and then you send the pro Network to compress it and make it really small um yeah that's um so it's kind of like wrapping proofs you're like wrapping one of it one is quick to verify one is quick to generate and you're getting the best of both RS basically yeah yeah yeah exactly okay gotcha um before we wrap it up one where do you want to Point our listeners towards how can they find out more about six synct or I guess like is there anything they should specifically be focusing on yeah well if you're like excited to BU with ZK you can go to our docs uh it's docs. sn. XYZ you can go to our website uh and then yeah you can follow us on Twitter at succinct labs and follow me I'm at Puma the Uma um and yeah I think those are all pretty good resources um we have some blog posts talking about like sp1 why it's awesome um and yeah like it's very easy to try out like on purpose so yeah I always encourage people to try it out and like see it um and see kind of the magic I think especially if you've worked with ZK before it's really like night and day like the I I mean as someone myself who used to do that stuff I think there's been so many moments where I was like oh my God I can't believe this is possible like I just import a library I import like the Sur library and rust or the Json library or revm or reth and it just works like wow my God this this would have used to taken me months and now I do it in like an hour um and so yeah for ZK people I always encourage them to just try it out and see for themselves because there's like that is like Irreplaceable feeling of like being like Oh my God this is like really a new paradigm it's like such a big shift that sounds awesome um I'll make sure to include those links thank you so much for coming on um yeah for sure thanks for having me are you currently building on polygon or interested in migrating season one of the polygon Community grants program is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon projects builders on polygon these grants are for you join the aggregated future today by applying at polygon.net [Music]

========================================

--- Video 99 ---
Video ID: S2aVBqaf8PY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S2aVBqaf8PY
Title: Exploring DeFi: Restaking, Stablecoins, and Governance Attacks | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-07-31 14:57:10 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Blockworks Research analysts discuss what’s happening in DeFi today. They cover the recent success of Kamino Finance, Jito’s restaking announcement, and the recent AAVE Governance proposals. Additionally, they talk about PayPal’s entrance into the DeFi space with their PYUSD stablecoin. Finally, they unpack the recent Compound Finance governance attack. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Join us at Permissionless III. Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iii
--
Follow Nikhil: https://x.com/0xnikhilchat
Follow Luke: https://x.com/0xMether
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:34 Kamino Finance 
5:16 Recent AAVE Governance Proposals
19:32 Jito Restaking
29:24 Permissionless III Ad
30:38 PayPal's PYUSD Incentives
40:01 The Compound Governance Attack
47:49 Ore v2 Update
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 100 ---
Video ID: JyXFJQKnElc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JyXFJQKnElc
Title: How Parcl is Bringing the Real Estate Markets Onchain | Trevor & Jason
Published: 2024-07-25 14:53:37 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Trevor and Jason from Parcl to discuss their journey so far. We dive into the original inspiration for Parcl, real estate adoption onchain, and potential expansion beyond real estate. Additionally, we talk about improving the quality of real estate data, and PRCL token utility. Finally, we hear about what it was like building through the last bear market, and what the future has in store for Parcl.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources:
Parcl: A New Frontier for Real Estate Markets | Blockworks Research https://app.blockworksresearch.com/unlocked/parcl-a-new-frontier-for-real-estate-markets

Blockworks Research Thread on Parcl: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1813930752855396798
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.

Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
--
Join us at Permissionless III. Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iii
--
Follow Trevor: https://x.com/trevorjbacon
Follow Jason: https://x.com/jasonlewris
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:00 What Inspired Parcl?
5:55 Real Estate Adoption Onchain
17:31 Potential Expansion Beyond Real Estate
20:40 Permissionless Ad
21:54 Polygon Ad
22:45 Avalanche Ad
23:27 Improving the Quality of Real Estate Data
35:20 PRCL Token Utility & Points Program Reflections
43:20 Building Through the Bear Market
47:53 The Future of Parcl
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Danny, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 101 ---
Video ID: Py0YxXiLUFA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Py0YxXiLUFA
Title: TradFi is Coming: Has Crypto Changed Forever? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-07-24 15:35:48 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Blockworks Research analysts discuss the surge in Polymarket activity, and speculate on how good its product market fit really is. Additionally, they dive into the Ethereum ETF launch, the implications of TradFi adoption in crypto, and the effects it will have going forward. Finally, they talk about the growing Base ecosystem, and Aerodrome’s place within it.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources

Aerodrome Thread: https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1811427222760329360

Aerodrome: The Liquidity Hub of Base: https://app.blockworksresearch.com/unlocked/aerodrome-the-liquidity-hub-of-base

The MetaDEX: Aerodrome & Velodrome Explained: https://apple.co/3XxKyiV

Inside Pancakeswap’s Multi-chain Expansion Strategy: https://apple.co/3SmRQ5Y
--
Special thanks to our sponsor LayerZero

Stay up-to-date with the LayerZero Ecosystem by following: https://twitter.com/LayerZero_Labs
--
Follow Daniel: https://x.com/_dshap
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:28 Polymarket Activity
13:25 The Ethereum ETF Launch
28:06 LayerZero Ad: Pancakeswap
34:23 Will TradFi Adoption Compress Crypto Volatility?
47:18 Aerodrome & Base Adoption
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
it was trafi that created the 2000.com bubble it was trafi that created the real estate Bubble at the end of the day humans are emotional they're greedy and I I will say um having some way to Value protocols right and obviously a cash flow-based DCF model is is one way to do that that would tether some valuations closer to reality but I don't think trafi and ing the market is going to lead to less bubble like behavior in the long run nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice bacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the companies funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of zerx research today I'm joined by Danny Ryan and Daniel Shapiro a new firsttime guest uh from blockworks research to talk about all that's happening in the markets and across crypto um first of all guys welcome back how are you all doing fantastic doing great yeah doing well happy Monday everyone happy Monday everyone um just as a reminder if you're a listener it is actually Wednesday what are we all looking at in the markets what's happening yeah I think one to bring up quick is lots of activity on poly Market um there's been a lot of excitement over the past week you know political related activities people trading election outcomes um you know Biden dropping out um there was a lot of excitement and movements in the in the pricings of the of these events over the weekend and over the past week so um we've seen a lot of excitement around poly market and I think you know you've we've seen people proclaiming on Twitter that it you know it's an app with like the the most clean and secure pmf I I think there's maybe some still questions there longer term about that you know post elction um does that does that remain but um definitely some excitement around it how much do you think other ecosystems have offered poly market for them to launch on like how often do you think that's happen so far because I feel like it's definitely been done right like if I'm an evm I'm going to poly Market probably like once in mon from saying hey guys actually we have this huge program specifically for you why don't you come and launch over you okay maybe this too risky of a topic tough to say I you know I don't have any inside knowledge so I don't know but I think your point is fair like if I'm running Bas or blast or any of these chains or salana or you know any of the main competitors these days like you see the success and the activity there and um it's the same with all these apps that are really popular if you're the chain that has it you you know you get a lot of activity and excitement and fees and and user metrics around that so um it's certainly valuable so to your question on you know what they're throwing at them I mean who knows one more thing I have with this one is pmf does poly Market have strong pmf or does it just have more pmf than everything else that we're like wow this one has incredible pmf yeah I don't think that it's clear I mean clearly like I've said in the past this has been one of the most successful applications this ccle and great like that's fantastic it fulfills its Duty um but it's participating in a market that historically has not been um hasn't reached escape velocity let's say um there may be some reasons for that you can think of like capped payoffs you can think of like the um it's really not necessary like within a portfolio like it's not a very obvious Hedge for like a trafi guy right like you can probably get more interesting um you can express more interesting hedges in traditional financial markets than like directionally betting on a candidate or on some event um so you know I'm not exactly sure why prediction markets haven't hit escape velocity quite yet but my my kind of hunch is that the way to differentiate itself poly Market in particular is to like the way dex's win compete on listing different markets unique markets [Music] um it's kind of clear to me that the most successful dexes have had the broadest listing strategies I think back to FTX and now hyper liquid um it's how binance kind of rose to fame like to the enabling users the ability to get interesting and differentiated exposure as opposed to like copy pasting everything from predicted which is is another popular and successful prediction market like I think as the best strategy going forward um what products they'll offer like after election season like TV not sure yeah I think um actually the the first application ever launch on ethereum I believe was augur which was a prediction market and it never really took off um I think to answer your first question maybe they're waiting to um for some interoperability infrastructure to become more developed and maybe have a CR train a cross chain strategy as opposed to just separate deployments on multiple chains um with respect to their product Market fit personally I think it's it's very clearly the election that is um generating that hype right now I think problem with prediction markets historically is there's just very low liquidity and that drastically limits uh their ability to be adopted and if you think about you could say people putting risk gone in the markets anyways typically you have some type of thesis right like I think this president's going to be this President and so therefore these assets are going to do well and so there's other ways to um I guess represent your thesis and different assets you can buy than directly you know betting on some type of prediction Market outcome so I think it's naturally pretty idiosyn idiosyncratic events that you can even bet on and that kind of limits their their growth um so we'll see I you know I I would expect post election for it to the hype around it to kind of die down but I I don't have you know strong Alpha there per se yeah and in crypto we have a very clear way of expressing that bet which is a meme coin on Solana that's misspelled the spot man way um for political candidates so I we'll see I I think people are becoming increasingly political um potentially because everybody's online all day so I don't know how like like you said I think maybe after the election cycle we'll see but I mean until then I think everybody's just constantly trying to put something some form of bet on a candidate so yeah I was going to Echo the same point I think really to measure their lasting success and and you know P the question around pmf is you know post election how does that success continue um if if metrics drop off because that was the main reason people were going there then they either need to find you know additional things to to bet on um outside of Elections um you know maybe the Olympics maybe big sporting events but you're competing with sports betting apps in that in that case so there's a lot of competition around these types of things where in comparison to to elections which pre previously have not been so um explicitly traded yeah there there's an interesting compounding Trend in the market where um look we're we're like financializing these um these like we're financializing like world events and like social happenings so like for example post Trump um assassination attempt if you went on to pump. fun and spread your bets accordingly like you probably did very well like I know that that's not where my head was at but some people's were and there's evidence of people doing very well post that on chain there's also like this morning we're watching I think it's like this new laser eyes magga meme that different um people in technology are using uh as their profile pick on Twitter dark me if yeah yeah something like that like if you bought and again if you're oriented this way and your first thought was like okay this is an emerging Trend like go to pump. fun and do that thing uh buy whatever token represented uh that kind of social movement like again you did pretty well today and yesterday so there is this kind of like emerging financialization of like social happenings and like poly market like kind of fits that Trend and as like the cycle carries on um and the longer we go without recession like I assume this activity is going to compound you're seeing that market develop on the pump. fun side where pump fund tokens represent you know you know Danny we were looking at into this anywhere from 20 to 60% of sana's onchain volume in a given day um like poly Market can definitely catch some spill over from that like emerging onchain Mee Market we're already kind of seeing it on base happen as well so like as these events get financialized like maybe New Market behaviors emerge I I don't think that that's crazy um I don't think that that's a crazy kind of like long-term view of the space um it's just like does poly Market have enough cash like stick around during a bear and then realize that on the other way out like who knows I mean didn't they raise 70 mil from the founders fund they should have more than enough cash to stick around a bear at this point then I yeah I in my comment that then they'll be fine yeah I think the other question to your point Ryan is like you know at a point you end up competing with with mem coin activity as well right people make like on pump.on and and these other application you know there's a base fund as well um people are making meme points for all events in markets there were events related to the the Trump incident last week so um you know I think the question here is if um you know is poly Market GNA have to then compete with like memec coin activity right people are using meme coins as means to basically trade events as well like like you mentioned um the activity on pump fund is is a good example people are making tokens for everything the the Trump incident last week I mean there were ear coins no ear coins um stuff of of all this variety so you know you then have to ask the question if if if these apps are kind of um leaning towards retail participants um you know they're relatively lower liquidity when they start and um they're quick events that happen you know in in days or hours sometimes um you know these are the competitors are you know a meme coin that people are hoping can do 100x or a a betting Market where maybe you're betting on something that's 50/50 or 2575 and you're you know those are your expected outcomes so um I think that's a there's like a fundamental question there of will you know retail users decide to go one way or the other yeah I think I think that that's right I think that like it's it's an uphill battle I think meme coins are the are far closer to pmf um I think that they're very low friction uh I think that the payoffs happen quicker which is very important for real retail applications you want a tight feedback loop and not a long feedback loop um uh you want to kind of get action like betting on the president like immediately that's all indications from like consumer application market tell us that that those applications are more successful so yeah like um as a pair trade I'm I'm bullish mem coins and and short poly Market frankly um but like does a social Norm happen where like we expect just like this activity to steadily compound over time like I'm not ruling that out mcoins have had pmf for some time now like 2017 one thing that I wanted to add to this is that I'm not I think poly Market's cool I think like it actually does have it we'll see what happens after the PO like the election cycle but I think it's like it's definitely the only useful app on polygon and I would say it's like one of the best apps on the evm right now I mean I can't think of like just consumer facing I want to start hedging um the bearishness of people from now on because we've been getting a lot of comments about I think we're falling into Ryan's trap of making everybody no that's not true he's not bearish yeah I was just gonna say not bearish just just bullish meme coins so yeah that's true that's true no I just want to hedge it out so that zerox research isn't known as the bear the bear podcast that would ruin my ego and my psyche if people knew me as the bear talking about things that you cannot be bearish on the E ETF tomorrow what are we what are we thinking Ryan what's the PA trade here say that again what's the pair trade here what's the I mean the most interesting thing about the ETF is the sole eth pair um that that's the most interesting thing um look people try to get in front of these trades um The Narrative is that flows just indiscriminately lift price that buyers do not care they cross the spread um however uh so e is up like 30% over the last month um I think you know I I have my hunches as to why like from a relative value perspective eth is trading like at over 300 times uh tev or total economic value which you can think of as like a price to sales ratios for chains Salon is anywhere from like 82 100 depending on the day depending on the look back window right so there's just like an very obvious relative value trade there and I think that as the incremental dollar into crypto becomes more institutional than it is retail and that kind of then you should kind of see that Divergence um there's clearly like less of a bid for like just eth as the asset as like fees have compressed an evm land um especially like just looking at like you don't need to pay $500 for gas on the e L1 to execute a trade you can just do it on nl2 so just structurally there's just a little less natural demand in the market for E to take advantage of big Financial opportunities um so it's not like I think three months ago if you told people that that were happening on the eve of the ETF approval they wouldn't have believed you um today however like that's the case and um it's unclear to me um when that trend is going to stop because frankly like the next ETF to be approved given the shift and reg or the likely shift in regulatory environment that we have coming is um like with a sole ETF right so I think that this can compound for a while here yeah I think um the the sole eth ratio has been interesting um you know I think for me I'm just bullish both I'm really bullish both um Soul's lower market cap and so it can be moved the price can be moved easier so maybe Soul keeps outperforming you know on a risk adjusted basis um you know maybe eth takes that back um but I don't see any reason to fade eth the asset it is going to be one of only two with an ETF and you know at around a third fourth the the market cap of Bitcoin if you get market cap weighted allocation to the eth ETF then it'll probably per it'll probably start to outperform bitcoin right and then you get the eth fly flywheel going um you know with more L2 activity those act as a supply a supply sync for eth um use in defi uh you start to get more eth burned and so I think generally eth is a little more reflexive than Bitcoin and so I think all those factors will lead it to start to perform and then I think obviously the sole eth ratio matters but also the the eth BTC ratio matters and if eth starts outperforming Bitcoin maybe that's a little bit of a narrative jump that needs you know that's needed for for it to get going um but yeah I mean I see no reasons to be both to be bearish salana as well so you know I think I think they're both great trades but I will say I do think there is some game theory around the market you know you could say the operator um composite operator lulling people to sleep with eth and then right when people expect it expect at least to perform well that's usually when it starts to perform well and then if you go six months in the future and look back on this moment you'll you'll say that it's obvious and so you know I do think that eth is having a little bit of an identity crisis um salana is definitely legit competition but eth still has all the liquidity um all the stable coins it has a ton of teams building out l2s competing for usage which although they are parasitic to some extent uh l2s do return some value to eth um the respect to eth being utilized as their gas as as the gas token still so get a monetary premium effect there's Supply syncs so yeah I think there's a ton of reasons to be bullish eth and I I think that this you know I think the summertime um seasonality component of just slow markets is in the short term you know might be enough to uh make the launch kind of uh not not as impressive as as you know the Bitcoin one once that started to really get going but once we get into Q4 and potentially regulatory Clarity um I I think eth is going to do really really well yeah I completely agree with Daniel shapir I think e is on their own and I think we're going to actually do really well with the flows um with that being said crypto always looks for what's next and it's very clear that Solana is what's next and I love Solana so like yeah we can't give Financial advice none of this is financial advice we've already heard the disclaimer at the very beginning but I see no reason to just not own both I think epher is God's chosen currency and it's incredible and it will do well but and I think people honest no but genuinely I think people kind of underestimate at this point there's definitely metrics that show that salana is I guess more attractive um especially with the tev and the fact that all of narratives are currently on Solana but I do see I think a lot of people are I guess underestimating what the ETF fls are going to be like and obviously like nobody has a magic Crystal Ball but I I don't know I guess I'm just overall excited for that it I think that to say um eth is under owned um what what would the evidence there be that eth is under owned I Feel It In My Bones yeah like it's hard to it's hard for me to think that a 400 billion market cap asset is under owned yeah that's true there's a lot of eth out there people have a lot of exposure I guess more so what I mean is that it feels like Solana is becoming bit of a consensus trade as opposed to e and I feel like people aren't generally less interested in ethereum and I think the flows my surprise because my my entire like thinking around this revolves around the fact that and I assume we want to talk about this later this institution like the as the next buyer thing but I I think BTC has a very clear Nar narrative which is digital gold but it's not as attractive as ethereum narrative which is it's the whatever the the App Store of the internet or the internet Bond whatever you want to pick but it fits into a lot of these and I think like the way that this became clear to me is I was watching the SN I don't know how you pronounce is son son you know what um and they pitched e on it and they pitched it with whatever like you hear on Larry think talk about on television is that tokenization narrative and I think that's something that I guess institutions are going to find quite attractive and I'm not sure if they if there has been prepositioning and I'm not sure if they've positioned already into this but I I expect the maybe it's just my side of CT and Twitter but I feel like a lot of people are expecting the flows to disappoint I don't think they will I think the narrative is quite attractive especially for uh institutional buyers who like some form of native yield and who like the fact that it's a productive asset yeah I I agree with Bach because um I think that price leads narrative and I think under own might have been the wrong word to choose but definitely um from a narrative perspective you would you have to think eth is near some type of local Minima right and I'm not saying salana is near a local maximum um salana could still be on the up and up but I I think from a narrative perspective eth has been pretty beaten down and uh from that standpoint right if eth just gets market cap weighted flows um from trafi and it goes up a lot and now the price is up then narrative is is going to fall that and the narrative is going to naturally come right and potentially all we need for that is just Mark cap weighted trfi flows so uh yeah I'm I'm I'm very bullish on it I'm also very bullish on salana so I just think um eth might surprise people in and if you if you know if you said that in 2022 around the merge right you know eth was the mo was the hottest thing in town right it was outperforming Bitcoin off off the lows after the big crash like eth um was kind of the consensus of winning asset so it to me it's lost that shine clearly at this point which makes it attractive yeah I will offer one Counterpoint since we're we're talking a little bit about sentiment here around eth just just the comment that I think if you look back like pre- Bitcoin ETF I would venture to Guess that many deep in the space were probably maybe overallocated to eth relative to bitcoin prior to that event and I do Wonder like what what amount of the sentiment today where people are saying you know we should expect you know incredible price action for eth off of you know the eth ETF similar to bitcoin you know how much of that is you know people who maybe missed out on the Bitcoin event because they were overallocated to eth at the time and now they're maybe still allocated to Ethan expecting the same you know price appreciation there um it because it does feel like that was some sentiment at the time as well many people you know they're like eth is the future and they went all you know in terms of allocation of their portfolio they may have gone heavier eth than BTC and then did not get that reward um when that b you know when the BTC ETF came around and we've seen what what what happened to bitcoin I mean we'll see trading starts tomorrow I I I you're right I I do remember that where everybody was like oh just own e forat it'll be better but we'll see trading Ryan do you have any final thoughts yeah I mean I just just I I think just hoping for flows is not enough I think you need some identifiable Catalyst um from a revenue perspective and like if you look at what eth is trying to do they are trying to minimize the amount of value capture that they have and salana is trying to do the precise opposite with something like fire answer um if you look at like Dex valume market share there's a clear Trend toward salana arbitr and base and away from eth now you can push back and say that that's by Design but just because something is by Design does not mean it is good for Value capture market right so like I don't think that trafi I I think that like these guys are data dependent uh I don't think it's the same Market participant that we've traditionally had and as the space learns or as I learns more about this space I I don't know if simple like flows and market cap waiting is enough especially in a nent asset class and like like look eth is a $400 billion do asset it's probably like a top 30 asset in market cap in the world it's not cheap um and I don't know I I just don't think that try indiscriminately buys um I think that they'll put pen to paper on this and um it's not obvious to me that there's just like a massive bull case for eth for them to for them to allocate to the counter point to this is that Solana has downtime issues which might freak traditional buyers out um but yeah I guess like what you say makes sense it's not a particularly cheap ass I I get what I've heard or like read on Twitter about ECC is that this was one of the main discussion points and it's this leaking of value to not only rollups but also app chains and generally losing um value of Cruelty ethereum and activity especially to because of just complex UI modularity is bad like at its current state it's bad um and e made that bet but I mean like if you look at what vitalic was talking about and that's reducing block times um and as far as I've seen like basically every talk was on some form of abstracting away of ux issues I don't know how that would help leaking value because at the end of the day I think you're just making it easier to leak value and you just don't let the customer realize it but they definitely do have an issue in terms of what direction they're going in like I completely agree with you on that is that just because it's on purpose doesn't mean that it's good I would have probably preferred just keeping all activity on E and making people pay $300 per transaction at least it's really safe you know before we move on let's have a quick word from pancake swap thanks to our fantastic sponsor layer zero what's up guys for this week's layer zero snippet I'm joined by the head chef over at pancake swap Chef kids uh thank you for joining us hi hi Tim thank you for having me here just to start us off do you want to give a short introduction uction of pancake Swap and what you guys have been focused on over the past few months yeah yeah for sure um so pancake swap is a leading multiple um you know chain decentralized exchange that operate on um you know amm model built on several chains were originally built on BC but gradually we expand to different chains currently we're operating online chains and we launched in 2020 you know pancake swap is one of the most popular decks in the cryptocurrency industry due to you know its lower transaction fees you know highspeed treating and also the user experiences um and also currently we have over 750 billion in total tring volumes and over two billion in total um you know liquidity locked and um we are you know making it you know as a leading um multichain deex in the industry perfect um and how does layer zero fit into pancake swap well layer zero you know plays a crucial role in our journey into a mod deex because you know since 2022 we have been fortunate to collaborate with you know strong Crossing Partners such as know layer zero um their robust cross chain massaging infrastructure has been pivotal to our Evolution from um you know uh B&B CH predominantly based the platform to a resilient Marchin Dex and as I mentioned you know currently we're operating across nine chains you know including um integration to eum ecosystem and moreover you know uh pancakes has became you know the preferred trading venue for a lot of you know of project such as Pap you know ether we uh HH and also usdv um layer zero also Powers you know um pancake swaps Crossing gauges facilitating the semless movement of Kik um you know tokens annual through the of standard and also enabling voting across chains so as a one of the Pioneer in adapting the of standard for our cake token pancake swap has been partnering with lar zero since 2022 to establish you know crucial Bridges so in summary um layer zero is you know integral to you know pancake swaps Crossing operations significantly um enhancing our platforms functionality and also adaptability um this integration actually enables a fantastic user experiences and introduce a lot of innovative features that distinguish us in in the deck sector perfect yeah you guys have had a great multi-chain expansion um especially over the past year do you have any exciting plans over the next six to 12 months yeah yeah absolutely um you know we have several exciting plans in the you know in upcoming U month time including two major product uh firstly you know for sure is our you know pancake swap V before uh which we covered in depths you know already in our previous podcast with you guys um So currently it's on track you know to launch in Q Ser this year and we'll start with Bing and etherum and also Will Follow by you know will be followed by many other chains um so um for the benefit of you know those who might not be familiar with us I will give a little bit elaboration on you know pancake SW V before um you know so basically pancake SW V before is the latest iteration of Our Deck you know uh where we introduced the several key features the first one is definitely you know the flexibility via hooks where we can bring in new features such as um dyamic fee um customer articles and a lot of other things the second thing is adaptability where we can support new am models on the go and lastly is the efficiency enhancement via gas savings you know uh from uh flash accounting and single T technology so we have a particular including myself you know we have you know very excited about the s um you know as with developers you know the sky is the limit nobody knows you know what you know developers can came up and we are excited as well so who knows maybe you know we'll see uh lar zero you know hook that utilize cross chain liquidity for ofs right and and also important we understand you know on the whole V4 you know U vfor saying you know the dep support is the key you know so for um developers guys if you are you know who are interested in building please visit our website and where you will find the most the information you need and also you can join our Discord Community uh I do look forward to see what you guys can come up with um the second product we are currently working on is to um you know enhance our users swap user experiences uh we aim to secure the best price for users by tapping into the liquidity from multiple sources and also leveraging you know our cross chain liquidity Network this is you know all the alpha I will share here so far um but if you guys you know if you want to know more about us you know about this product please uh stay student uh stay tuned about you know our upcoming product announcement so in essence um you know our strategy revolves around enhancing our you know corn swap product with the Best in Class technology while ensuring you know our um robust supporting functions so we are sured uh especially myself you know I I'm I'm very serious about what is ahead of us and I do look forward to sharing you know more update in upcoming um several months time with our community SW perfect that all sounds very exciting I'll make sure to link the pancake swap episode under this one as well because that should contain a lot of alpha um yeah thank you so much for joining us thank you thank you for time thank you one thing I kind of touched up on that I want to talk about that I want Ryan to talk about is what happens when the marginal buyer of crypto is institutional yeah we kind of just touched on it um thinking you know I think one very obvious place that things go is more cash flow oriented um I think it's very obvious that once try comes to this space and they understand it deeply you know tokens ACR cash flows most of them and like everything on the planet that does ACR cash flows is to some degree valued on the basis of those cash flows so I think you'll see the market kind of or orienting around those assets I think things will obviously get a little less crazy I think like there will be V compression in a lot of assets um I think that like as you go down the risk Spectrum like your kind of airdrop opportunities kind of dwindle over time because it won't it won't be a secret anymore um now obviously like a lot of this is far off and I think of you have to think of like what's coming first and and like I think ball compression and like orienting toward valuation are like two kind of obvious more like near-term maybe like 12 to 24 month things that you should start to see in the market uh assuming all goes um well on the crypto regulation front by you know December and onward or sorry November and onwards um I definitely agree with you in terms of V compression um where I have I guess slightly more questions and and obviously you'd have a better idea about this than I do but it was trafi that created the 2000.com bubble it was trafi that created the real estate Bubble at the end of the day humans are emotional they're greedy and I I will say um having some way to Value protocols right and obviously a cash flow-based you know DC F model is is one way to do that that would tether some valuations um closer to reality but I don't think trafi entering the market is going to lead to um I guess less bubble like behavior in the long run um I think Trad fight's kind of this nebulous word and I think there's still probably a vast majority um or it's I'd say the vast majority of trafi probably are still um you know not not these hyper sophisticated actors by any means um there's definitely going to be actors that come in that are highly sophisticated and are going to out compete uh crypto native um participants in in many different ways but I don't know I I think based on um kind of observing markets over the past past couple decades I I tend to lean more towards uh the the theory of reflexivity um being kind of the the main basis of of how I believe asset prices asset prices move as opposed to you know everything kind of getting have having this value and things kind of um you know over time going towards that fundamental value so um we'll see though right like I think right traditional markets have Circ Breakers and they have different um rules around trading if you have 247 Global you know tokens that are being traded I I think that we're still going to have some um you know crazy volatility moments maybe you know VA will be compressed generally but yeah I'm curious what your guys's thoughts are around that the main thing I think about is how this will affect I guess lower market cap tokens and more so like will there still be an edge in I I feel like the word trenches is now overused but like being in the trenches I guess like just spending more and more time in small to Mid market cap like sub 100 Mil like looking into those do because at the end of the day we've always experienced this thing where or at least over the past few years we've seen where you know as Bitcoin and E do better A lot of money flows into lower market cap tokens but I think that's with the expected notion that okay like these buyers are going to come and buy from us but I don't really see I guess traditional Financial players buying into some random telegram bot token on a random chain um that sub 100 point you know what I mean like I don't I don't see how that would affect it I feel like the ball there would just St same because we already have our own money that we play around with like sub whatever market cap and that's for us and I I feel like that wouldn't change too much yeah I'm hearing a lot of good points on both sides of this spectrum here I think to Daniel's Point um especially around just the animal spirits of people that interact with markets um I think you can look back to 2021 and and baky just mentioned like you know what institutions are going to buy 100 Mil market cap coins or lower um maybe they won't but we had you know we had artists and rappers and large institutions and I think even banks in some cases that bought like nfts to put them into their collections at that time there was some very crazy behavior going on in 2021 that I think no one expected prior to the heights that the market reached at that time and I think we can sit here and kind of like ask the same questions of like who will those people buy these things like is someone going to buy this tiny market cap token at a fund but um ultimately I think you don't really know until if the insane crazy Market moves happen and and people get wrapped up in the price moves it's you know like like Daniel mentioned it's the same as as the.com bubble people paying hundreds of of multiples on earnings or maybe no earnings for Stuff um that just didn't make sense but they get wrapped up in it so there's always the chance for for people to get just go crazy about you know wild price swings when when we had that um I met a few analysts from Banks and they were they were [ __ ] coining as well like you know so obviously they they're not just because some guy's [ __ ] coining doesn't mean he's going to make the bank buy into it but what I mean is that it's I feel like there's this General notion that a Bankers are going to come in and buy our bags that's probably not true but we have to see is what Danny thinks we have to wait a bit maybe they will we've had crazier things happen but the second notion is that Bankers don't know what's happening or like trafi doesn't know and I don't think that's true like that hasn't been the case let's say for a few years now and a lot of these like analysts are they they hold crypto um probably more than a lot of people who say oh Bankers don't know so I I also see that them I guess maybe as like the acid class becomes a bit more legitimized in in their boss's eyes they might be able to participate in it more but we'll see I don't know how that that side of the world works at all I think the other point of it is like you mentioned the multiples on I think the VA compression is a good point I also think like just multiples compression on on you know smaller cops as Bitcoin makes moves I mean you can see this very naturally if you go back and look at the charts right like hitting 100,000 is on all the random coins that came out in the Ico Mania in like 2017 and then you go and you look one cycle forward and it's like slightly compressed to lower multiples and then if you look today you know we haven't there are a few cases right like there's meme coins and there's specific coins that go onchain from you know 100K market cap to 100 million a billion and those are wildly insane but on the average and on the whole you know the across the board those multiples they have reduced over time as as the AET class has grown so I think it's it's natural to just expect that to continue as well I think another major thing will be the index ification of the space and so I I I think somewhere um around 60% of all money in traditional markets are in um some type of ETF or index and um I think it's around 67% of new money coming into the market is um literally going directly into Target Market date funds which are effectively index you know ETFs that then also um as you get older closer retirement change your change the allocation of your funds over time maybe becoming more um heavily allocated to bonds for instance and so I think there will definitely be you know a top 10 index top 50 index top 100 index you know the the 250 the 500 right all market cap weighted Maybe equal weighted um maybe there'll be sector indexes right like layer ones or AI or whatever right and so there's you know the marginal buyer honestly it's probably re mostly retail through 401K flows and all that's passive so um that's another interesting component and I think the result of that is um Vault compression but not necessar neily um well all right not yet not necessarily multiple compression due to the market cap weighted Dynamic and Mike Green is someone excellent to listen to to kind of better understand um those Dynamics at play yeah I don't I don't disagree with a lot of the points I think that yeah in your small caps just they're not going to play right they're not going to play the Market's not going to change you could have quantitative funds that run sophisticated strategies right like these are like permissionless like open apis it's going to be easy for like like today right you can like download Twitter data figure out what's trending and then long things on pump. fun right with an llm um pretty trivial to do I imagine more more people are going to do that but like look things are still going to be crazy right it's like a totally open and permissionless Market um just some data I wanted to draw some attention to my my buddy actually sent me this this morning uh large uh small mid and large cap uh indices and just like the valuations over time um they don't become untethered like yeah bubbles happen in trafi but like so for example like a small cap index the forward price to cash flow ratio has never risen above 19 times like never it topped out around 17 in the early 2000s topped out around 17 in uh like 2014 2015 and then around 17 or 19 looking at the chart in like 2022 um same thing with like mid uh sorry small small C value um small C value like that that forward price of cash flow multiple has never surpassed 13 or 15 times looking back 20 years so like there's some degree of discipline right like people look like there's some degree of discipline eventually you run out of buyers even in Mania things like people start to realize like this can't go on forever and you don't have like the filecoin 150 billion fdv event uh I think that's unique to crypto um and I think that as the marginal dollar changes mostly in the large caps right you're going to see some Behavior change but I I you look we'll still have our fun it's just not going to be in the same places I guess sorry I just read a chart to you guys it must have been painful no it's good that's really good data it's really good data and honestly like we're I guess you can say we're starting to see that Trend now with the whole fdv um low float discussion right like people are getting getting smart the market is evolving all right last up for today I think we want to talk AER right so Daniel Shapiro you wrote the best report on Aerodrome last week um do you want to kind of talk about it a bit Yeah so um kind of the idea behind this report was uh to Target the leading protocol in the Bas ecosystem and I'm very bullish and I think block Works research is in general uh very bullish on base um just looking at their their growth in terms of of number of transactions number of active addresses uh tvl stable coin growth um it's all the metrics point to the that ecosystem is growing very rapidly and there's also fundamental reasons for that for instance their smart wallet which abstracts away um the need for having to create a uh some type of soft software wallet um and and you know Pass Key it it provides a pass key way to log in um and also bases uh I guess you could say their um customer base which is 110 million but I think closer more like eight 10 million active users but still nonetheless um they have a ton of users to direct uh towards the base ecosystem and so um very bullish on base and so getting into what aerod Drome is um aerod Drome is a decentralized exchange that is a fork of Vel Drome um it is a specific deployment for base um because the team expects there's going to be kind of unique offerings uh institutional offerings That Base provides that other chains don't um to where they will need a a separate unique deployment on base itself um what what makes Aerodrome unique compared to a DEX like coinbase or like Unis swap um is that it uses is a vote lock governance model similar to curve or convex um and this model actually gives the token Arrow utility because uh LPS must lock that Arrow um in turn giving them governance power to direct where the protocol emissions go so you lock your tokens you pick a pool to direct emissions to and in term you capture the fees associated with those pools this also creates a flywheel effect in which obviously the highest volume pools are going to attract the most liquidity because right any rational LP is going to want to maximize uh their fees and so um they pick the highest uh volume pools and so what's unique about this is is it allows new projects launching on the chain to see liquidity for their tokens and so not every project is going to be backed by um you know top tier VCS and and have access to um you know topof the-line Market maker deals or you know centralized exchange listings day one so they might need a launch on a DEX to you know like Aerodrome to see liquidity for their token um before they grow large enough uh to eventually get listed on centralized exchanges um and so what's interesting is due to the regulatory environment and Bas not having a token in the absence of a base token um currently I'd say Arrow at least my thesis is kind of like the the gas token of Bas right like if you think about all the users of Bas you have like the kind of retail consumer users they're just using interacting with the chain you have um protocols that are launching and might have you know a treasury to deploy and then you have Farmers or you know LPS that want to come to that chain and you know Supply the the you know the picks and shovels right um you know someone that wants to come and provide liquidity on a decks right and and get fees so other than just like the base consumer users the other two categories of major users of the chain will need to buy Arrow tokens um and whether that's to seed liquidity for their token which is a necessary precursor for adoption or that's maybe to buy aot tokens to um you know deploy some of your treasury Reserve to actually make money um off of your you know the the tokens that you already have and so it it's a really interesting um way to kind of bet on the base eco system in Aggregate and the aot token should theoretically um do well so long as the ecosystem go uh does well and I think what's interesting about it too is for funds that might have a mandate uh where they are not allowed to invest in memecoins um arrow is a is a way to actually kind of get memec coin beta exposure because a lot of the largest pools on base are mcoin pools that were launched on aerod Drone and so um you know if re if base does onboard a lot of retail and that retail likes to speculate on mem coins and there was some indication of this in late February and March um in terms of Base uh Trend you know decks statistics just growth in general exploding around that mem coin craze um arrow is is a token that could capture some of that value um and they have a very strong team the uh the team um their initial distribution of 14 15% they Max locked their entire distribution um so they can't sell any of their tokens um the pro the team does get 5% of protocol emissions but they have Max locked more than 90% of those and so um in the report you know we we show the team wallet and um do an analysis there so you know the team the team's all in right they um they can't sell anything so um there the the in in a few weeks at Epoch 67 um the overall you know all Arrow hold governance um token holders ve uh Arrow voters will vote on the future monetary policy of the chain and you know they can adjust the the annualized emission rate by like 0.25% each Epoch so um you know know it it can the the emission rate could theoretically change but in general the the the team is is committed um and there's no like immediately or like immediate Supply overhang that could come onto the market so um it's it's an interesting token and and an interesting way to get exposure to the Bas ecosystem in aggregate yeah I think that the most interesting thing is just like the best thing of I mean a lot of that's super interesting and and one of the most I should say interesting but compelling things is that it's it's really besting Unis swap right now um to outperform such a name brand is is not um an easy task yeah I um we had them on the podt so if any of our listeners want to also listen to the team coming on and explaining how it works you can also we'll put a link somewhere um but that's one thing they've done really well is integrating other the way that you said like it might become the gas token of Base I um they've done really really well just working with other people on the ecosystem and like other protocols and helping them out kind of I guess not incorp incorporating them I don't like the word partner um because they're not partnering with them they're just like trying to build an ecosystem alt together because they they want to kind of become the liquidity Hub of there and I think um Unis swap obviously doesn't have to do do that and they're not doing that versus Val is aerody is very like actively doing that so I think that's that's one thing that they've done really well um and I really like the idea that it's exposure to base I agree with you I don't think I know a few funds that I've tried to gain exposure to meme coins um especially since that's what's mostly happening on base it's it's always tough versus Aerodrome is like direct exposure to base and the base ecosystem as well as you know whatever D5 we're at now D5 4.0 um 3.0 4.0 like it's it is a new like ve3 FreeX is um based on Andre's solidly model Andre CR solidly model like it's a new primitive and it I don't know like exactly how well it works to be honest with you I know it had some issues with this with solidly and it has had issues since then but I know that the AR team like they've built it out and it's it's working well especially on base yeah I think it great points on it being an opportunity to sort of make a bet on base the ecosystem because I think you know many Market participants like Bo said like meme coins have been one area but it's it's obviously a bit different right you're not really you know when it comes to a mean coin you're either going to hit a massive multip M or or lose it all in many cases and you're not you know the linear growth of the ecosystem might not be really reflected in how that Meme coin trades but um the other option has really just been like coinbase stock for example yeah um but I think in that case you know that's not really a direct trade on base itself the chain um because there's obviously lots of verticals that that that coinbase is going after and you know base is not the only thing that um you know that they're making money on so um it it's definitely it's an in very comp argument I think for um in the absence of a of a gas token for themselves you know like we saw in 2021 when people went to the alt L1 chains they bought the gas token and they bought the the you know primary native Dex token so in this case when there's a lack of uh of a base token um and there is a kind of what we're seeing is sort of this primary native Dex um that you can trade it's it's an interesting opportunity yeah and it has nearly twice the tvl well more than twice the tvl Unix swap at this point I um I wonder when this is going to happen again but I I remember like throughout the bear I was really focused on I guess building like a mind map of native apps on chains um and I think first of all it's gone increasingly hard because there aren't that many apps launching but also because you see like Unis swap Dominate and a Dominate and like let's say Moro in this case as well like especially on newer chains so I'm I guess I'm also just interested in aerody Drome because it's a native app and it's like only for base and I like that idea a lot more than I guess Unis swap dominance all across because I I want to try on this stuff like it might not even be particularly efficient this is not a jabat aerod Drome but like in general I know like sometimes we like to launch apps that aren't even particularly efficient like you could have just used a Unis swap V3 Fork but I like trying out new stuff and it's even better if it's native to the ecosystem yeah and it's positive for the thesis as well right like if it was just Unis swap again you know I don't think it would make sense to want to buy uni as a proxy for bidding base right like it doesn't make sense because of its existence and and you know value elsewhere um but in this case it's a bit different right you know it's Unique and native to base there's no specific Bas token to bid other than the stock or to gamble on memes so um very compelling yeah and when you have a native app um they actually have to work with one another to make sure that ecosystem does semi well like I mentioned before Unis swap has no like skin in the game for base technically they they'll be fine either way they're they're established um yeah like I think it's important to look at incentive alignment um a lot and this is another reason why you know newer tokens typically outperform old tokens because because the team has an incentive to reach that you know big liquidity event right and so incentives really matter and um Arrow gave I believe let's see 25% of um the yeah 25% of the initial voting power was reserved for a base ecosystem Goods fund so they are um you know they also launched with 20 other base um Partners where they immediately established liquidity pools so they're they're very locked in into the ecosystem they wanted to succeed um also you know coinbase Ventures made an investment in their team so coinbase wants them to succeed um so there's there's a lot of there's a lot of incentive you know the team Max locked their tokens and any new tokens that come in they Max lock essentially all of them their stable coin Supply was uh generated from actually blocking tokens and getting rewards you know as a user so um You' like to see that and if you're going to make a bet on a project um you know I think it's a good project to bet on it's it's you know I I think it it still has some emissions to um to distribute right potentially making it reflexive which we saw right it's going to go up a lot it's going to drop a lot um in ter you know with respect to the price but it's still you know terms of circul sub billion dollar market cap um which means it has some real upside um especially if Bas takes off so just from kind of these other points that might be a little less discussed um there's a lot of positive signs around around the project my producer is gonna love this man he's big big I wish I could pull up the coinbase uh Brian Armstrong bald the bike picture I don't know if you guys have seen it um pull it up if so people aren't looking at or listening to this and thinking it's weird Mark when you if you can um do we have anything else we want to mention or do you want to end it on my awkward explanation of Brian Armstrong's picture well you know people that went to base early might have gotten rugged on the bald token but maybe aerod drum is a new opportunity not Financial advice guys not Financial advice this not Financial advice nothing is financial advice um okay Ryan Danny Daniel Shapiro thank you for coming on and talking thanks for having me first pod thanks for having me on that was fun I always love the the thank you at the end multiple responses and then a smile from Ryan it's great [Music]

========================================

--- Video 102 ---
Video ID: U_Sr6ohZgDM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U_Sr6ohZgDM
Title: Crypto’s Identity Crisis: Investing in a Better Tomorrow | Matti & Rapolas
Published: 2024-07-18 16:06:34 UTC
Description:
In this episode, we’re joined by Matti and Rapolas from Zee Prime Capital to discuss the evolution of SocialFi, the current state of the crypto markets, and some of the innovative projects they are backing. They dive into the importance of adaptability in venture markets, how culture arises onchain, and explore crypto’s identity crisis. Finally, they look back on the Fat Application Thesis, and how things have played out thus far.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.


Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
--
Join us at Permissionless III. Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iii
--
Follow Matti: https://x.com/mattigags
Follow Rapolas: ​​https://x.com/long_solitude
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Check out the Zee Prime Capital Blog: https://zeeprime.capital/blog
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:18 What's Interesting in Crypto Today?
8:42 The Prevalence of Infrastructure 
24:12 SocialFi's Evolution
34:39 Permissionless Ad
35:53 Polygon Ad
36:43 Avalanche Ad
37:25 Do Tokens Generate Culture? 
46:31 Approaching Problems in the Market
52:28 Crypto's Identity Crisis
1:00:56 Tackling Different Market Sectors as an Investor
1:09:11 The Fat Application Thesis
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
I think that currently we're in the uh I call it embracing our shadow part of the crypto Evolution you know we're kind of admitting we're Jokers nothing works and let's just find a new marginal buyer for this token or mcoin whereas you know last cycle we really believed or you know maybe partly fooled ourselves that we are rebuilding Finance with with Defi and the Deion were more like a fringe part of it but today they are us right today Deion are are embraced and I and I think that um it's a quote from y that only the man who goes through this Darkness can hope to make any further progress and I think like this is us on the rebound right like we were hurt this by this beautiful idea of of Defi and we're jumping on this mem coin canang and uh you know the financial degeneracy is unraveling and uh the shadow our shadow was playing out in the open the polygon Community grants program was launched with 1 billion tokens all four polygon Builders season 1 is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon projects builders on polygon these grants are for you join the aggregated future today by applying at polygon.net platform that has a novel consensus protocol subnet infrastructure and the hyper SDK toolkit which allows web free developers to easily launch custom powerful blockchain Solutions you can start building today by checking out the link nothing set on ZX research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice Pacho Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of ZX research today I'm joined by Ryan from blockworks research and MADD and rapalas from Z Prime Capital to talk about how they're thinking about the markets and crypto in general um before we get started Maddie rap thank you so much for joining do you want to give a short introduction of yourselves and a bit about Z Prime um thanks for having us um sure we um yeah Z Prime I think that this story goes that we we just emerg from the depths of the subconsciousness of this ecosystem and meaning we're likely demons but uh yeah we started as a prop shop VC Prop Shop group substantially into free funds over the years um majority of the capital we we manage is internal um and we're investors uh with a long-term investment Horizon um our funds are close-ended 10-year vehicle so um but we're looking for zeny wacky Solutions with the technological substance I guess that's how I would describe it in short perfect yeah that makes um I've looked through a lot of your research and a lot of your website and that's definitely the vibe that I got is that you guys invest in more zany is the right word I think like more interesting stuff than I think most other funds do um which I really appreciated do you want to talk a bit about what narratives you guys are looking at right now or what sectors you're interested in I think I'm mostly interested in being surprised um you know anything that you know I know that can become a narrative um has much less power than um something you know I or we have not conceived of yet and yeah I mean I know that crypto um in crypto we think of narratives and narrative waves and narrative rotation but to me at this point I'm I'm much less interested in the narratives because everyone knows these are just narratives and therefore like it has much less power so to some extent some of the narratives can materialize down the line but it always takes time to so personally and maybe some other Z Prime team members I'm not speaking for all but we try to pay attention to the slow more than uh to the fast um so I read somewhere that fast has all the attention but slow has all the power um but I do think many of our narratives like you know Desi culturei or socialy deepin and and defi will likely um in the long run produce great products I don't know the sequence of things I don't know when it'll happen I might see some good attempts right now but at this point I'm just hoping for some real Innovation trigger that Sparks a new wave of adoption regardless of a narrative I would also add maybe that I guess which narrative comes back is not as important as seeing just good execution on you know either one of them um I think people over index on let's say over engineering the tokenomics and like trying to think what else could be the utility of the token or how you know like it fits into the product but I think there's not enough we haven't seen like enough um good attempts at actually building out like useful products that wouldn't just cater to you know the existing demands of you know the people who are in crypto today um so I think maybe we should just like try to think how to execute better rather than you know come up with new narratives that die quickly and then we expect them to come back but ultimately that's that's not the whole point that makes sense I um regarding execution over I guess token Dynamics um and like how projects are building is there a specific thing that you look for in a project when they come to you or like when you're doing your own research process is there how how do you tell that like you think these people will be able to execute or they have a unique way of executing is there something specific there um I guess I can start by saying that you know we're always put off by just like simple copying of ideas you know from one ecosystem to the other and you know being X of Y uh is never like a good idea so I think I guess what we try to spot is just people thinking for themselves and uh trying to establish a new playbook rather than following in someone else's footsteps um because I think if you just like copy what other people did the chances had that the outcome that you're going to have is not going to be as great as the first person for whom it worked yeah that makes a lot of sense how how do you see products evolving over the past six months like cuz in the be I assume that the products that came up that you guys were interested in the protocols the apps they were quite a bit different to what is launching right now and what has been launching over the past few months um and not just in terms of like valuation but in terms of quality and their execution plans is there something that's noticeably different I think from the perspective of like a a VC or you know the the private markets um it was it was pretty volatile I think earlier last year it was mostly dead like it felt like no one was allocating sometimes felt like we were alone um and with the market pumping later last year um the private markets got crazy you know big rounds big INF plays AI nonon K rounds people started clustering around you know certain buzzwords and um optimizing for the VC pitch again um and I think that you know some some some investors that were scared to deploy earlier last year were were overcompensating and um I'd say um you know sort of like now with the market kind of going down and and and the lowf flow High fdv bubble bursting things started to to slow down again um and I think people are starting to reposition to to to f applications at least that's my feeling um so would say that um this is one of the bigger uh shifts uh in the industry is people starting to call out infra uh and large and um and uh asking for for more applications yeah even in um as far as what I've seen being discussed about ECC there seems to be some form of like infrastructure tiredness and people trying to get away from people constantly building infrastructure um in favor for building more apps and one thing that we talk about quite often in uh at block works is that the prevalence of uh infrastructure is kind of related to ethereum having to scale through rollups and that's why it's like there's a lot of infrastructure constantly launching because there's always like something that needs to be fixed is this do you guys think this is like a good take or do you have any other idea why we might be getting a lot more infrastructure than perhaps is necessary yeah I think well in one of the articles that we published recently is that you know because ethereum has sort of not enshrined a lot of the protocol Solutions um you know at the protocol level that created the sort of the DC Surplus value to be captured by you know investing in startups that do all of these small pieces themselves uh individually and you know all of these small pieces can then go to the market market and command you know High valuation um and so the natural incentive is just you know to do that and I think there's another aspect of this Market where because you have like quick time to liquidity compared to the traditional markets um then you're obviously incentivized to go for the you know for the largest outcome so like you know build huge ideas get you know liquidity quickly and then you know hope that it's like survives over time somehow as opposed to like starting with let's say a a smaller Niche wacky idea uh and you know taking a long time to execute it um so yeah I think liquidity and time to liquidity is also a big um aspect contributing to this and I think also in the past uh the biggest houss were always like infrastructure place and so there's this just mimetic uh mimetic desire to you know follow the what's worked in the past basically that's a that's super interesting um it I think it begs the question like okay the crypto industry needs to shift towards apps from infrastructure to me thinking about the people that I've met in this industry what they're interested what their skill sets are like an infrastructure founder is very different than like an application layer founder um I'm wondering if you agree disagree and like what are you seeing in the market in terms of like the founders that you're meeting with um like does this necessitate a completely different mindset than the current like mix of developer skill sets in crypto right now like are we going to have to pull from like big Tech or does that Talent exist um in crypto today I I definitely think that we always need to tap into the new talent pool um I think it does require um a different sort of a Founder in terms of that it requires some bit of idiosyncrasy right so you you probably cannot be just a nerd right you have to be a joke if we're going to the archetypes I I um and you know there are people like that um in crypto um and hopefully there there will be you know more of those um but I think it's it's also a question of a risk where uh you need to have a I think you need to have a higher sort of like a risk appetite to be building on the app layer because you will you will fail much faster than sort of like techn babbling yourself in the uh um you know in the infra um cluster because it's um you maybe get you know two or three pivots and and then you're and then you're gone because as an app you you really need users um it's not about you know Partnerships and um you know other deps using you it's um it's about very clear uh goals and and you know it's it's data driven do you have users and and how much money you're making by having these users or how much money can you actually potentially make um and I and I do feel like um perhaps other other ecosystems than ethereum are are doing better at this uh or I better at this because like ethereum's ethereum has this like a long-standing death fetish and I think think it's probably costing them in the race uh if if it's TR truly a race against other uh chains um but I you know I you know people are talking about even you know um I've heard lately uh amongst the DS it's like oh you know a good ux but I don't think you know the ux is a problem it's um if you're offering people great product or giving them a way to make money it matters less how many times you click or something like that so um I do feel like um we need to tap into the new Talent cool indeed um but I do also feel like we need to um stop playing these um um sort of like almost almost you know I think many people they would go for the ethereum space mostly they're over indexing or on impressing other people within their group so they're trying to out smart one another um and I think too many people in that Circle optimize for smartness they sort of like indulge in this self-image of um oh um smart map genius or blop Optimizer or ZK magician I don't know whatever right and and the fact that that they actually got rich in the past re uh re real fast as well just enables this obsession with status game rather than building outside of the C J circle jerk towards users so I think that the incentives are also not helping so if if if you get more people interested in building apps I guess um you know the the focus can can shift towards them and uh it may also convince existing Builders to to to build there also I think to add to this is that what we see let's say in the uh crypto consumer product space is that the founders who build that are not those who've been around in crypto for 10 years you know they're more like the people who entered crypto let's say in 2021 2022 be it through nfds or you know some other like popular means and you know if if sort of you're part of that cohort and you know you want to be a founder and build something like why would you you know why would you build another L2 or why would you build you know a bridge between l2s or the aggregator like the chance saw that you will want to build something that's kind of you know unexplored um because you know the incentive should be uh the strongest for that right so yeah I think just to reiterate what Maddie said is that um it matters like what part of group you are and like who who who I trying to impress those are two really interesting observations um I guess what we're alluding to is like different cultures forming around different chains and like kind of a path dependency there like with e being more infrastructure related or or more infrastructure focused um so that kind of makes me think about like brand new like blockchain ecosystems right like an aptose or a sweet like certainly less burdened by like these cultural path dependencies that you guys are alluding to um but at the same time they like it's hard to start a developer ecosystem right so like how do you guys think about new people coming into the space and what chain they're choosing I I always say that you know we are product investors for ecosystem second I I I truly don't think it matters where you're building as long as you're building a great product that because if you depend on being on a on a certain chain are you even a product or you just like a x of Y right like I'm a Unis swap of blast or or of Mega E or something um and yeah it's just uh um I don't think it really matters the ecosystem doesn't matter if we if we're talking about applications I agree with you mad I don't really I mean there's definitely some that have done better in certain ecosystems but I wonder if that's just culture or because of the way that they I mean I guess it's a bit of both it's like for example Bas has done um comparatively really well with social fight especially with um FR Tech and farcaster both being on there but then you also see valant efforts like I think lens is on ZK now um but it originally launched on polygon so I agree I mean apps I guess as long as you're building it for users the end goal should always be to abstract away the back end anyway to not let people focus on what's happening in the background uh going back to the base example I think it's um good right because like they started with the onchain summer last last year where you know they had this like daily nft mins and this and that we just like you know click with the expectation that this will amount to the air drop in the future or something like that and that obviously like didn't really uh lead to a lot of usage and then frch came along in August and that just like you know flew it out of the water and you know was the thing for quite a few months um and I think that's a good example that like it doesn't really matter the ecosystem that you're building if you have actually uh a mvel product that creates new user roles um you know like FR was at of time and and also um lately we had an experience we were on a call with a with a specific application and you know we kind of questioned whether they are you know because they were build on one of the uh or they're building on one of the uh I mean upcoming hyped um ecosystems and I asked like you know without this like who are you like do you have an identity or um does it matter that you build on this and it took a very wrong turn and people got offended just because us questioning if this is like an ecosystem play or is this an actual application that cares about the product more and I think there's a lot of a lot of this where you know it's even funny to talk about culture of these things because these things have haven't been around for you know maybe some for like a year like there's no culture it's made up there's no Community there're just people uh waiting for upset which is which is fine but there's no culture um they're just you know opportunist um mostly manufactured applications that um you know got entitled with like a bloated seed raises um but they have nothing to show for right it just you know um it's a you know decent salesmanship but I guess the staff and if we're asking where are these new users coming from um there are they really don't care if you're build on Bara chain or Mega E or monad or whatever thing that's not even launched yet right it's just um it doesn't make sense it's just a very very kind of Niche inward looking game that um um I don't think it's productive when it comes to um yeah I would say it's mostly Zero Sum rather than than than positive sum for for crypto yeah I mostly agree with you I um I think like the most extreme example of that do you even have an identity un like without this chain is when throughout 2022 2023 there were a lot of um apps that were just over and rap you kind of mentioned this is like where X on Y and I think it was like with GMX Forks a lot it was like oh we're GMX on polygon we're GMX on avalanch well I guess it was already an avalanche but you get the just it's it was a lot of these and I think we're going to get a big wave of this with the new l1s or l2s that launches well especially the super hyped Pointes um Mega E bar chain monad are the ones that you mentioned I think those are going to largely disappoint um is my controversial take maybe not Mega E just because I haven't read up too much into it but I mean I like bar chain and monad and the guys but I feel like they're going to be a bit overhyped I'm curious what you guys think though I don't know like there's nothing to assess yet I don't know like uh I don't think anything has been launched like nothing is live on mainnet right um um I I don't think it really matters um I think that for example Solana when he was coming up it it it wasn't it wasn't hyped right I remember like 20 2020 um in like the ethereum community there was a lot of f around U you know the unlocks um in early 21 um and and stuff like that like you didn't see salana coming up right like um whereas um you know all of these um ecosystems or ecosystem I mean these chains that you mentioned like they everyone sees them um they're overhyped um they you know they're not launch yet so I mean I don't want to talk about things being priced in but um yeah um I I I'm not saying that they won't be successful or they cannot be successful but I guess it's uh um it it it might largely disappoint um in the long run who knows uh but in the short run I don't know and I think one one one of the other questions that I give to Founders you know who let's say build in the new ecosystems that are far from launch uh is like why do you want to sacrifice like six or nine months of your time just to wait until this chain launches so that you can prove your idea like isn't isn't a better use of your time just launch it somewhere where it's like available today where it's possible today because you know there's plenty of block space and wouldn't you want to validate at least something in those six or nine months until we wait um and no one gave me a good answer yet yeah that's a fair point I mean worst case you can just Port it over to these chains um I kind of want to talk a bit about social fight with you guys and not just socialy like a bunch of these new consumer apps that you guys mentioned that you look into um but just to start off with social fight how do you see it evolving um do you think that there's something there I know we said we don't like to talk too much about narratives and if it will come back or not but how do you view that space going forward um I think that we've we did see some good attempts um whether it was frch which was roughly last year when everyone got bored I think that it was a it was a cool game when um where it didn't provide sufficient depth as a game um and what happened later was that you know they didn't sort of like double down on the on the sort of like vertical aspect but like when really horizontal and now when I you know go into the ab I don't even know what's happening yeah um then um I think meme coins largely are um also social five primitive um that got validated and um so I so I would say that these are like a first experiments someone someone said um uh and and we keep repeating this that that that frch is is to socialy what cryptokitty was to um nfts and um that means I think well we are largely optimistic we've invested in um bunch of things but um I I I do feel like it's going to take a bit longer to to to get somewhere but um I'm I'm trying to be optimistic and hopefully someone will combine these ingredients uh in a way that will make sense in the next um couple of months and we will get some kind of um socialy or as I like to call it now culture um application that uh uh will become adopted at least will um sort of outshine um frch or some other um other apps that we've had so far and also I think uh it's interesting to observe how let's say frch uh inspired many Founders in Social f space you know with the bonding curve and then we saw many many people try to apply the bonding curve to their product um you know even in places like decentralized science uh where you could trade early stage research uh on a bonding curve but anyway I think um it could be that next breakthrough in Social pie comes from something completely unrelated you know something like maybe blinks that salana and you know dialect enabled you know on on X um and this is you know something completely out of the field that you wouldn't expect right because the way people thought of social F until now is that you know okay you have like these mini social apps and you have speculation on them and you know you you stand to make a lot of money in a quick amount of time um and then somehow that you know kind of reaches the escape Velocity and you don't rely on speculation as much but yeah maybe the next breakthrough comes from you know somewhere that's uh completely unrelated and and and probably um sort of coming up with cool features that could be embedded with existing social networks uh could be better play than sort of the existing sort of unchain social protocols um that are largely just recreating um what we already have but but on chain right um so I would say we grew more skeptical of these sort of Twitter clones um and we were never big fans but we did we did see value in um a decentralized graph but I would say now less so so um and therefore are more focused on like cool features that could be that could become sticky products but could live anywhere right it doesn't have to be again ecosystem specific it's just you know a cool and useful app yeah to jump in there cool features that see that that could be sticky anywhere that does that sound like when I think of things that I've seen in crypto that might fit that mold maybe like a blinks or frames like is that what you're alluding to yes yeah yeah I think blinks is a good example that Salon enabled for X um and Frames is is also like a novel a novel thing that you know helped forecaster to get some relevance and uh you know the hype and then you know on board more developers and users so ultimately these are two like very different things right because you know far foraster is building its own ecosystem that supposedly can offer all the things that X does and more whereas you know blinks just basically says look we already have a perfect social graph so why not just kind of add the commercial and transactional twist to it because you know your wallet can can do that uh while you're on X yeah um related question here uh I'm thinking about like Market sizing for something like social thi and it gets it could be a complicated exercise right because I think about current social networks they're really not financialized and you can like you can find opin opinion polling where like people just do not like making financial decisions um and do not like speculation and you know we exist within an industry where you know it's run by speculation right like it's the it's the core driving force so like given these kind of like Tendencies like how from a market sizing perspective how do you think about these like features these social F features that are driven by speculation financialization yeah I think it's um it's a question of like um explicit and implicit financialization right like um maybe there's a way how you can embed it into the experience where it's not um where it doesn't feel like speculating um that's one thing so I it's very hard to um understand what the market size is if um you know we don't even have like product Market fit so um I have no idea what the market can be I think I'm optimistic about it being very large I'm you know I I kind of think that crypto will eat consumer um in um in the long run uh but I guess we don't have that wedge yet um we do have a wedge of um of sort of like of tokens which um I think um I don't think uh R will necessarily agree with me here but I I I I I do think that tokens are consumer products um and that is a that is a pretty big wedge and the question is how do we take it from here or where do we take it from here how do we how do we keep on sort of like building on this consumer product that that we uh that we created you know this this new asset class that um uh is consumed by people not in a way that um is necessarily sustainable today but how do we translate it into um into um uh sort of applications and and just like General new behavior um uh on the internet yeah also well first I would say that you know it's very hard to see the market before it exists right like to conceive the size of the market before it actually started um so we we don't really spend much time thinking about Market sizing for things um and then another thing I agree with mat what what he said about you know explicit and implicit things and I think think you know social media in general is actually like pretty financialized implicitly because you know like people like influencers with big followings I mean that that is their business model right like it is a financial tool for them um and then you know consumers also you know have resources that they allocate to like you know different influencers and different forms of content and uh and eventually you know they pay for Content as well so I don't really agree that the social mediums today are not financialized at all I think implicitly and in some ways explicitly they are and I guess the question is if you know crypto products can push it along the curve towards being more explicit than you know than what it does to Consumers on the platforms and how do their relationships change among each other I would I would also add that if if I'm right and tokens are the product and there are these weird luxury goods they give this illusion of you know a stake in this bright future or in this idea and they're a game of up and down um ultimately there are new assets um that have probably not reached its best form but um um I I hope in the next couple of months we'll we'll have some Innovation on this front and we sort of get closer to crypto um as a consumer and then you know if you're thinking about Tam I think the Tam is um uh infinitely large um I I really do believe that um uh but I think we're still you know couple of um uh Innovation triggers away from that hey guys permissionless the event for crypto natives is heading west to Salt Lake City and we're bringing the biggest names in crypto together for an incredible C Miss event join me in the rest of blockworks on October 9th to hear from more than 200 Industry Titans including Nick white from Celestia shiram from layer and Keon from Mona the conversations at permission list will be covering the hottest themes in crypto including modularity reaking the Bitcoin and Solon ecosystems Ai and crypto rollups l2s institutional adoption and of course the November election that will be right around the cor we couldn't be more excited about this event and it's happening in one of the most beautiful places in the US ticket prices will be increasing towards the end of June so get your ticket today make sure to use the code so I get some credit and bragging rights from the rest of the team uh use ZX10 for 10% off on your ticket one more thing we're also hosting the permissionless re hack ofont in collaboration with bbx the theme this year is a multi-chain future to build a better cross chain experience so I don't have to have a heart attack every time I bridge to a new chain all hacka found participants will receive a free ticket to attend permissions so if you're a developer come join us in Salt Lake City team up with fellow devs and build the multi-chain future polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open- source ZK Tech to aggre at crypto liquidity and user bases empowering developers to grow in a unified web of interoperable chains with the a layer the a layer is a machine for Network effect don't worry about boost wrapping liquidity just build anywhere in the a layer to tap the liquidity and users everywhere to support the aggregated future and boost scrap quality project the polygon Community grants program was launched with 1 billion tokens All For polygon Builders season one of the community grants program is live right now and features 35 million in madic to for the next generation of polygon projects for Builders on polygon or projects interested in migrating these grants are for you join the aggregated future and feel empowered to grow in an infinite web of unified interoperable chains apply today at polygon.net Porter Avalanche becomes a seamlessly linked network of many sovereign blockchains that communicate so smoothly they feel like a single chain teleporter is an evm compatible cross chain communic ation protocol built on top of avalanche for message it allows any evm chain un Avalanche to send messages assets and data to one another in a simple fast affordable and secure way teleporter and Avalanche work messaging provide a new foundation for how Avalanche blockchains can communicate and how developers can easily build cross chain applications out of the box build anything you want any way you want on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for web free de check it out by clicking the link below I kind of want to talk about that um tokens Genera in culing because you talk about this or I mean you guys talk about this in your rwa versus NWA PS which I one thing that you mentioned is that crypto is generating cultures memes and narratives and that we can have new consumer products at markets can you um I guess give an example of what these could look like or potentially what you see these evolving into because I'm maybe I'm just being too much of a midwidth but I'm having a bit of trouble envisioning this well they already I mean are we have been just talking about it right like you know these new ecosystems are essentially just people organizing themselves around a a new brand right then you know it's it's it's a it's a tech that it's wrapped into a brand and people are already building apps on that Tech even though you know the tech is not alive um but it's only internal right it's only in crypto but um I think there's a way and I maybe it's a I I'm not sure if it's a good example but the mother token you know it was um um it is also a brand right the same way as any other token is a brand and and and you know there there were some products attached to it and I and I do think that this is this is um um this is the way um so it's um um you know what are token become more like um um you know token um uh enabled um uh sort of brands or or or just uh partaking in a specific Endeavor or culture um um you know whether they could help with like a co-creation and attribution aspect um that's another thing um but I I do think that um you know crypto has a pretty decent overlap with like the aspiration culture of of you know Tik Tok and the social media in in general um and um I do think that this is where we could you know uh where we could um where we could find our wedge as in you know like our culture like the crypto culture is built on moving money um and and money is the enabler of the aspiration culture so uh that's the wedge and um you know that's why we have beam coins in my opinion and I and I and I do feel that already shows that okay so people can organize around this you know Meme or a brand and I just think we need to find more productive endeavors where you know this could become like a meme coin with a utility for a lack of a better description and I think there you have you know the consumer products um you know whether it's mam coins that are uh enabling gating access or um they enabling premium axes or whatever it's just I think there's a lot of different different experiments that we could that that we could we could do uh we had this idea of culture bootstrapping pools where um you could sort of like um um try to bootstrap a new sort of um brand uh through you know Kickstarter like mechanism but you know leveraging some U um crypto Dynamics um so yeah I think tokens are the and the distribution rolled in one in into one um um so I I do see all these perhaps abstract sort of takes on uh how how crypto is a is consumer and and and how it could conquer consumer but um um yeah I think that uh in next I don't know couple months um to you know year or two we we will see more more specific examples of that I don't know if they will be permanently successful there will be just you know another sign of something like like you know the experiments we had before but yeah um we're probably closer to to this Vision that's and B you also have a m lady pfp so that's definely just real world asset it's NWA yeah I um I was actually just going to mention that I with tokens um becoming culture and them like allowing you to maybe token gate but also like you're kind of showing off what um your identity is and I feel like nfts were a really good representation of this because when you see somebody who's a Mady or somebody who's a board ape or somebody who's a I don't know a pudgy or a Bitcoin puppet you have a very clear idea of who they are um and every once in a while this kind of gets gaded and more and more people get into a community and it gets ruined and then it gets fixed again um but this is something that I I don't know I was thinking about a few weeks ago we did an nft episode and I feel like that could also be somewhat related to this tokens generating culture and identity thing but maybe it's just the I guess the crypto Kitty moment of it like nfts were too obvious but it memco coins are cheaper they're easier um tokens in general are just I feel like more natural for people um so I'm excited to see how it evolves mother was definitely a good example I feel like a lot of people this cycle are also attaching themselves to tokens um that's something that we've seen like anom and whff he attached himself very well so that's also going to be interesting to see how those Dynamics work but I guess like kind of to bring us more into reality how do you view um this is kind of going to be related to the rwa versus NWA thing but only tangentially how do you view increased attention in crypto from large Trad five funds and institutions do you think there'll be a net positive or do you think we don't really need it because your guys's takes on the rwa versus NWA piece are very much like we already have something very cool here that we should continue building but we're getting increasingly interest by yeah I think ultimately it's obviously positive right if you want to you know the asked class to grow to trillions and ultimately tens of trillion so it's I think it's about like the old money you know learning new rules and buying the new assets that are like relevant today right and U you know it's I don't think it's bad that you know they they're trying to participate and obviously they come with their own baggage of kind of mental models that work in the past for them and you know some of those apply here and some of them don't and you know it's it's not about like porting the real world assets to the chain it's about like you know the existing Capital owners so quote unquote trpi or sovereigns whatever you know like learning about these you know nwaas uh and um kind of buing into the culture and like into the into the new rules um so I think it's positive but it's it's not like you know strictly it's not a question of like what kind of assets they they bring with themselves because I think like what we see is that some of these funds are actually interested you know in buying the defi tokens and um it's not like there's no interest at all I think that you know some of them want to learn and uh are willing to kind of be wrong um and learn something for from it do you think as they come in um large participants institutions that it becomes more competitive um I mean I feel like that's just a general take is that it becomes more competitive but do you think that there will always be somewhat of an edge for crypto native people people have been here for years who understand maybe the NWA a lot more than than new participants or do you think it just gets competed away I think you can also make a question whether the people who have been around from you know like 2016 20 201 un necessarily up toate with what's happening now right it's um I think it's like it's not necessarily I think it is like more competitive right but some of those new participants will want to learn the new rules and kind of you know play by the new rules and some of them will try to you know look at bees and uh uh DCFS and uh you know maybe it will fair for them differently but um yeah I don't think it's bad or I think fair I um I have one thing specifically for you rap I um I read your wedge is the founders Edge piece and I really like that idea of um small markets discover large markets and the example that you gave was Unis Swap and blur um I kind of want to ask you like do you think that the reason that a lot of projects now are building um to solve more abstract problems um do you think that's incentive missign or we kind of talked about this before but um or do you think it's just a natural way for people to approach problems like they want to start with oh I'm GNA solve everything instead of focus on a specific solution yeah I think it's important to realize that you know we are you know in the phase of the market cycle where we're kind of at alltime highs for Bitcoin and so I think that the natural incentive for people is to be like okay this is the moment to you know grab as much cash as possible and you know execute on a Playbook that works because there's like much time left you know to to do this uh or at least I feel like some of them think that whereas you know those Innovation triggers as M likes to call them are you know always happening like in the depth on a bare Market where like there is no rush right because you don't see the light at the end of the tunnel you don't know when the huge outcome will uh will come for you and so you are forced to think from you know first principles and question the existing standards because like nothing actually works in the bare market right so like you have more freedom to explore the uh idea space uh so this is where we typically you know see those uh interesting breakthroughs um and uh what was the other question or did I cover it um no that was it you covered it um I also want to ask like you said in the bear we saw some of these like new ideas and one that you mentioned was blur and how it kind of um started off by appealing to like a to solve a specific problem um and then it competed uh against openc and now it dominates volumes um for nfds do you have any or can you either of you guys think of any recent projects that did this well as well in terms of identifying a problem that needs to be solved and work towards it um maybe I can mention one portfolio company of ours which is froots uh and frobots is basically a game that you play you know with a controller and you control a robot uh you know on a sidewalk that's placed somewhere in the world like in different cities and you complete quests uh you know you complete challenges by driving the robot and interacting with the uh with the uh pedestrians because there's like a camera and microphone and so it's kind of kind of it's fun you know uh but at the same time what they're doing is they're collecting you know the uh the data set from all of these rights uh that will eventually be veryable very valuable for uh you know training uh of of robots and I think that they're on to something because um like such you know such data set doesn't like really exist in the real world or if it does then it's very limited and I think this is you know an example where you start with a game and you know your user is the gamer uh you just want to have fun but at the same time you're solving like a much uh larger problem that is not obvious you know just on the surface I would I would also add uh freaking hair because balding is a is a real issue that has not been solved and uh there's a real audience for it and it has truly been underfunded um and you know they have the token they have the memes they have a clear Mission and to me this is one of the most um important ongoing experiments in crypto where it's tied to actual research um and actual studies being published and um the products being developed um and consumer products being launched you know their their shampoo uh that they also have launched so um and it also ties into Commerce so um I you know I like these idiosyncratic um ideas more than um uh you know just a very generic products because with these idiosyncratic ideas you're um you're more likely solving um a a real problem that is not necessarily only sort of like um Crypton native problem yeah that's I mean if they can solve baling that would be incredible um yeah also what I what I just realized you know when Maddie said this is that you know like a lot of the products that are built today are actually you know for people who are already on chain and it's fine but I think we also have to realize that like the people who are already on chain they're not going to leave ever right because it's almost like an addiction for them it's like you know part of who they are and so like whichever product you will throw at them they will use right because there's like the incentive there's the intellectual stimulus of you know trying something new and like being early to something but so maybe at the same time it's like not a high enough bar right because like you know these people will use this app like however crappy they are and so you know going back to what we talked at the beginning of the PO about you know like raising the bar for execution I think this also goes back to that which is that you know we have to like set a bar higher and so I think here is you know instead of looking inwards which is kind of the the core users of onchain today they're looking outwards and saying you know crypto is just like means to n to to solve some problem yeah that's fair I um I actually have one thing that I wanted to talk about since the very beginning is um the optimistic crypto piece um the optimistic crypto pitch piece um which I Echo like a lot of the thoughts mentioned in it one thing that I wanted to bring up is that I feel like crypto's having kind of an identity crisis like you guys are approaching it in my opinion very well is like we're just trying to build some at to an extent like silly stuff but also to an extent like actually interesting and cool things that might be able to solve issues that are either related to crypto or are not related to crypto and I feel like in the past we had this idea like oh we're kind of stumbling to success um but we're like we have very clear values it's decentralized it's less tyranical it's like it's crypto um from the very Beginnings like what people have but now this cycle or at least like over the past year I feel like everyone's been a bit jaded um it's become like let's just gamble a little bit make some money and leave do you think that um this is a theme at all or is this like me reading into the timeline too much as we get a pullback or how do you think it's going to get resolved um in interestingly enough this week uh we sent our um investor letter and I wrote it I think that currently uh we're in the uh I call it embracing our shadow part of the the crypto Evolution and this is like a union mythology of us sort of like confronting our sort of Shadow you know and it's sort of like an end of the self side that um you know we're kind of admitting we're Jokers nothing works and let's just find a new marginal buyer for this token or mcoin whereas you know last cycle we really believed or you know maybe partly fooled ourselves we are rebuilding Finance with with defi right we found this magic pmf and and the Deion were more like a fringe part of it but today they are us right today deons are are embraced and I and I think that um it's a it's a quote from y that only the man who goes through this Darkness can hope to make any further progress um and and mem coins are this um or this people call it finan nihilism I don't I don't agree with that definition but um or or even term but people know what it refers to and I and I and I and I think like this is us on the rebound right like we were hurt this by this beautiful idea of of Defi and we're jumping on this meme coins K and uh you know the financial degeneracy is unraveling and uh the shadow our shadow was playing out in the open and it's like the true confrontation between you know the vision of the future human nature the expectation and the failure to achieve it and you know on one hand uh is the you know expected inflow into ETFs and the normalization of crypto investing and um it's a it's a wonderful dichotomy of this degeneracy on on on one hand and institutional adoption on the other um and I could go on um uh sort of you know I'm asking myself uh with regards to crypto edfs like is this a trojan horse or um are we admitting defeat and um uh since you asked about like sort of reconciling this and I'm looking at crypto today and I'm thinking you know this is you know we're at a at a stage where this is either a one revolution to a reformation and free potentially normalization um you know if it's a revolution it's Revolution by Trojan Horse Reformation you know by admitting that you know crypto is important and and has a right to coexist uh with you know the the um standard of financial markets and system and you know normalization you know of Boomers just you know needing you know more things to sell to people but the credibly neutral money aspect is somewhat decapitated right and and if you look around there are no revolutionaries here and um if they are they're they're they're silent minority and um crypto has lost this Anarchist period right it's it's opportunistic to the Bone and and almost you know it's a zero sum game as we've been discussing and bankers probably love it more than than your average techie um and if it becomes a revolution then it's probably only by Serendipity at this point um that would you know include implosion of the existing system and and um I think revolutions only happen when the idea is stronger than the payoff or when you have nothing to lose right and I think ideas and ideology and crypto are getting weaker and and people have too much to lose these days right so so you know the reformists Among Us you know the um the lobbyists the big exchanges you know the big investors I think they favor the outcome of the Reformation right like so it's more of a negotiated um negotiating with the incumbent um and I think that crypto is not going strong because we are so brilliant at the moment but because you know the opponents or the incumbents are even more dumb and and corrupt and on a bureaucratic autopilot um And in regards to normalization I think you know black rock is on the side of the money and does not have true ideology so I think we're not or will not get decapitated by Direct Hit um although you know like the government attacks and related genes make it difficult for us but um I think now we're fighting for reformation and hope we don't get normalized um I still think despite the fro and the lack of product um just by the virtue of the permissionless access to markets we're we're ahead and so so money will flow for the path of Le resistance and and and most money is Dum money um you know just like those schools of fish swimming in the ocean you know and if it's easier to uh into crypto they'll they'll they'll flow here right and I um I think it's getting so difficult to operate under this you know sort of kyc AML authoritarian regime to open even like a broker account and uh account and it's just governments are taking away access to the markets while while crypto is adding more right it's like more ways to access more markets for more people and yes it's mostly dumb things like meme coins um but the agencies you know the the government agency that take away access to markets are you know are even dumber than these mcoins in my opinion like banks are not businesses anymore they are government bureaucracies uh in the way they operate and then you know in terms of their dependence as well so um all in all I think that despite us being in this weird stage um I think we're you know sort of like reforming um and um I think we can still grow you know 10 eggs in the next months and years um um to the diservice of major majority of insiders by the way but um because everyone just feel like they're Geniuses but they're but they're not um it's just you know that our you know competitor opponent it's it's it's ruin itself so I would say price action wise I'm probably more optimistic in the short to midterm but in terms of actual substance you know technological innovation that leads to you know better Commerce that we discuss right now um I think that's that's that's further in the future wow yeah I um I'm I I don't even know what to add because that's exactly kind of what I was looking for um and I mostly agree with you I think money will flow into crypto I I also agree that we're kind of like in a weird place but over the next let's say five 10 I mean I'm always optimistic that's the issue with me is that I'm always a Believer and it's very good right now but at some point it might not be as good but we'll see we'll see how everything develops um Ryan do you have anything that you want to add Maddie I thought that was a fantastic answer um that that was awesome um I I just I'm I'm scrolling through your portfolio here um and I just like wanted to ask one kind of highlevel um question from an investor perspective I see like a very wide um array of bets across um like disperate themes right like they're is like decentralized training via Jensen there is like prediction markets via poly Market um ceramic is a super interesting primitive flash Bots Mev like the um there there's a lot of expertise here embedded in your portfolio portfolio and I'm wondering like how do you guys attack that from an investor perspective um it seems like nothing's off limits but in my mind like you kind want to like zero in and specialize on something like how do you how do you guys handle tackling so many different markets here yeah I think I you know first I would say that you know we've been around from 2018 so there's like multiple funds that we invested from and uh you know the thesis that we have they they change um and our I guess preferences and and Theses are fluid and uh you know we just always we don't necessarily you know like put out the thesis and uh only invest in the founders and projects that do that thing but we just actually look for you know people who think genuinely and are generally interested in let's say you know a fees and we kind of try to just assess whether the idea itself is um original and the kind of out of the box and you know you can be like you can have a great idea regardless of which crypto vertical you're working on uh and so I think that is that is kind of like our reflection of the wi portfolio that we have um and I think I I don't know like any fund [Music] who like over a long period of time managed to have Stellar performance by just like zeroing in on on want thing right um I think like these these crypto ideas they have cycles of their own it's not just like you know like one big cycle where everything goes up in Tandem and everything gets proven at the same time uh they actually have their own Cycles um and they have like idiosyncratic things that work for them um and so yeah I think that's that kind of summarizes it I don't know matter if you have anything to them I don't know I maybe just if you know like um if like three years ago if you put together like the you know the best math me experts and give them money to invest in me related stuff I don't think their portfolio would be would be that great so I don't I don't necessarily think that um you need to have like a 100% expertise and understanding all the new ones because first of all they change real fast and sometimes if you're if you're you're if you're too zeroed in on something you're missing the bigger picture um so that's why we we want to maintain generalist uh because I think that we like the idiosyncrasy of it um and yeah I guess the incentive is to become more more focused I think uh the institutional investors um talk about like crypto funds being you know like like like theme oriented is better you know because they have true expertise but I think it's just an illusion of an expertise like this is so Dynamic so so you know it's changing so much you know if you're expert in something to today probably you know you don't even understand a single thing about the topic in like three months because um yeah so um I guess it's also you know a way how to sort of remain fresh and to be always on the lookout uh for a new thing when you're doing uh you know various niches and verticals in crypto so um for us it's it's been very productive to be challenged by different um themes and uh crypto verticals and also you know as an investor you have to learn from from the mistakes that that happened in the portfolio and uh you know crypto different crypto verticals and ecosystems you know they they die fast as Maddie has explained right so you know I don't think it Ser serves anyone well just to you know kind of not like not Tak in the learnings from the market that you have especially if you invest over long periods of time and so yeah that I think that is a good representation of uh you know someone who learns from from things and then Builds on them yeah I also think that um you know we're at the frontier um here in crypto and I don't think anyone needs any sort of credentials to do anything here because it's it's a frontier um and it's a actually sign that you're at a true Frontier that you um that you can just even as a Founder you know you you don't need anything just you know write a couple lines of code and suddenly you have a a product that um it's it's it's adopted right so I guess that's a true sign of a Frontier where you don't have the you know sort of like a you don't need a list of credentials to be successful or to you know make a decision or to deploy capital or you know anything like that because uh it is truly mostly experimental than than than anything else I agree I think that's probably my favorite bit about crypto is that there is no need particularly for any credentials that you're encouraged to go in learn um and just build and do research and there's nobody's like oh actually are you like allowed to do that um which which I feel like is kind of the look and trafi yes exactly and even you know if you look at for example dii decentralized science so so so who should be investing in this or building only scientists like I I think it's exactly what it's trying to undo is you know unbundle you know sort of like science from Academia from like the bureaucracy from the credentials um so yeah I think it's a um to some send a um I think I wrote it it is like uh the frontier uh like the the the frontier of the old west and meeting Las Las Vegas this is this is crypto so good luck like um I'm counting cards there yeah I think this has been my like General whenever anybody's like oh like why would you care about the centralized AI or why would you ever care about um like decentralized gaming like fully onchain gaming and the general take is that like why would anybody who has the credential just come and work in crypto why wouldn't they just do something for some established traditional company and I like I think crypto has such a unique way of a like you have a hyperf financialized platform where you have guaranteed at least like let's say five to 10,000 users day one who just want to try out stuff because of various Financial incentives and two is that you can just come in and just build even though you like as long as you follow a specific IDE not ideology but General theme like you have to want to build for some form of decentralization you're happy to just you can just come in and build whatever you want to build which I always find really cool um I have one last question but and I don't I like I'm cognizant of the time here but the fat app fees that you guys wrote about in 2022 late 2022 um how has that evolved is that still your view um and to kind of after that as a secondary bit how do you see it apps in general um evolving over the next year how do you see the app landscape changing I would just briefly say that I think that the the the FED application is kind of just start to play out or maybe it's becoming sort of more validated um than in the past I think that the um um last couple of years infrastructure has been the dominant play and now the market is um saying okay we need more apps um so so so in that respect that's a beginning of of validating it I think the idea that if you own the users you're going to build your own stack um you know that one um is also playing out and I think that um that has not changed um and yeah rap do you have you probably have something else to add here yeah I would say that you know since end of 2022 we just saw more apps you know building their own chains their own rollups uh building their own wallets abstracting the chains um so I think we it kind of it's playing out as as we expected I think on the on the fat app pces um in terms of what's going to happen over the next year um in in in you know in relation to the apps I just expect that we see like many more experiments that as we like to say you know they they happen fast and then they fail fast right because the feedback cycle is very short very quick um so yeah we just kind of want to see more experimentation and not necessarily just like in one ecosystem but like across many many different vertical and ecosystems uh and I I'm I'm not entirely sure I I don't think that any of the products the crypto products that we have today are necessarily winners in the long term in the uh crypto consumer space um I think you know it could all change very quickly U as we saw in the past you know uh for example like p. fun uh you know came came out kind of out of nowhere and uh created a market for themselves and and uh I just wouldn't discount crypto's ability to produce these types of outcomes uh when no one expects so it's very hard to like extrapolate the current traction and be like okay these apps you know are going to succeed in six months perfect um guys thank you so much for coming on this was incredible thank you for for for having us yeah um Maddie is MADD gags on Twitter and rap is actually long Solitude on Twitter um I'll link both of those in the notes either way but MD Rus do you have anything that you specifically want people to look into is there any like source that you would guide them to or is that it um you know we have our we have our um blog uh some people um sort of glorified by calling it research um but we do have our our writings on our website um we do have a newsletter um and you know it's a it's a fun read but I don't think it's for necessarily for everyone uh but yeah I think that uh that's the only thing that comes to mind yeah I have nothing else to add fantastic yeah make sure to check out the writing because even though MADD is being very humble it is very good um and their feces are often quite different to what other people write about and I always find them like very insightful and well written um thank you to the listeners Ryan have anything to add or no are we done great conversation guys thank you for being on all right fantastic have a good one are you currently building on polygon or interested in migrating season one of the polygon Community grants program is live right now and features 35 million in madic to support the next generation of polygon projects builders on polygon these grants are for you join the aggregated future today by applying at polygon.net o [Music]

========================================

--- Video 103 ---
Video ID: ZFSzeRhrNdo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZFSzeRhrNdo
Title: Are There Too Many Liquid Staking Tokens? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-07-17 16:41:15 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Blockworks Research analysts discuss Trump’s potential impact on the crypto markets, single asset vs bundled spot ETFs, and recent developments in the Hyperliquid ecosystem. Additionally, they explore the role of Maker in the DeFi space and its business fundamentals. Finally, they dive into the significance of LSTs in the market today, and the challenges they will face in the future.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.

Resources:
Inside Hyperliquid’s Onchain Perp DEX Vision | Jeff Yan
YouTube: http://youtu.be/cxyUtPoC1-E
Apple: http://apple.co/4b0ut8M
Spotify: http://spoti.fi/4b0uyt6
--
Special thanks to our sponsor LayerZero

Stay up-to-date with the LayerZero Ecosystem by following: https://twitter.com/LayerZero_Labs
--
Follow Luke: https://x.com/0xMether
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:50 Trump's Impact on the Crypto Markets
3:44 Are More Crypto ETFs Coming?
10:03 MakerDAO and DeFi 1.0
23:02 LayerZero: Ethena Ad
25:15 Developments in the Hyperliquid Ecosystem
38:53 Sanctum Launches Profiles v2
42:51 How Many LSTs Are Needed?
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 104 ---
Video ID: Uyl1QflP3z4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uyl1QflP3z4
Title: Inside the Future of Cosmos and Appchains| Jehan Tremback
Published: 2024-07-11 14:39:44 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Boccaccio and EffortCapital are joined by Jehan from Informal Systems. They dive into the unique aspects of Cosmos, including its history, and the evolution of its ecosystem. They also discuss the pros and cons of appchains versus rollups, and the work being done to improve the appchain deployment process. Finally, Jehan shares his thoughts on the future of Cosmos.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.

Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
--
Join us at Permissionless III. Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iii
--
Follow Jehan: https://x.com/JTremback
Follow Informal Systems: https://x.com/informalinc
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow EffortCapital: https://x.com/EffortCapital
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:11 Overview of Cosmos 
8:13 Rollups vs Appchains
17:16 What Does ICSv2 Improve?
31:52 Permissonless Ad
33:06 Polygon Ad
33:57 Avalanche Ad
34:39 The Cosmos Hub Pitch
40:20 Babylon Integration
42:37 ATOM Value Accrual
48:18 The Cosmos Hub End Game
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 105 ---
Video ID: ohgY8T30U_8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ohgY8T30U_8
Title: Are New Tokens Always Better? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-07-10 15:06:28 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Blockworks Research analysts discuss recent market movements, the AI x Crypto crossover, and the problem with narrative trading. The conversation also covers Germany’s Bitcoin sales, Mt. Gox distributions, and the implications of FTX repayments. Finally, they speculate on whether or not Blast has been left for dead.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice. 
--
Special thanks to our sponsor LayerZero

Stay up-to-date with the LayerZero Ecosystem by following: https://twitter.com/LayerZero_Labs
--
Follow Danny: https://x.com/defi_kay_
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:47 Germany and Mt Gox Selling
7:43 Are New Tokens Always Better?
18:41 The AI Trade
30:36 LayerZero: Pendle Ad
35:40 The Problem With Narrative Trading
46:03 Mainstream Crypto Applications 
49:16 Has Blast Been Left For Dead?
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
the only bearish take is that like a whale is selling like that's fantastic like macro data is softening but it's not clear that like traditional markets are anywhere near recession yet so like this is your opportunity we've spoken about this a few times on this pod that you know like you said Danny we're just dying for a pullback to see some reasonably priced things to rotate into um valuations are still a little stretched even after the pullback but like short term if you wanted to rotate into higher beta things like this is that opportunity because like look you know the economy is still chugging along traditional financial markets are not drisking uh and that typically means the cyle has legs so this is an opportunity nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice Pacho Ryan and our guests May hold POS positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of ZX research today I'm joined by Danny and Ryan from the blockworks research team to talk about all that is happening in the markets uh and across crypto before we get started in with some prepi topics I want to hear from you guys what you've been looking at over the past week yeah I think um with the recent activity in the market recent uh drops dips and prices um you know selling of some coins um there are a lot of altcoins that previously looked quite expensive you know over the past several months um I think we're seeing you know if you look at stuff like apos you know newer like gen 3 blockchains if you want to refer to them that way are nearing their all-time lows um I think if those are if that's Tech that you're interested in you know there's there's some opportunities in coins that did not exist previously that you know were just running and running to to new highs um so I you know it's a time in the market where things are starting to look cheap or more affordable than than they did before and and I think that's interesting it opens up opportunities to to look at more coins than than um were pre previously available yeah that's a good point I do want to speak a bit more about at what point like do you go with new token over old token because I feel like that's something that's always in people's minds like we've kind of been ingrained with this idea of new is better um but there's also like some old coins like maker and stuff that are just cash flow generating at this point and it's like I'm not sure if that's what you want or if you just want pure speculation what can this gen free L1 become the possibility they're Limitless but yeah we should we will talk about that I think that's a good thing to talk about but the death of altcoins um I kind of want to tie this up to what's been happening with the Germans um and mount gox uh to be fair mount gox has nothing happening with it now like they've been relatively inactive but the Germans are mass dumping like 35,000 Bitcoin left now in the wallet they've sent 5,000 Bitcoin over the weekend and this morning um they're using desks now apparently instead of just Mass sending it to coinbase and one more thing is I do you guys know about Gollum uh Dan you might know who that is Ryan do you know um they like they raised in 2016 they raised a lot they raised 820,000 e in 2016 and they just sent 36,000 e to binance they they've done nothing with it they just held on to the E which is kind of a crazy trade if you think about it um and they've been sending more and more e they hold 131,00 e at this point like $400 million which is quite a bit there's a lot of bad news for Majors um my cope with this is that after this is done there's no like oh what about Mount goau like that's it we had it like what about the Germans we had it I guess like there's other governments that hold it but we'll see what happens Ryan I feel like you might have a better take I have some observations um I think that there they're clear like we all know that market structure in crypto is pretty tough um the German the the German government selling like a lot of Bitcoin that's been pretty well telegraphed to the market for a very long time um and when something is well telegraphed in traditional financial markets um the price impact is typically very muted um it's priced in right this C like this wasn't priced in and it's been very well telegraphed um now like does that have something to do with the sales like starting on July 3rd or July 4th when there's like you know no one's at their desk um I'm sure that had something to do with it um but just like it really underscores how long we have to go in like Market structure we need more participants we need more sophisticated market makers and and you know news just isn't priced in like in traditional markets um I do think that like from a fundamental perspective um if like someone um is that the German selling ma dumping again um if if the like look if if your only if the only bearish take is that like a whale is selling like that's fantastic right like like macro data is softening um but it's not clear that like traditional markets are anywhere near recession yet so like this is your opportunity we've been talking a few uh we we've spoken about this a few times on this pod that you know like you said Danny we're just dying for a pullback to see some reasonably reasonably priced things to rotate into um valuations are still a little stretched even after the pullback um in in most cases um but like short term if you wanted to rotate into higher beta things like this is that opportunity um because like look you know the economy is still chugging along um you know traditional financial markets are not drisking and that typically means the cycle has legs so like this is not opport this this is an opportunity yeah and maybe if you're looking for some extra cope into the end of the year um you know the FTX repayment plan for creditors there I think they the judge has to make a decision on October 7th of this year on whether to pay them back in cash or you know in kind in tokens so there might be some additional cash coming into the hands of participants later in the year that um you know maybe they're excited to to to buy back tokens hopefully higher at that time we we'll have to see yeah one more piece of cope there is that a lot of people have been screenshotting um Reddit comments about like Mount ga's creditors um like like the people who receive money from MX and they're like oh I'm never selling so that's also really really good cope that people have been posting which is going to keep us chugging along um I I want to talk about the new token thing um I feel like my opinion is always like very simplistic and it's that new token is better um unless there's like a specific narrative that you want or you're looking for something like it's fundamentally underpriced um but I kind of want to like new tokens this cycle hav't done well I'm once again going into high FTV low float conversation and I don't want to do it but new tokens haven't done particularly well this cycle there are some that have done really really well obviously um but how do you guys think about that looking into comparing new token versus old token do you think a new one is always better like cetrus barabus everything else the same or is it is there anything else that you guys focus on I think I think one point I want to make is the Dynamics around newer tokens and you know generally the low market cap High fdv kind of debacle um it primes a lot of those tokens for periods of outperformance followed by periods of stagnation and and decline right you know um when you've got low float there is an opportunity obviously to push the price up quickly if there just isn't a lot circulating but but you know if Supply is coming online and you know there aren't new people to buy continuously then um you're you're you know over the multi-on or or longer time periods you're just you have to expect some some downward pressure from that so um I guess something I would say is if you know for people that can't handle the the extra spiky volatility there you know newer tokens might not be right for them um you know maybe you want to buy something tried and true that has earning and the PE makes sense to you then um you know maybe you know a maker or you know something similar that doesn't have those kind of token supply issues to worry about would be a better kind of emotional or psychological boat for you but I don't know it's not it's not my favorite framing um I don't think that new or old matters um I think that what matters is like the underlying underlying cash flow potential of the project right like is the thing going to drive value or not I've seen old tokens come back from the dead and do that I've seen new tokens like being like very obvious like shots on goal at like real meaningful real world cash flows um and like but but these these narratives do like gain Steam and like I'm not going to sit here and try to argue that the market doesn't like trade on narrative so like there could be some new token old token like dichotomy in the market but I think that like with the way things are going politically um the way that the SEC keeps like losing court cases and like the E ETF around the corner um the like environment for institutions to like trade in this space like it's it's just getting more and more favorable and in that scenario where you where the where the marginal buyer is a traditional asset manager and not like a crypto farmer or retail participant I think narratives like this um matter a lot less so um I wouldn't I'm personally not as much focused on that um I I think the tried and true like framework is just like what has the potential for very meaningful cash flow generation yeah I think that's a good point um and I think to the point around like picking new versus old um you know the comment on just you know investing in solid teams or solid Tech I mean obviously I think that that always sorts sort of makes sense but I think even when you look at new versus old you still have to pick winners um in the case of new tokens they you know if they're launching at higher ftvs like you really have to be careful about picking the right thing if it's launching at 10 billion fdv and it's vapor um you know you might be in for a rough ride um same goes for something you know a team that's stuck around from 21 and is still building today you know maybe they pivoted and they built a great product um and they're on the up and up but for 99% of the other projects that tried to do the same they are probably down only still so um it either way new versus old you still have to pick a great team and and a great product and Great Tech um to have you know to see um you know the returns maybe that you're hoping for so that's that that sort of root question never really goes away I think I think Pendle is a good example of a team you know they they pivoted in 21 or 22 and and that project has been doing s you know fantastic over the past year and a half now so yeah that's really interesting I think I think a better dcom is something that's been forgotten um versus something that's hot right um there are a few old coins that have done really well and it's not because they are old it's because that the project was forgotten and was re invigorated and has meaningful cash flow potential um two that come to mind uh render and ton coin right ton was sideways for years um partnership renewed with telegram and uh it ripped on that potential or rated higher because future growth rates were rated higher um same thing with render right I think they might have iced or something in like 2017 or maybe they started 2019 um the thing was was like barely in the top 300 market cap like it was absolute micro cap and then um interest was renewed um um you know juules got behind the project and you know the things generating meaningful revenues on uh on salana today so um yeah like I guess there's that's that's a super exciting opportunity if you can find those tokens that um you know are on the precipice of like being uh rated higher based on some like renewal of the project or like a new partnership or just like left for dead um but like the team is still building um yeah do I know of any right now midb Market way harder to find those opportunities yeah I think I'll add the comment that I think right now might not be the time to be deciding or start looking for those types of projects I think that's you know when you're if you're hanging around during the bear and you're seeing who's still bu building and who's pivoting and you know putting together s maybe potentially successful business plans for the future um you know those might be opportunities to look for but um today it's you know there's lots of raises happening there's there's lots of money flowing around um it's a very different environment yeah it's kind of crazy to me that people are still doing private markets given that I assume they must be getting like horrible deals at this point but I mean that's just the nature of it now it's you have you just put some money in it get some fomo that this is we talked about this months ago I don't know if you were on you were definitely not on it Danny but Ryan were you on it where I was like I feel like VCS are kind of a forced buyer to an extent because they have to get exposure to coins like you have a mandate and you need to deploy it obviously if you're like a really good VC you don't like you deploy it as much as you can during the bear but even during the bull Maybe there's like a new narrative coming up there's something attractive that you have to deploy into and that's what I meant back in the day I was like you're kind of a force fire yeah I think I think that that's fair um I think that the time yeah VC is being a force force fire that's interesting yeah for a lot of VCS I think that if they can get in on the deal the time to liquidity is so short that you often are Force buyer like you don't have time to sit sit around and wait for valuations to reach set because if you don't get in on that round um you know you might not get the token at all it might become liquid and you don't have your chance so yeah I think that that's a fair point yeah another thing is that now it's very like deals go like this um you don't even have a time this is as far as I understand you don't even have time to do very good D diligence um because they can just raise for I mean people want coins so bad they want see they want some form of investment so bad that you can barely do I have to imagine the Dynamics are um I mean as with anything else probably very topheavy right like your s tier VCS that get you know into all of the best projects at the you know the earliest rounds or the you know the best prices you know there are projects that raised at the top of the 21 bll Market that are were still you know fantastic you know raise opportunities for those investors because they've you know still done 10 or 100x multiples from those valuations at the time um but I would imagine if you were buying you know near public or pre-public like pre-public raises as a smaller VC fund like around 21 you might have just been completely obliterated um even now like if if those things have done well since then so um there probably is a little bit of a dynamic there where if you're getting the absolute best deals for the best projects like you know if you got to buy in Arbitron and you know some of these other projects you know back a cycle ago you're you're doing great and if you didn't you know if you got to buy things that were probably just super overvalued at the time because everyone was trying to jump in um and you were late to the party you probably didn't have a good time yeah that's very true and I wonder this is one thing that I found out is that just by talking to people is I don't even know this isn't particularly relevant but I still want to bring it up like a lot of VCS end up doing a lot of thought pieces and a lot of these like well research reports and they are genuinely like good um but it's mostly to get into those top rounds because if you are the person writing about modularity before it was a thing then the people building modularity Tech are going to be like hey like we're raising right now I read your piece Let's Do It um so that's actually like I assume it is top heavy as well and I think that's kind of an interesting way that it plays out I I I don't know how like relevant it's still is now but I feel like during the bear if you were actually invested into like interested in certain Tech that probably opened up a lot of doors for you um one non-vc favorite this is a horrible segue but I'm going to keep it one thing that did not raise is towo bit tensor and it went down last week I don't know if that's it's not related then VC ra isn't why it didn't why it went down but um they had some package issue where a malicious package was downloaded by a lot of people um and it stole their keys so they have to Halt the chain and we talked about this this morning Danny is the VC not the VC the AI favorite um the AI narrative leader I thought it was going to be to but apparently um it's render everybody wants render everybody wants a piece of render well it's playing out just like trafi so far right if you bought you know if you're in Nvidia you're you're so happy you're over the moon right now and if I think if you're in render from it's you know reating you know a year and a half ago you're also over the moon at the moment so um that might continue to play out that way because I think a lot of these AI projects are very early I think people can't really connect the dots in terms of what value they truly provide quite yet um I think you know maybe the deeper thinkers really have a feel for what they could become but um you know there might just not be enough solid kind of material understanding of of what the what the true value is there yet before Ryan gets into this and tells us all about it I want to make one little point is that for a few months um a couple months ago maybe three four months ago there was like this era of uh LBP AI projects which is like mon Ai and like whatever Olas was the first one that did it and they did very well so every team launched some form of AI token on lvps on F specifically and then like just chasing that a lot of people missed out on like genuinely good AI coins and one of those was tow at the time it was a genuinely good AI coin people were just like oh I missed that I need something I need beta um beta and then they just reached out for that and then now you don't even hear about those anymore which I mean I guess that always happens you chasing bet beta is the death of all of us at some point but I don't know where it's all going to go what is um Olas what what kind what type of project is that Olas was AI agents um I think it was the first AI agent one um they had some issues with Team vesting and I mean that always seems to be the case it's either team vesting or the tech doesn't work but I don't even know if the tech works but they did like this was honestly quite a like interesting Phenomenon with these lbps is because one or two of them did very very well and then it got crowded everybody did an LBP everybody chased it they were like oh Olas did a 15x why can't this and then what ended up happening is these projects rais ridiculous amounts of money on F like they would raise 15 to 20 mil on F at some point and it's like you just have barely a deck and a website maybe not 15 to 20 let's say to 10 but it's still a lot of money to like raise I'll say pre-product pre anything I mean that just reminds me very heartily of 2021 token pre-sales on really any chain but you know ethereum bance smart chain like hey we have this pitch we have this product we do a token sale just you know or an LBP or you know whatever mechanism and pull in several million and maybe you never hear from them again maybe they built something for real that that probably is a solid indicator that um I think people were a little too hyped up about it yeah um I mean I think with AI as a broader Trend I mean you have to pick your spots with any new and exciting technology there's always going to be some degree of a hype cycle that um that it follows um I think that a lot look inevitably there will be a correction in the in in the broader markets and in AI stocks and tokens in particular um I'm not denying that at all and I frankly look forward to that um but a lot of the a lot of the um I I I I I think that a lot of the like I don't know talks of froth in the AI space are misplaced like the obvious one is just Nvidia comparing it to Cisco Nvidia is not Cisco uh its valuation has actually declined since um since I think it was March 2023 or sorry May 2023 when it really blew out numbers um yes it does have a high valuation but is not a historically High valuation and revenues following those numbers which is why the which is why the valuation has an hasn't expanded uh I think you know crypto is obviously a different story there's always tends to be some valuation premium that crypto tokens have um you've seen a lot of that get washed out which I think is super positive like the market is starting to come to terms with the fact that like agents are going to be a are probably going to be a commodity um and they're super expensive to operate and they're going to come here a little later than we thought because like the Tech's really hard and if you're doing agents on financial transactions like they have to be right like they can't hallucinate so like agents are like super exciting for me as a user of AI but as an investment opportunity within crypto like yeah the market is definitely coming to terms with the fact that it was a little overrated um GPU tokens or GPU networks like still like the valuations are High um it's nice to see that they are actually generating tangible revenue on chain um they're probably going to be challenged um in the near term just given how much GPU demand has softened like it's it's relatively simple to get an a100 allocation now of the hyperscalers it's still kind of challenging to get h100s and better um but these networks aren't like as as my thoughts have evolved on like the GPU Network space or the GPU deep in space um it's not clear to me that they are competing directly with what the hyperscalers are offering um they're competing more in Niche markets I think so like academics and researchers like it's hard for them to get access to AI they have smaller budgets like they don't have huge uh they don't have um embedded relationships with a lot of the hyperscalers like they're an obvious candidate I think for a a GPU Network um synthetic data generation like GPU networks have or crypto GPU networks have an advantage there um so yeah they have to compete on these nich is and I think so far like so good they're doing an okay job just like the narrative might not follow through just given the softness and GPU demand um I think that like last comment I think that the the market is was over indexing on the intersection of AI and crypto Technologies and and under indexed on the um the kind of uh market dynamics that would arise as a result of AI that crypto could help so for example like decentralized GPU networks decentralized energy networks and uh and decentralized data generation via crypto rails I think are all really interesting um places where crypto has a wedge into the market as a result of AI um it's not the actual intersection of AI and crypto technology that I think is super exciting from like a future cash flow perspective and I think the Market's like slowly realiz izing that where do you think we go from here on the uh on the AI crypto narrative yeah look the the thesis for decentralized GPU networks in the long run has not changed at all they still have wedges into the market um the US the the Grid in the United States is in desperate need of an upgrade and the hyperscalers are telling us that there is not enough power out there for them um you know energy usage in the United States has scaled up like 0 to 2% per year for like more than a decade and we think we're going to be compounding at 6% annualized from here on out due to AI like that's an opportunity for crypto so I think you'll see some early stage opportunities there um we're expected to run out of high quality data by 2027 um tokens to incentivize um the uh contribution of data to like a data Dow or synthetic data generation via crypto um Source gpus I think is like a really interesting opportunity I think we'll see some early stage opportunities there so like near-term probably like incremental weakness just given the pullback in GPU demand in the cloud but like longterm there's still really interesting problems that crypto um like uniquely solves so I'm I'm bullish on a medium to long-term time Horizon for sure I agree I um it's basically what I asked I wanted to make sure that I wasn't being stupid and that you also um no but I mean it's just one of those narratives that people don't really talk about anymore was crypto AI for two three months everybody was like crypto AI crypto Ai and it's fair I mean it was really exciting uh I still think it is I agree with you I think there like the Allure is more than other things that we've leashed on to as an industry to make a narrative like it's actually there it's semi interesting and it can work um any other narratives that you guys can think of that have died out Danny you can go first if you had something relevant yeah I think just to go off of what Ryan said I think I mean I think he made a lot of great points um and some interesting points just around the potential for some of these you know Crypt based decentralized networks to you know potentially dis place or replace you know existing what are traditionally managed by you know local state federal governments or you know National governments um and you know there are people within the US you know you can ask people about their you know electricity about their water about their internet um about their mobile networks even um you know maybe talk to Helia mobile about that one um but I I think these types of projects offering you know or looking into and and building out solutions for like decentralized grids or decentralized um you know GPU networks as well um there's an opportunity to really kind of provide a new means um to build out these networks and serve the interests of people that that use and need these Services um in a way that you know maybe has not been effectively addressed by governments today in most cases Ryan any rebuttal he just said all your points are not correct no that's I don't have anything to add on to this I feel like you guys said everything that needs to be said so I'm going to go back to my original question um actually before we do that let's have a quick word from Pendle thanks to our fantastic sponsor layer zero what's up guys for this week's layers your snippet I'm joined by Anton the ecosystem lead at Pendle uh thank you for joining us Anon thanks for having me uh just to start us off do you want to give a short introduction of Pendle and what you guys have been focused over the past few months sure so Pendle is essentially a yield training protocol where users can execute various yield management strategies how this works is that we tokenize the yield from an underlying yield bearing asset such as e or SDI where we split the yield which is represented as a new token called YT from the principal which is represented by PT and then can be traded in its own individual markets so this allows anyone to obtain fixed yields from pts or principal tokens or long defi yields by buying whts or yield tokens so instead of speculating on spot prices you can speculate on yield or interest rates itself so this concept is similar to bond stripping in traditional Finance where for a coupon bond that is essentially yield bearing or earning interest you can detach the coupon which represents the interest from the underlying zero coupon bond which represents the discounted principle at pendel we work with um any Yi bring asset of which we are a major beneficiary of the liquid sticking recking and rwa sectors to name a few we've supported assets such as lios Ste ether fire e Renzo easy eth um Sparks EST AIS at toet and U many many more so in summary pendel is a venue where you can express your viewpoint on the direction of yield and develop strategies around the underlying yield volatility so that would be kind of like Pendle in a nutshell perfect um and how does layer zero fit into Pendle right so Pendle implements a v token model also known as a v Pendle that serves as an important tool for maintaining the long-term health and success of the Pendle ecosystem it's very similar to uh vcv or V or from curve um the model is essentially using the same um like concept behind it and the goal behind V Pendle is to align incentives and generate liquidity and fees so users who lock their Pendle tokens for V Pendle can vote for pools every Epoch to channel Pendle token emissions too and lockers also enjoy the benefit of boosted yields on their LP positions as well as um you know collect real yield in the form of eth from the fees generated by the protocol now Pendle is deployed on various chains but all the V Pendle voting is all done um within ethereum so we use ethereum as the main Hub layer zero has essentially enabled the protocol to deploy Omni chain V tokenomics allowing users to synchronize their V Pendle balances across all suppored chains where Pendle is deployed so we so layer zero helps enhance this reward accessibility and interoperability for those Pendle pools what this basically means is that you just need to cast your V Pendle votes in a single Hub which is on is on ethereum and Pendle the averages layer Z messaging protocol to broadcast the voting results across the different P protocol deployments on on different chains perfect and you guys have done really well over the past year um do you have any exciting plans over the next year yeah so I guess for the next few months up until next year um I would say that our core values include um you know this idea of iterative product development continuous experimentation and staying on top of Trends and with that we will continue to focus on the reaking sector which has been doing quite well in the past few months since earlier of this year and we will continue to experiment with the new narratives in fact our recent improvements to our friend and product like if you go to app. tendle finance you will see um improvements such as our points dashboard uh limit orders and other um you know transparency data that can be seen um uh on our front Ed so this underscores our commitment to this um iterative Improvement so but on the protocol side we are actually silently working on pendal V3 which is something that will complement and work alongside our current V2 deployment while we cannot reveal much for now we are working hard and are very eager to launch this to the community so more will be more will be revealed later this year and uh yeah like just stay tuned and we have more exciting things to come so that would be kind of like uh the most or like our major development that we hope to put out uh later this year and early next year perfect that sounds very exciting I'm genuinely very excited to see what you guys are building cuz you like as a team you've been very adaptable and very agile so excited for you guys thank you for coming on thank you so much as well I was actually talking about this with a few other people but what like we had every not everything but we had a lot of stuff come up and a lot of stuff die out and AI is one of them um it hasn't died out it will be back your AI coins are good and they will definitely come back but there are are some stuff that have can like come up and Di out and I want to like in my mind it's AI is one of them very clearly I feel like modularity is another one um kind of died out and by die out I don't specifically mean like it's dead and won't ever come back I more so mean like it's it's down 75% now um anything you guys have in mind specific narratives no but this is um this is the the this is the um this is the problem with narrative trading when all you have to hang on is the new narrative like the thing is going to collapse on you I think that Tia is one of those things um like look I'm rooting for the team I hope they're successful um but they've generated $22,000 in Revenue since Inception and they have a multi-billion dollar valuation and you can think about the forward uh cash flows of that project and you need a big number of rollups to um to get that you know to make that valuation come anywhere like back down to earth right so um no narratives are look they're they they matter today they're going to matter less and less and um you know especially next cycle when you know presumably we have some regulatory Clarity and uh more institutions are playing in the space um maybe this was is like a good lesson to learn to many like first-time crypto participants that it's not necessarily the narrative that you want to be chasing um yeah I think I I can talk about my narrative later but um I think to that point I agree and I disagree around um like going into the future the you know I would agree that we would see you know reduction in dominance of like narrative trading but I would also say that you know inad today I mean there is still a significant presence of of narrative trading and you know startups that that launch and and raise at crazy valuations you know pre-revenue and um lots of these things exist and not that I'm going to justify any of the crazy Valu you know a multi-billion valuation with 20K in Revenue right it's that's that's hard to talk about from an economics standpoint but um I think just to the like people investors are forward-looking they think how big can this get uh how much can it be worth in the future and and if um they think it's worth less than that now they will consider buying it so um I agree to the extent that you know it it should lessen we should you know we should end up with you know more realistic and um I guess maybe regulatory compliant um teams and and institutions and and groups but um I don't think that we will see the complete disappearance of narrative trading because it just you know it always EX exist in some form or fashion yeah I think that's what I think so as well I mean we'll see I um I think I literally only do use narratives like I use some fun like there are some things that I fundamentally believe in um just because I've done like a lot more research on them but mainly I just like to ride some form of a wave but I do agree with Ryan to an extent that it's it's been getting worse already and I'm sure that it will continue to get worse um I mean even though we were just talking about it and we're saying like the Market's not particularly like big right now um it's also getting a lot more efficient I think like it used to be a lot I mean I just remember like 2022 2023 you almost had like a weaked position for certain stuff um versus now it's obviously like very much like a I mean still it's like compared to other markets it's not as efficient but like yeah I agree with you both I think that look I I don't think narrative trading is going to completely go away um you can look to try markets where retail trading is like 25% of the market and when it went from 15 to 25% in 2021 like things got really weird and that's going to happen from time to time I think that crypto is particularly unique because it's this like weird permissionless system where you can kind of like launch whatever token you want and like kind of put Capital to work where you want and it's invited a lot of um non-traditional Market participants so price actions should look different um and I think in certain pockets of the market it will like I think meme coins will be here until the end of time and I think that those that's obviously going to trade on narratives um I think that you know there are enough like libertarian hard money people in like the BTC and eth ecosystems that like those coins particularly eth can like trade at like a valuation premium to like what like cash flows would dictate um but like if you look at the annualized volatility of something like ether BTC that's fallen from like in the hundreds of percentage points per year to like around 40 now maybe even less um the market is certainly getting more efficient and we have a market today where not everyone is allowed to participate meaning like there is a compliance person that's literally standing in the way of so and so um fund manager um who wants to put you know 20 million in capital to work um and there's a lot of those guys and there's like a single compliance officer that's holding them back from doing that because of the regulatory environment um so that's going to slowly change over time and you know it's going to be felt in different parts of the market um more so than others but it's something that you have to think about as a long-term participant in this market like this cycle um was way less crazy than last cycle um and the cycle before that I think was less crazy than the IC than the Ico boom like it's just getting less crazy over time so you know it's it's kind of you know it's not going to happen tomorrow but it is it's certainly like your you're True North as a participant in this market you have to be cognizant of that Trend yeah I think the key word there is it's not going to happen tomorrow as well I feel like a lot of people a lot of deniers of like the market becoming more difficult I would say are like oh but like you can still make money this cycle obviously um like Ryan mentioned there is like legit regulatory stuff that isn't letting everybody participate and I also don't think that everybody is interested in participating still like there are a lot of naysayers and a lot of people who don't and I mean sure they might never come um or they might and it might just become more and more difficult but I don't I don't see it happening in a day like you said um but I was actually surprised to this isn't something that is maybe particularly interesting to everybody but I was talking to a few people um over the past few weekends and I feel like every but I don't bring up crypto often it's a weird thing to bring up but sometimes people ask me what I do and I'm like oh I'm like I'll usually start off if I'm in fch and then you'll slowly move on um and there's a lot of people who just genuinely participated before and they were like it's just not as exciting as it used to be like what to what you said Ryan but these are like older not old but older people who were like just semi- relevant in crypto at some point and now they're like it's just not something that I want to do anymore so I wonder like we talked about it before how many people are just disinterested now because they got burnt on FDX or they got burnt on Luna but there's also like a sub sector now that are like oh I already did crypto like what it's not as cool as it used to be or it's not like as interesting as it used to be I wonder if that's I wonder if they'll come back or if that's just they're like oh it's done now I don't care anymore I mean that is a very small amount like that's a that's a very small subset of people right like we're all like the the crypto industry rounds to zero and the percentage of people who left this like minuscule industry like I'm not I'm not worried about them um no yeah it's it's just neither am I it was just it was the first time that I've heard somebody be like oh it's to me it's done and I look because I'm of your point of view as well I'm just like it's it's so small like how can you count yeah I totally get what you're saying I mean I've the the burn factor is real um I meet people today and I tell I don't I don't lie to them like you do Bach uh I tell them exactly what I do I I I tell them exactly what I do um and and some people are like you know they all they know is FTX um there there's a there's an image thing that the industry has to get past but like I'm really excited for when that changes I think that there are a few projects in the ecosystem where like they could generate like real Revenue like trafi guys will want to own that token and uh then people will forget about how crazy things were like everyone's forgotten about the point in time where like your mom and dad did not want to put their credit card on the internet like everyone's forgotten about that but it was a real thing like the I think the first Mosaic browser was like unencrypted in the United States or maybe it was Europe or it was not encrypted right so like it was just a very different environment there was a lot less trust but people have totally forgotten about it because it's proven itself to be useful um there are a few things in the market you know hopefully um they can like kind of reach that Mass Appeal where you know everyone forgets um that you know it used to be such a wild Place yeah I think trailing off of that if you know we're we're sort of yet to see some of these fantastic wonderful great consumer applications but if you know the Tik Tock of crypto came around it it doesn't really Ma you know if it's all abstracted away and and the users aren't thinking about you know how the crypto is really integrated into the platform or how they're paying for stuff stuff um I don't think it really matters if if you know the retail participants really know or care um that they're like in crypto so to say right if they're using the app and they're generating revenue for the you know for the underlying project or protocol or token um then that's all that really matters we just need to build those apps yeah um I just I mean we can't even build an app that is comfortable for me to use and you to use and Ryan to use it's like every app that I still use is not particularly like good so I wonder how long it's going to take for us to actually onboard regular I don't think we will but on board regular people my thought point of view is that will'll always be like semi Niche um highly financialized obviously there will be other like people constantly join in um but I don't think it's going to be everybody's like going to use crypto and underlying I don't know maybe I'm just becoming very pessimistic yeah I think it maybe it just depends on your worldview for where where crypto rails are going into the future but like if you think there could be new backends for stuff like a patreon or like Shopify and web stores and e-commerce platforms and other things along these lines um you know Creator sold Goods um you know there's opportunities where just normal retail consumers could be using products that are kind of supported by these you know this infrastructure and these applications without knowing it um you know maybe they maybe they'll end up just using usdc on the back end and it won't actually be tokens that they're buying or trading but um you know it might still be driving revenues to something yeah I think there are a few applications that um that I use in particular on a daily basis or let's say weekly basis that um I think are really great products um uh helium And Hive mapper uh I have a helium Mobile plan and I have a hive mapper dash cam and I use them I use the helium uh I use my phone every day and I drive probably once a week and I never have to think about it it just does its thing it provides its service it's uniquely enabled by crypto um that's super exciting um I I got like kind of like a thesis that like if if crypto is ever if if all crypto ever amounts to is just like 20 very useful deepin projects like is crypto a success I think like I think that's a yes um what those 20 are going to be like TBD but um I'm really happy with um with with what those those two projects have done as far as like uh uiux perspective and and frankly they don't get enough credit Ryan do you want to talk a bit about blast yeah I I guess I I I want to ask you guys um so I'm not deep in the Weeds on like the evm L2 space um I'll I kick the tires every once in a while just to see what's going on and uh kicking the tires on blast and looking at its valuation not only relative to other l2s andm things um but also um relative to like what's going on on chain the activity that that they're generating like Blast has been left for dead um from a fee perspective like ZK sync is trading at600 times uh trailing one month fees annualized uh blast is trading at 35 times fees um tvl is still significant though like it's certainly in Decline Dex volume still significant though like certainly in Decline after like like you know aird drops or these like airdrop uh Farmers probably leave the space I'm wondering um presumably you guys know a lot more about the space than I do um what do we think about blast um what do we think about the valuation is there anything for real over there and um like given this valuation in the market how are how are you guys playing it I specifically want to talk about it compared to ZK because this is how it originally came up like compared to ZK sync um and to me that makes sense only because I think the market is or people in general are overweight or like they're more they're over interested in ZK Tech um I I think it's because of what people have been touting for the past two years it's just saying ZK rollups are the end State end State ZK rollups are the end state which is fair um but I think people often forget that optimistic rollups can just adopt ZK proving and ZK proofs and this is something that they've been working on like I know both optimism and arbitrum are working on their own ZK proving systems um but regarding blast like in on its own I think they just had like a tough over farmed for a year year and a half not a year year and a half let's say like six months eight months everybody was like oh you have to be farming blast everyone is farming blast the end state is that you don't give enough tokens and you make people watch a two-minute video and people are upset and they just Mass dump it um like I know this seems stupid because at the end of the day that isn't how a market should work like it shouldn't be people are like oh pacm made me watch two and a half minutes of him talking about the full stack L2 so I'm gonna sell but I think like that is what happened like I think he overplayed I think he overplayed it basically and I mean it was also like his marketing was a bit off at the beginning we talked about this before as well he was like oh like guaranteed he didn't say guaranteed but he did say like earn rewards and like you're going to make money and you were pre-rich and stuff like that so I think that definitely played into people's mindset a bit and they were like when they didn't get it there was just Mass dumping we'll see how it goes I after you pointed those out um those charts blast did a quite a good job onboarding apps um I think you can go two ways you can have enshrined apps or you can have like these big bang type competitions to build apps I think they actually have quite a bit of apps and it's the only place where they've actually tried to launch gamei I feel like a lot of l2s don't do gamei um very seriously at least the newly launched ones these guys actually like had some games on them I mean one of them got hacked for quite a bit of money so let's let's not think about that one too much but the rest have been also down only but at least they tried yeah I think I want to Echo the thoughts around the ZK point I think um you know you can look at ZK sink and Stark and I think really the valuations there are you know people we talked about it earlier right people want to bet on the tech um I think a lot of people are betting on the tech in this in this case and not you know there aren't a lot of user metrics to bet on in the case of ZK sync and and Stark net um so you know if you think zks are the future then I guess that's how you end up at these valuations um so I think to that point that might be part of the discrepancy there I also think on the blast point like I you know you know I've been a bit of an L2 farmer myself um I did not Farm blast personally I just didn't find it interesting enough and I was not ex you know I was not personally interested in um bridging you know Ethan into a multisig um so that wasn't in my cup of tea but I thought the initial strategy was quite interesting you know they had a a great product in terms of blur and then you know the goal was to kind of you know you introduce blast and then have like this new home for blur to kind of support that um I think the challenge is then now that you have this whole L2 how are you then going to go and compete against the Giants of arbitrum optimism base chain like sure you could get a cool gamei app and maybe get some users over there but um I don't know if people are building on the Giants and all the users are over on the Giants then um I just don't know how you continue to compete um without really enticing people or incentivizing you know other great Dev teams to come over to your chain it's the classic L2 problem right there's just so many um for people to pick and choose from and some of the best ones have or you know the most used ones have a lot of the available things to do um and that's where most of the people are so um I think there is just an existential problem for all l2s that aren't leading the pack um so I think that will be a challenge for blast going forward one more thing I want say is that I feel like people are also a bit blast blur blur could have been so much more like they could have done so so so well and they barely like they have two iterations now it's just on inferium and on blast um and I feel like they could have tried more like they could have done something with Bitcoin um when ordinals were popping off or they could have done like gone on base or anywhere else and they didn't and I think that's because like Pacman moved to blast and he focused on blast so I think people are a bit worried about that as well they're like okay like he did this with blur he built a fantastic product one season two seasons and was like guys I'm gonna actually launch an L2 for Blast for blur um which I don't even know if he explicitly said that but I know like everybody was thinking that because it was like there was there's also this vitalic piece about how you can port nfts to l2s and make them tradeable over there which was quite interesting um and then now I guess people are like when is he gonna let go of blast and build something else I think the comments are focusing around like user kind of perceptions of these projects um or maybe popular perceptions of blast Visa the rest of the space um I'm not I'm not saying I'm explicitly a blast bu I'm just poking around here and like so the one thing that's just very interesting to me is that it is the from a valuation perspective it's the the lowest by far um lowest valuation in the space um as far as l1's l2s l3s goes relative to any fundamentals and um from an activity perspective Blast has not seen a day of outflows since June 25th um tvl might have began to bottom out on July 4th um and derivatives volume on blast is essentially unchanged since mid April um so no decline in activity there which I find to be really interesting um arbitrum on the other hand um inflows outflows are mixed um derivatives volume is like flat to down um and yeah like blast is certainly competing with the other l2s but it's right on their heels if you look at like trailing 30-day Dex volume um arbitrum is 10% of the entire L1 L2 space base is 7.5% blast is you know they're considerably they're behind they're at 2.4% but they are the as far as trailing 30-day volume they are the uh sixth most used chain which I find to be super interesting now like the 30-day window is probably too small um but I don't know it's not it's not like a completely Bleak picture for that thing especially like if you assume it's a going concern and if you were to like cut the valuation metric or sorry if you were to cut the the activity met metrics in half like it's still cheap compared to everything else so um I don't know like is what would you say um his Pac-Man is the the guy behind blast like is he treating this chain as a going concern like it's pretty low float like High fdv um if he wants to get that value out of it it seems like he has to treat it as a going concern I'm wondering what you guys think about that yeah I I think one thing um worth kind of bringing up um in ter you know in terms of looking at the trailing 30-day metrics um for blast is I mean the token launch was only a few weeks ago so a lot of the activity around the tge um the trading in the volume there um might be sort of obscuring the real picture a little bit um I guess it would be interesting it might just be too early to say based on you know that sort of relative valuation based on the activity there um maybe in another month with kind of the the airdrop and the other things out of the way um maybe the normal activity has the valuation from an activity and usage standpoint a little more realistic in the realm that we would expect um there's no way for me to to know or say that with any confidence but um I I do have a feeling that you know airdrop tge people trading that um certainly always causes an influx and then we see you know rapid declines of activity following that so this could just be a spike on on recent activity that um is making that valuation look odd when you know participants are Maybe already kind of pricing things downwards um based on you know where they think it's going yeah the interesting thing is so if you do 7day trailing volume blast does fall down a rung but it's basically do generating the same activity as optimism so it's the seventh most most used change Chain by Dex volume which is pretty interesting yeah and I agree I think the next month will be critical um from like a trading perspective but like it's pretty interesting to see that derivatives volume on the Chain has just been basically flat since April um and that and that's like a positive thing given the um given the um decline or sorry given the potential like decline in Farmers uh since when was it three weeks ago that they that they launched the token so definitely on the radar um I guess it's TBD uh if they're treating uh blast as a going concern or not any final points you want to hammer into the heads of our listeners Hammer into the head doesn't sound right I don't know what do you say that you want to make sure that our listeners part [Music] with that's fine we'll we'll get them next time guys thank you so much for coming on um and to our listeners thank you so much for listening have a good day oh [Music]

========================================

--- Video 106 ---
Video ID: ykbn2781F7c
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ykbn2781F7c
Title: Eclipse and the Next Generation of Rollups | Terry & Ren
Published: 2024-07-05 13:01:07 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Terry and Ren from Eclipse joined us to discuss how they are building Ethereum’s first SVM L2. We covered why they chose to bring the SVM to Ethereum, design decisions made along the way, and how they plan to onboard developers. Finally, we dive into sequencer design, and the future of rollups.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
--
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.

Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
--
Follow Terry: https://x.com/0xtaetaehoho
Follow Ren: https://x.com/purplepill3m
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/

Check out the Frontiers Podcast on YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCN5NrfmADK2DV4uAv8DZz0g

Check out the Frontiers Podcast on Spotify: https://open.spotify.com/show/6F6Cowlai4kEWJl3JQinZp?si=94cf6721a8cf484a 
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:43 Why Eclipse Is Bringing the SVM to Ethereum
5:35 Eclipse Design Decisions 
25:24 Developer and dApp Onboarding
31:47 Polygon Ad
32:38 Pear Ad
33:03 Avalanche Ad
33:46 Sequencer Design
42:16 Eclipse dApps and the Future of Rollups 
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 107 ---
Video ID: 7nZY1Xro1Tw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7nZY1Xro1Tw
Title: Crypto Today: ETFs, NFTs, and Mid Cycle Valuations | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-07-03 15:05:32 UTC
Description:
In this episode, the Blockworks Research Team covers the potential impact of the upcoming Ethereum ETFs, the likelihood of a Solana ETF getting approved, and how the NFT meta has evolved. Additionally, they dive into the bull and bear cases for Celestia going forward. Finally, they discuss the recent Blockworks Research report on TON.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Resources
TON: Not Right Now 
https://x.com/blockworksres/status/1806380764369670367
--
Special thanks to our sponsor LayerZero

Stay up-to-date with the LayerZero Ecosystem by following: https://twitter.com/LayerZero_Labs
--
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow EffortCapital: https://x.com/EffortCapital
Follow Pibblez: https://x.com/0xpibblez
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:34 Impact of the Ethereum ETF
18:28 Solana ETF Speculation
23:13 Will Celestia Make a Comeback? 
35:21 The New NFT Meta
47:05 LayerZero: Pudgy Penguins Ad
49:02 Discussing the Blockworks Research Report on TON
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- -
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 108 ---
Video ID: 3DHbc07khnk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3DHbc07khnk
Title: Driving Mass Adoption: TON’s Breakthrough Mini Apps
Published: 2024-06-27 15:06:53 UTC
Description:
In this episode, our hosts are joined by Alena, Ecosystem Lead at TON, to discuss how “Mini Apps” are helping drive mass adoption. We cover Mini Apps, the similarities and differences between Telegram and WeChat, and TON’s strategy for onboarding new developers. Finally, we dive into TON’s systems architecture, and what the TON Foundation has in store for the future.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Polygon Labs is developing the next generation of open source zero-knowledge tech to aggregate crypto liquidity and user bases with the AggLayer. To support the aggregated future, the Polygon Community Grants Program was launched with 1 billion tokens — all for Polygon builders.

Season One of the community grants program is live now, and features 35 million in MATIC to support the next generation of Polygon projects!

Join the aggregated future today by applying at https://polygon.technology/grants
--
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
--
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.

Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
--
Follow Alena: https://x.com/alenka_w3
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_ryanrconnor
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
7:45 Telegram Mini Apps
19:17 Telegram vs WeChat
28:36 Onboarding Apps to TON
35:00 Polygon Ad
35:51 Pear Ad
36:16 Avalanche Ad
36:58 SocialFi 
42:56 TON Systems Architecture
51:41 The Future of TON
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- -
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Ryan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 109 ---
Video ID: M83wXU651JQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M83wXU651JQ
Title: The Next Wave of Consumer Crypto Applications | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-06-26 16:33:03 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Natalie from Bain Capital Crypto and Ben from Seed Club join us to discuss consumer applications in crypto. We dive into Seed Club’s recent Demo Day, viewing consumer crypto from an investor’s perspective, and the current state of crypto gaming. Additionally, we cover ongoing experiments with crypto social apps, and the NFT market going forward. Finally, Natalie and Ben give their advice to founders building in crypto today.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor LayerZero

Stay up-to-date with the LayerZero Ecosystem by following: https://twitter.com/LayerZero_Labs
--
Follow Natalie: https://x.com/eclecticcapital
Follow Ben: https://x.com/benroy__
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
9:42 Seed Club Demo Day & Consumer Crypto
20:38 Crypto Gaming Today
28:07 LayerZero Ad: Blockdaemon
30:51 Experimenting With Crypto Social Apps
37:54 The NFT Market Going Forward
53:22 Advice for Founders
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
--
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
the stuff that gets me most stoked um is stuff that acknowledges that crypto itself is a game like a bigger game environment um and I think like Cambria is an interesting example um where you're like okay for for now there's just duels and bding but at some level that becomes like a different interface to how people can experience crypto as opposed to just having a metamask browser extension games like that become like a UI for the entire set of blockchains that we already use stuff to do um like you can do swaps and you can do all these other things inside of a game environment so when I think about it it's it's kind of like how do you extend the crypto as a game idea through other interfaces um that stuff is cool to me nothing said on zerox Research is a recommendation to buy or sell Securities or tokens this podcast is for informational purposes only and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions not Financial advice pachio Ryan and our guests May hold positions in the company's funds or projects discussed what's up guys welcome back to another episode of ZX research today I'm joined by Ben from seed club and Natalie from Bank crypto who also both run their own crypto podcast called liquid culture thank you guys for joining thank you for having us so good to be here man before we get started I I wonder if you guys want to give you a short introduction of how you guys kind of got into crypto and also like how you guys got started with liquid cure as well yeah sure so I've been around crypto for about five years years I actually like to speedrun the story I listened to an xrp podcast while being a finance bro um sort of working in an international trade stuff so I was like okay this is going to be the future of banking um and then you know got pulled into eth pretty quick just parents are both start up people and the idea that you could build stuff on top of this as a platform um just sort of hit better for me than than the whole money set of use cases um and so yeah long story short u did a couple startups in crypto one in defi more on the nft and art side um and felt more at home on that kind of more culture side of the industry um and so yeah do a couple things one um is run an art nonprofit called accelerate art um two is is work with startups uh that are more on the consumer side with seed club which is an accelerator um and three is this podcast that not and I just started called liquid culture um and yeah that's kind of a bit of the backstory yeah I amum got into crypto during Co actually a friend of mine who got laid off taught himself how to trade options on Robin Hood and he ended up on the cover of Forbes um from being becoming so successful from doing this and he was the first person I knew that like Made Real Money trading so naturally I was like where can I participate in this so I went on Robin Hood bought some Bitcoin and then you know as like some side diligence ended up reading the white paper and kind of went down the rabbit hole from there um but defin def came in as a Speculator and then stay for the tech afterwards um and yeah just after that tried to just increasingly get more and more into the space ended up coming on to the Venture side and have been doing that for a little bit over a year and a half now so yes mostly working with startups trying new things also love you know being on chain as a user as well so yeah that's kind of my background the cover of Forbes that's uh that's pretty crazy I feel like we need more details on this story yeah his name is Taylor you can look it up it was uh 2020 he uh was trading airline stock options like around the time that the market crashed and it was and all the airlines turn it went down it was absolutely insane and he still trades to this day he's like the nicest guy ever he donates like a bunch of his profits to charity shout out saor wow that's super cool he was Roy and kitty before it was cool then smaller scale yeah Dan you know what I realized we've kind of never done an introduction of you do you want to give an introduction as well oh man okay I'll take I'll take the opportunity I guess uh got into crypto first time full-time uh in 2020 I actually shot Jason yanowitz block Works co-founder a DM on Twitter he had a tweet uh that was like hey I'm at the airport something along these lines of hey I'm at the airport I got time to kill like if you're looking to break into the industry shoot me a DM and there I was you know sitting at my day job in the accounting World accounting Finance world and uh I was just procrastinating whatever task I had was mass refreshing Twitter it was like boom 5 seconds ago saw this tweet pop up and I was like you know what what why I got to lose so actually asked shot him my elevator pitch and asked him if I was like a good role for what is now one of our you know our main competitors uh and he was like H we're actually building something and we're in the super early stages of it like let's hop on a call talk it through uh and one thing led to another and here we are two and a half years later walk work's research is born and alive uh played like a pretty role in making that happen which is pretty cool and now leading out the the product and data side of what we do so um that means like building out our data platform what assets do we cover what metrics do we cover how do we display that to the user how do we communicate the value and importance of these metrics you know blockchains are just like Giant open apis in some way um tons of raw data turning that raw data into some like actionable Insight is is actually fairly challenging uh and we see uh picachio is going to get mad at me here but we we see uh like a lot of misuse of data and a prime example of that is like active addresses and comparing that between chains and they just it's it's hard to tell meaningful stories with an abundance of data you almost get like too many uh too many potential insights and air quotes that end up meaning nothing and so it's become like my passion of like you know decide helping play a role in like what matters what are key metrics that actually provide value and how do you use these to like identify Trends and then make predictions about the future I don't get upset about the daily Act of users think I just think it's like everybody knows that it's not real and then yet here we are we got hamster combat T ton telling the world we got 1% of the people using our game I maybe you maybe we see that like the four of us on this on the screen and pro quite frankly a lot of the listeners you know we don't really you kind of need like a prere to know what the hell is happening and being talked about on the show so yeah all of our listeners probably do but we go to like on board the next you know next even the next 100,000 people they're not going to know that it seems like that's a great stat because you come from these Web Two backgrounds with social applications for example that can track users and do track users and everybody knows like daily active users that's an important stat uh so when you get you know active addresses being called daily active users you just end up going down a road to false conclusions and I think it's less important for the people here today again because we all kind of have put these pieces together and more important about how do we tell those stories going forward to not see like a bunch of idiots yeah that's fair I shouldn't have brought this up we're just going to get really angry about it again and talk about 30 minutes um let's um start off with what you guys are looking like what what do you guys pay attention to data day what's like your sector um I assume it's called like liquid culture nfts consumer apps and not only I assume a lot of your VC work is related to social apps as well actually I'm not sure so maybe guys can run through like what you're most interested in these days um cool yeah I feel like why I joined uh seed Club this year was to focus more on consumer as a as a general category it's one of these words that doesn't mean a lot like it's hard to Define what exactly consumer means because the scope is so big but basically the way I think about that is just stuff that is not necessarily defi like that real humans are going to use um and so like there's a pretty broad uh scope in terms of yeah what that actually looks like in practice um but it's art and fashion and gaming and social and and sort of each of these categories where a lot of people have said hey crypto might actually be cool for this uh but we've never really seen something pick up or take off like you have these little ephemeral experiences right um through just like being obsessed with crypto land whether that's uh you know friend Tech or something like these these fantasy top like you're having early signs of people starting to do different stuff other than just buy meme coins um but it's it's not quite there yet and so yeah spending a lot of time just like hanging out with Founders trying to figure out how do you build something that is real in in that consumer Lane yeah I um I wanted to let Ben go first because I felt like I might derail the conversation but I I was I recently made a transition because I was previously at another fund um until before I joined Bane where I was more so like having a generalist perspective and I was honestly focusing on like truthfully the whole space cuz I was the only analyst there at the time so I I had to take a wider lens and look at kind of everything now I've like narrowed my scope significantly and I'm pretty much focusing exclusively on just sort of media as a category um and where that's going new business models around media new new um yeah really new business models around media um and so I'm almost exclusively focused on that at this point um I'm like almost like zoning out most of the even conversations that are happening on the Twitter obviously you have to you have to pay attention to some extent because you have to know what's happening around you but I'm like very sort of in a uh a whole a corner right now information wise awesome I want to I want to dive in deeper on both sides there but Ben going back to you first um you mentioned right before we hopped on the call you're talking about SE club's demo day can you walk us through some of the highlights from that yeah totally so C Club runs these three-month cohorts um in this case it was nine startups kind of for for that whole window of time uh and the culmination point is this demo day which we actually had yesterday uh there's a good recording it's basically five minute pitches for each one so it goes pretty quick if you're interested in startups it's it's definitely worth looking at um and yeah we had I think more than 7,000 people come and listen into that uh which is crazy um unclear like I don't think that was synchronous I think that's total now like after the fact 24 hours later right but um just cool to see a bunch of these teams work really hard uh and then compress like their whole company into five minutes right because it's so hard you get very close to your problem and being able to tell those stories can just be can be tricky um and yeah I mean it it kind of spans a lot of different categories there's some sports stuff there's like tokenizing real life um there's you know NFC chips there's like I don't know I mean it's a pretty intentionally eclectic uh group of people and teams but all people that we think really have a a a shot at doing something that people want to be part of um and yeah so that's kind of the Quick Pitch yeah I I want to say just like yeah shout out to the seed Club because I feel like they are one of the few places in crypto that like intentionally allows for like The Eclectic stuff to to have its its place um and so yeah I just want to give them a shout out because I feel like that's much needed in our space what was one of your I don't I guess maybe don't pick a favorite here but what were some of the uh the most exciting pitches that you heard maybe on a a lane that um something like new or novel that maybe the market hasn't seen before specifically as it relates back to demo day definitely I don't know about for you Ben but definitely for me there was one project that was innovating around the this like Vision model they had they had built that sort of allowed you to create like IRL games um it's you have to watch the demo for it to like really click but it's they're kind of pitch was you know we spend so much time online as it is like why not just gamify real life and and make that more immersive um so that demo if you guys I recommend watching that that kind of blew my mind a little bit because it was a it was a mix of like tokenization and like AI you know Vision model Innovation like there was a lot sort of happening technically under the hood um so that I thought that was really sick personally totally that one was called side quest um and they're yeah they're kind of working at this intersection of computer vision and crypto where you think of like Pokemon go and and being able to interact with the real world in some way um but adding tokens to different like activity Loops um so you could literally have touching grass burning you a grass token is like a stupid example right of of just how these things work because you could prove that hey oh look look I'm touching this grass um and it's it's more just conceptually cool like for anyone who's spent a long time around crypto it's just taking the stuff that we love to do on the internet and pulling that into real life um but it's a little bit trickier for me to to pick favorites obviously just working with all these teams but I think um everyone in there had an angle that uh I think people who really follow crypto closely would find interesting yeah I felt bad asking that question halfway through I was like ah I'm not trying to make you pick a favor here but it's cool it's cool to see uh it's just cool to see like the innovation in that types of of uh business lines we're seeing in crypto right like um another like semi silly example that I recently came across was baxis who is like bringing the wine and spirits Market on chain which that's kind of like going the reverse route of what you just described right we're taking existing assets tokenizing them bringing them onchain making deeper more liquid markets that's kind of the goal uh versus what you just described is super interesting because it's kind of taking the onchain experience and bringing it into the real world that is actually something I spent no time looking into but will be at the top of my list I wonder how you um I feel like this is something that we don't look at at all then like I you had the backx interview um sem I related to Consumer crypto but like for me I feel like my consumer crypto lens is so deteriorated now I just I'm not sure but I kind of want to understand like how you would even approach kind of taking that and as a VC like okay there's a cool lens to it like I'm interested I watched this chipped one for example which was and I thought it was like genuinely really cool but how do you view that from an investment point of view I I mean obviously like depends on what how much you guys can share about this process but kind of want to understand how you approach it yeah I um I think there's there's a lot of different ways to to go about that I think the way I think about something like that when I look at chips specifically is like I think there's a thesis behind that about advertising and referring and distributing and that sort of behavior going P top and I think you see a lot of people building sort of Primitives on top of that like I would say Zora's protocol reward is actually a similar idea um there's other people who are building similar things in different verticals and so I think the question there is not necessarily like how can you you know build a wall Garden at the protocol air but how can you build you know a real incredible delightful user experience and I actually think that's why it's interesting that they have a hardware component even though that's hard to build because that is something that is more of a you know could be more of a technical mode around it in the long term it's it's it doesn't scale upfront but think that that's interesting but that's like when I when I look at something like that for just to give like an example that's kind of like where my mind goes as as a BC if like you know how I could potentially break this down you know into something that might be investable and when you say Zora there were you just meaning like how I think my understanding is that the the content creators themselves actually get a fee split with the chain yes like the idea that you could sort of create a an incentive mechanism within the the the protocol or that within the assets that allows people to be permissionless compensated for their distribution no matter how small it is and and that that doesn't require necessarily a platform to be measuring you know what your distribution is or even defining what that is like if you post a mint link on foraster and 10 people mint that you just get 5% you know rewards permissionless and so that idea you see you see showing up as a perative in a lot of different places whether it's you know fashion referrals or recipe referrals or you know gaming referral r s you know name your name your vertical yeah I think I'll jump in and say that the lens that that we use at C club for the most part is just building something people want to be a part of um and it's it's interesting even just to set SE Club aside for a second we've we chatted with wob from sappy seals um Natasha from boy club on rpod um like these are kind of upcoming episodes even smoovie from sunko uh and you think like they're all building stuff that people just want to be a part of it's not necessarily that the tech is that much better than the next thing or that the nft is that better that much better that much cleaner it's like okay how do you get these people to want to be a part of something and then we can build from like the base of having people who are super fans and so I think something like chipped is interesting because you're really in a lane on your own right when he's a special founder you end up with this kind of like it girl crypto brand and you can build networks around that there's like the physical component there's the social component um you can expand Beyond Just Nails right and so I think a lot of it is just like this is a special thing that people want to be a part of um and it's a little bit you know fuzzy sometimes but some from a VC perspective anyway like sometimes you're just betting on a Founder um and that qualitative Lane of like can they do something that people want to uh be a part of yeah and to Ben's point I think part of like the hard part as an investor is being able to like see the bigger Vision in something that could look like a toy up front because I think a lot of people look at that and they're like like nails like you know but like there is there is there is like a whether you buy into it or not there is something else that could be underneath that so I I I totally agree with that I think that that's what people are trying to do with something like that yeah I um I want to talk about something you mentioned Natalie which is I guess distribution channels and getting a fee of that I feel like that's such a like clear narrative especially but it's it's a clearer narrative than I think a lot of other stuff has but I've been focused on gaming over the past week and gaming has no clear narrative I think it's like really struggling because the cool gaming like the interesting gaming is fully onchain gaming it's not like slapping a wallet on something or putting nfds on chain but that is people it's just difficult to make Gamers care about it I think but I feel like be sharing is a lot easier but on the other hand I guess before I joined crypto I was kind of like really against financialization of everything but like as you're in crypto you're like everything will be financialized but do you guys like when you see some of these consumer apps do you ever feel like uh I don't know if this is necessarily A needs to be financialized apart from like obviously stuff that doesn't have a fit I am I guess the way I think there's like two ways to approach that I think one way I think about it is that if we're being honest with ourselves I think social media and the consumer experiences online are all are are already highly financialized in a lot of ways we just don't actually see the revenue from that like Instagram is a mall in a lot of ways we just don't actually really reap any benefits from that being the case or the fact that it's such a money printer on on the advertising side even though we are the people that create the content and the distribution in many in many cases that creates that so there's like one side of it where it's like it's already kind of like that so let's just let people participate in it I think the other side of it though is that I think what's so so powerful about the nft As A Primitive in a lot of ways is that media for a long time at least has had to be commoditized to become valuable and so the idea that we can have these things that are that don't have to be commoditized to sort of have their value be legible to a market um is a really interesting idea um and so over time I've come to see it more like that and less of like oh it's bad to financialized and so I'm I'm more there's like a lot of different ways to do financialization there's like you know there's Zora there's pump. fun there's friend Tech but I don't think it's a bad thing like with large I wouldn't say Pacho you mentioned something interesting there which was uh you're like sort of your gaming thesis which you alluded to saying that the cool gaming is only onchain gaming one I want to get you to like paint that picture for us a little bit better and then that and Ben I'm curious what you guys think about gaming as it stands today I um yeah I this is this has been very difficult to explain and which is why I've been working on the reports for so long because there's like technically non fully onchain gaming is as an investment it's better because it's easier to build it's there's less like it's more similar to the traditional gaming flow um because you only have to do a few clicks but with onchain gaming especially at its current stage it's very difficult to the point that it's almost impossible to build like a complex on chain game but last time that I did this with with another analyst with brick I mentioned that it has a Vibe but it's very difficult to explain the vibe but it's like the people building fully onchain games are interested in building games fully onchain and that's all they want to do like they're nerd sniped they want to spend weeks and weeks building random stuff they want to one story that was really I opening was uh I can't remember his name but he went on stage at the fully onchain game convention and he basically spoke about how they were building these 2025 people engineering teams to play Dark Forest and which is an onchain game which is and it's like very it's not particularly good um but they were like super into it and building like coinbase engineers and stuff they were building on top of this game that just for the money obviously for the money but also because they were genuinely interested in it and I feel like that's what fully onchain gaming attracts versus semi onchain gaming it's like okay like we slap an NFD on it we raise however much money we can raise and then oh there's a token three years you have to wait for the game to actually be live but it's coming guys don't for like don't threet it's it's almost there it's like it's a completely different developer Community is a better way to put it than Vibe but that's just my fault yeah I am oh man I mean I'll preface this by saying I'm by no means a gaming expert or no I have no level of like real depth in this category as far as crypto is concerned but I will say conceptually I'm definitely nerd sniped by fully onchain games like for sure I I totally get that whole story narrative and I would like to see that exist in the world and I think it will um and again like I'm saying this without a lot of knowledge to me I'm always interested in like leaning into the stuff that we can't really do without crypto like exploring the block as a medium so for me like that's always going to be the much more interesting stuff the hybrid web 2.5 like more Trad stuff is less interesting for me personally but you know I'm showing there's people building viable businesses in that space as well so yeah I think the way I look at it is there's a bit of a barbell um you know you like the extreme onchain uh game stuff like the Realms people coming out of loot uh some treasure things like there there's an early crypto Nerf type of hey we really want to do something that's medium specific here and then there's the AAA like in theory parallel would be a good example there um right or or the pirate people who're like cool we want to build like a very serious game here not that the UN people aren't serious but you know what I mean the scale is is a kind of different conversation um and I think it's so hard that's maybe my headline comment of just gaming is hard um in either of those buckets right where most stuff dies like both most of two of my childhood best friends actually are game designers um and like 99% of stuff dies and you just like see it in their careers and I don't think crypto is any different I think it's just like it's got some cool potential to do some other things like You're extending what gaming means uh but yeah this stuff is just hard yeah I um that like games are genuinely very difficult to the point that you either have to attempt to build hits and take the 99% like rejection SL failure or you have to build like there's Subway Surfers and then there's like yeah Metro runners or something you have to like repeat these similar games um but I don't know I've I've become disillusioned with it now this week I think like I'll add one extra thing and just say the stuff that gets me most stoked um is stuff that acknowledges that crypto itself is a game like a bigger game environment um and I think like Cambria is an interesting example um where you're like okay for for now there's just duels and beding but at some level that becomes like a different interface to how people can experience crypto as opposed to just having a metamask browser extension games like that become like a UI for the entire set of blockchains that we already use stuff to do um like you can do swaps and you can do all these other things inside of a game environment um so when I think about it it's it's kind of like how do you extend the crypto as a game idea through other interfaces um that stuff is cool to me yeah like the crypto the game experiment was I thought was really interesting um I've few things in crypto have gotten people that like revved up um over just like not just pure speculation so yeah there's some interesting stuff happening for sure we'll see I'm kind of giving up on it at least Natalie do you have any expanded thoughts on like the acquisition of uh crypto the game by Unis swap Labs like I'm I'm curious if you are trying to like piece back together their uh intentions there yeah their Visions right because you know they built an amm and now they're they're they obviously want to be more than this I think that's clear but uh yeah I'm just curious how you how you put yeah I I've thought about it I have been able to reverse engineer it but I think it's really interesting and just like worth paying attention to like that that's like some kind of signal to me I don't know what it means yet but I was like I would just never have guessed that that really threw me off when I saw that headline yeah it does feel like they want to kind of get just get one step closer to that uh that relationship with the consumer and crypto the game kind of feels like yes it's a game but it also feels more of like this social media type play as well um and one thing you said earlier that I've been pondering since is when you fra framed Instagram as a mall the thing that jumps in my mind there is that uh you know meta doesn't want to give up the ownership of that mall so how do you think about the push and pull between like yeah of course the users probably want ownership of the all as well but uh the existing incumbents kind of have this power and are you'd have to think are you know that they owe the uh the duty to their shareholders to not let it go yeah I think um I I guess my answer to that is kind of meta I think that crypto represents the sort of structural transformation to the internet that just eventually makes those business models unviable I think you just have to believe that that's the case um and I think we're like seeing that happen very very very slowly but I think you have to believe that that's like where this is all going um fundamentally before we move on to more conversation let's have a quick word from block demon thanks to our fantastic sponsor layer zero all right guys for this week's layer zero segment I'm joined by Andrew senior director of blockchain engineering at block demon thank you so much for coming on yeah no worries um just to kick us off do you want to give an introduction on what you guys are building building over at block demon yeah sure so you know block demon has been around for around six or seven years um you know we started out as an infrastructure company RPC you know full nodes archive nodes um along the journey we kind of moved into staking um you know as part of that we then started building data products and backend Services um some of those we've offered up to our customers like you know um staking reports and all this sort of stuff um in the last year the the team that I've been working on mostly is kind of an innovation team we've been very much looking at what is onchain how can we tap into that um you know we see the advert of layer 2s and and the proliferation of you know evm um so you know we're kind of thinking into the future and Building Systems that can you know um serve our customers maybe in a year's time where all of this is kind of interoperable so you know really looking forward to the the kind of next iteration of interconnected blockchain technology perfect and how does layer zero fit into the product yeah well you know if you think about the future where everything is pretty much interconnected kind of like we have with the internet um layer zero you know is building kind of a technology platform that allows for messaging to be sent across these different ecosystems um so you know really what what we're doing with the the layer zero technology is you know when we look at our wallet and we see that we're adding all these different chains You could argue that they're still isolated right um but if you have a technology like layer zero with you know it's it's MES passing technology we're able to move assets around the different chains in a very trusted way um and then if you you know expose that and build those capabilities for our customers for instance in our institutional or in our retail wallet then you know it it's it's kind of it's a natural evolution of our stack and and the the technology that makes sense um do you have any exciting developments coming up over the next six to 12 months yeah sure we' have a couple so you know we're we bought an NPC company a couple of years ago and and now we're kind of you know doing stuff with that technology right so we have an Institutional wallet that's on Prem um you know we're adding a lot of the the blockchains that we already support um and then we're also adding you know defi Integrations into that that allow our customers to basically transact on chain so you know we have um a lot of uh um interesting stuff coming out over the next couple of quarters mostly with uh you know onchain um cross chain swaps defi um yield all all these sort of things all tied up into our our Mobile wallet and our and our institutional umam wallets perfect thank you so much for joining us Andrew what's the best attempt that we've had for social F now forecaster for social social F specifically like like a more financialized thing than foraster or including that I guess I just I use social fi and social apps related to crypto interchangeably we can do either I mean yeah I I it's hard to say what's beat that at this point um especially like Ben and I were were both that farcon um out in La not too long ago and like being able to see the community in real life as well like that's that's a real Community we can talk about the Bots and like of course there's Bots and you know that's a thing but that is like an actual community of people who are there and care about it regardless of price up or down um and like stuff has happened there people are building followings audiences businesses so that's probably like the the most real foray thus far yeah it's a small space ultimately I think that's the the main conclusion right now um forecaster is cool lens is cool um I'm like sympathetic to frch and fantasy top and these more kind of like hyper financialized games but if you look at the user counts it's like how many people are really using these things right you can roll like a college hackathon app and have more more users than most crypto products and so for now it's kind of like I am stoked that people are experimenting with this stuff like I like the idea behind a lot of it um but you know to me none of it really has broken out or it's like that vitalic tweet from whatever that was 2017 have we earned it right it's like we haven't really earned that category yet like there's there hasn't been anything that really has crushed it uh but I'm optimistic I just want to say it out loud because this is the sentiment around social F right now is why don't people realize that social f is a grift and there is no reason to put this on chain zero value question mark and I think this is kind of ridiculous first of all as a take but also I think CT is this is one of the things that I I think about quite a bit is like there's people who just kind of want to have fun um and then there's people who are like I need everything to be hyperf financialized which is fine both sides are fine but the hyper financial side never sees value in this like the people building cool stuff and the other one also kind of looks down on the other one so I'm I guess it's a long-winded way of saying like why do you think this take happens about social F about gaming about consumer apps about every that is not hyper financialized or defi yeah my first thought there is like okay so time. fun recently hit the market um which is basically a friend Tech V2 is honestly how I describe it it's at the core primitive is the same you're you're sort of paying for access to the individual um like frch did this through chats uh everything was like within the same app time. fun is doing this with like a slight twist where you like tokenize your minutes and then you can like the purchaser can redeem these minutes for like a telegram chat a one-on-one call a video call just like a messaging um platform as well so it's broadly the same idea with like a a new iteration on it I think it's cool that we're like iterating on things Mt and I had a good light speed debate on this and it's like this got a lot of heat for just being a frch you know spin-off um but I I think there's like Merit in that in like taking an idea iterating on it forking it and then iterating on it right like we see this in defi ethereum has the most re robust defi ecosystem because of this um you get these small improvements and then ultimately they tend to work themselves back into the original protocol anyways right like sushi swap did not defeat Unis swap Unis swap lot better over the long term um and so taking that all back to the original question like I think just we're in an era or a meta of financializing these things and I I mean blockchains are inherently Financial they're these asset ledgers that swap assets from person a to person b or or wallet a to wallet B and there's that's what the meta is right now will that be the meta forever it's hard to say um I I get why it's frustrating like I experimented with time. fun personally I was like okay like this isn't for me but um I get it yeah I um I don't know I think the met the more like medit take is that Twitter has CT has just become a little bit nihilistic lately um and I just think that what I've done and what I would recommend to other people is just to maybe cut down on the time a little bit and just reconnect with whatever that thing was that brought you into crypto where whether you're a gamer or you like medbots or you like fashion I would just encourage people to like a retab back into that and just tone the dial down on the the CT nalism just a little bit because that's 100% true it and I have a theory that it's because everyone is trading meme coins that is like a inherently depressing activity you get this like huge endorphin boost and then you either capitalize on it and sell or you you just retrace everything and lose money and that's depressing and it's just like this cycle over and over and over again uh it kind of like fits into this like broader view of how Tech is just killing people's attention spans right you just swipe through Tik toks all day long like I don't know that's what it feels like to me and then you just speedran this like whole Cycle's worth of excitement in three months and now everyone's like depressed that is literally what it feels like has happened yeah I that's that's that's all I can really say to that totally I don't I don't actually have too much to add I just think my thought was like this guy probably is down bad on on dgen or on some coin he roundt trip right like I get it at one level it's fine to be critical of these things to some extent because like you know crypto is so full of grifting that you just have to be careful not to get sucked into the wrong thing um but I also think people are probably too nihilistic to Nat's point where it's like you know if someone is trying in good faith to build uh something over like a three to five year time Horizon like just you know you got to let let that play out and the idea for for social anyway um of having open social graphs where other people can build experiences on top of like a set of data structures um is just cool like regardless of of price like that's the world that you would want to see like if anyone is in crypto um hopefully they'd be more aligned to like that version of an Instagram versus the current version of Instagram um and so it's like yeah does all this stuff have to be financialized probably not but does all this stuff have to be on chain in one way or the other I think there's at least interesting experiments that are like worth riffing on there that you just have to give a little bit more space for um and yeah the cynics will say what they want to say kind of regardless yeah just stop scrolling and believe in something that's that's the tail just believe in something P's favorite phrase of all time it's real I I love that what do you guys think about like all right so nft were super super hot last cycle they had this like very generic form of this pfp token basically that has uh not fully I I mean I I I don't really love nfts to put my opinion into this matter but um I'm just curious what you guys think about it like I I know you guys have good views on this and how do you think the nft market shapes up going forward would just say it's like there's a yeah there's there's like the initial Euphoria insane like oh my God these monkey pictures are every where on the internet and across like mainstream culture this is what you become known for um and in some ways it's just a different Ponzi flavor for CT to play right it's it was an unsolved game people would admit these things they would go up people would make money and a lot of folks are left holding the bag um I think you can split you know the evolution of nfts as a category after that run um into sort of this like Gartner hype cycle chart if you guys are familiar with that where like really over pumps um really Giga dumps and that's where we are sort of like the the oversold area if you will and then the stuff that comes out of that is still cool um and so there's a few different ways you know a few different conversations to have off of this but for me the core thing is just being able to own things natively on the internet seems like a primitive that will matter going forward um nfts are kind of like a facilitator of that whether it's owning art or Collectibles um or having some sort of game economy that you know we'll see if ever if that ever happens from Pico's perspective but um it's really just this thing of like hey this is a new primitive um and in the same way that like icos kind of invented tokens and they all died and then now we're hoping to come up with a different model where tokens have some value I think nfts are sort of in that lagging version of the same cycle where we're going to start to see some carry value but maybe not as much as like a board eight being 153 eth or whatever it topped out at um so yeah we can talk about speculation we can talk about app design we can talk about collecting there's a lot of things but I'll pass it over to Nat because I think she's got a good framing here yeah I mean it depends it depends how much of a rabbit hole you guys want to go down but I think um I think increasingly there's kind of like two ways to think about the design space of nfts I think one is just like the metadata which so far has been like the the static pfp things like just linking to a picture of a JPEG you know there's people who have taken that a bit further and they've done you know a dynamic nft or things like this but I think increasingly we're on more interested is in and the actual design of the token program I think that we're not paying enough attention to the fact that you can do a lot in there to actually make the media programmable and to just there's like a whole that's like a whole design Space Rabbit Hole to go down so I'm I'm interested in that side of things increasingly and less so in like just the onchain pointer to a piece of offchain metadata I think that's like the the frame that we've been stuck in for a while but I think there's a lot more there and I'm hoping to like explore that in the coming months what do you think of before I say this I want to say I'm not bearish onchain gaming because if this like just I need to hedge always I love onchain gaming but just in case I I've gone down that like I'm at the bottom I'll I'll be positive again regarding the pointing to metadata I feel like this was one of the reasons that well it wasn't one of the reasons it blew up because it was speculation but it was used to justify how well Bitcoin inscriptions and ordinals did and this is like I think the puppets guy talks about this a lot and how he wanted he did not like that a lot of the art on ethereum was just pointing to an ipfs uh versus like Bitcoin is actually in the set and this is not related to the Token programs as much but I kind of want to get this take out as well like I think that's a lot more interesting and if you're in nfds definitely um but I also don't see people caring that much I'm very bearish today for some reason maybe I need more sleep like this is not usually how I am I'm usually very positive very happy I'm always like yeah let's do everything on chain whatever it's probably a good Market signal folks pay attention to that but uh Natalie where do you see some of that Innovation happening uh like is it chain specific or is it like more come being driven by the app developers that are like here's what we need and like we're just going to pick the place to build it that's the easiest to build yeah this is this is and I my answer to this question I think is going to eliminate why I think a lot of people are so nihilistic because it's not happening in any of those places it's happening in the creative scene it's people making onchain instruments and people creating 3D worlds inside of nfts that are like separate from whatever the metadata actually points to um and so those are like again things that look like toys but if you kind of draw them out 5 10 years you can start to imagine that that goes in quite interesting directions but yeah it's it's interesting and that's where I've been spending most of my time lately cuz it's actually not in the quote unquote like hackathons and the the the you know the VC places it's it's that's where the artists are and you know and the the creative discords and these sorts of places is where the stuff is actually I think the most like the frontier of it in my opinion totally no I would I would agree with that I think there's actually more experimentation than people might think happening in evm land um not not not to say like there isn't stuff also happening on bitcoin or salana um I just think it's one of these things where the the original take is hey like these nfts are essentially a scam because they're just pointing to another input in a database which is like totally valid critique um but you look at you know art blocks is all on chain uh terraforms is like a funky example that Nat and I often talk about doing stuff that's not just a 2d thing like there's like a dynamic aspect to this um you know we can go through the list um but I think a lot of it is this question of like what is actually cool that you can do uniquely with a blockchain that is more what I'm interested in than just being like hey here's like a picture of an animal that you know lives in some database it's like you know sure but yeah I think the onchain stuff is much more interesting there are flavors of that though right yeah and to to that point I actually like I know you said that somewhat as a joke but I actually think it's a really important point to make because it kind of points to the schor the schi morphism of the current nft meta because if you think about that that idea of like pointing to a piece of offchain traditional metadata it's like it's kind of like having a TV and just like putting plays on TV instead of realizing that you can have like nonlinear time and cutting and like you can reimagine the the the kind of like audio visual medium entirely and you can have a TV show and that's like something that's entirely different from a play or just like putting a PDF file on the internet sort of instead of having like an interactive web page and so yeah that's like that's I think that's like how I kind of think about this current meta of nfts where it's like it makes a ton of sense we're like here's things that we already have and own let's create provenance and markets around them but like you can actually use the blockchain as a medium in and of itself to sort of create new things which I think is the next step if you will yeah I guess it's the same reason people were super excited about frames as well because it completely changed the way you interact with the post themselves um I think the only recur I guess like generative nft that I can think of right now is the GM da one which kind of every time he sent it over it acquired new metadata and like it represented that so if I sent something to Daniel it would be like bukachi sent this to Daniel and then if she sent that to you Ben it would add Dan sentus to Ben I um I'm kind of what are the leading I guess leading is not the right word but what how can I like do some more reading on this with some more research on this I feel like this something yeah I think I mean happy to like just share some stuff with you guys in the in in the chat but I think terraforms um as like just a project is probably the best thing to explore cuz I would say that's probably like the furthest thing out on the frontier um but also like just the art block stuff as well is also worth diving into um a lot of the just the the more experimental generative art on chain um world so yeah happy to share resources but but the terraform is some great like jumping off point one thing that I had two other people who are very very interested in nft the one thing we talked about was the same shift away from BFB nfts but apart instead of going into like the generative side we mostly talked about how Zora and drip house basically and like opening up going away from collecting to going away from owning to collecting and I thought that was also quite interesting and looking at some of Zora's numbers it's also like obviously picked up people love the app I I I like Zora on drip house I kind of struggled because a lot of the art was like Alec Monopoly style art which I'm just not interested in but on Zora I actually found a lot of I guess it's it felt more like browsing for images that I want rather than buying um I think the only time I haven't felt like buying with psbs was like buying maladies and puppets because I wanted to be specifically part of that group I like actually enjoyed it um but yeah how do you you guys think about that like opening up going from owning to collecting instead yeah I think that's absolutely the next step like I'm a Zora power user I meant Everyday um the dopamine hit if you think you get a dopamine hit from like Instagram likes the dopamine hit you get from people collecting your media is like 10x so I recommend people just put stuff out there and I would say to people who come on Zora like do not think that you need to like have some sort of profound essay or visual to drop like write a note in your in your p in your like Notes app and then just mint it like just don't make it super complicated or highbrow um but yeah I think that's absolutely the future to Zora to me is kind of like onchain Tumblr um which I think is amazing because it's like a scene um what you feel like you go there and you can like it it it has that vibe to it so yeah I'm a fan I'm definitely a fan don't really have anything to add I think it really just comes down to this thing of being able to own stuff online right like you abstract away blockchain you abstract away like the Ponzi nature of speculating on these things and some of it is just like hey that's a behavior that we probably do because we spend so much time on the internet anyway like Mak sense that we should be able to own stuff just different relationship um to like how content gets made and consumed of all kinds um and I think both drip and Zora have their own kind of Riff on that but yeah definitely a fan as well I was say drips like doing some cool stuff uh like I know they're really putting some effort into expanding the content they offer like they want podast on there they want different types of media they want like more Global media as well like one thing I've like I this is space is fairly new to me and so one thing I've recently picked up on is which intuitively makes sense is based on where you live there is such a different desire for like you obviously there's different cultures and like what appeals to you is so so different especially on like the consumer media and social side um even talking to Kyle Sani from multicoin he was talking about how like when they like one of the the sectors they're interested in investing in is wallets and like how you get wallets into the hands of people will vary greatly different depending on which like region of the world you're targeting uh or like uh the telegram uh blockchain ton you know they love to like highlight how many monthly active users they have but one of our analysts on our team Ryan Connor is pointing out how like yeah that's great but they're the it's not like a homogeneous group of users they're all like highly uh segmented across different region of the world and thus like you don't just get to tap into all of them simultaneously because they like different things um so I don't I don't know that's something I've been thinking about way more is like the regionality of what people find interesting yet we have this like inherently Global uh infrastructure with blockchains dear Point Dan I think I per I have a personal thesis which is like sort of cut a little bit of Half Baked about curation having to become more sort of like a local and decentralized again partially just because of the sheer volume of content that we see on the intern and the fact that AI is probably going to crank that up by at least an order of magnitude and I think that most web 2 companies today their business models and their actual platform infrastructure is built for a certain amount of volume from a Content moderation perspective from a curation perspective and like I just don't know how that goes and so I think to the regional perspective I do think it's something crypto could be useful for is helping to facilitate more local and decentralized curation because I think that that's probably going to be more needed as time goes on Daniel it was kind of crazy that you managed to both defend Solana and complain about user counts in the same sense I was hly shocked at how well you pull it off um that's what they call me the Sultan of salana these days yeah it's you and bit Bo what I was going to say is that this is not related to crypto anymore but I want to ask about it pumping out generative content my biggest fear for crypto is and this is always been my biggest fear for crypto because I always before I joined crypto I was a no social media I only had like a brick phone um I wasn't on the internet at all so I'm like constantly kind of yearning for the past where I don't use the internet at all and one of my worries is that when this isn't related to like I guess it is if you're pumping out generative content and Ai and like you said Facebook Instagram they they don't have any reason to not I guess um so this out My worry is that people are just going to be like I'm done and I feel like I'm seeing this a little bit on at least my like surroundings people are like I'm done like I'm genuine like okay a lot of people quit Instagram but even at a higher level they're like I'm just not going to go on my phone today just going to like leave the internet for a little bit I think that's my biggest bease for crypto that people just get sick and tired of the internet we go back to the old days no phone just taking walks talking to people good luck think the other side really this is team team Europe versus Team North America on on that take I think I honestly I wish that would happen but I don't think it will that' be that I'm like that too yeah really wow this is a horrible take by me I'm not going to let this there's I think there's you're not alone there's that there is a community of people but I think the larg community of people is is probably in a different place fully addicted swiping swiping swiping interesting a lot of my friends are just not online anymore maybe I'm you're living a no you're you're you're you're crushing it like it dud do you if you can that's awesome no like just logging off CT even like you mentioned it's it's hard for me but I see people who just don't even check their phones sometimes they like how do you guys do this like must be nice uh B and Natalie you guys both spend a lot of time with Founders so I'm ious like what what um what like key mistakes have you seen people make uh that is like a a something you'd love to see Founders stop making I'll like I guess I'll I'll slightly rephrase it to say like what's the thing I see most people missing or not thinking enough about I think the number one thing that I feel is missing um when I speak to the average crypto founder is just a conviction and a vision I feel like a lot of people can tell you what they think might happen in the next six months or the next 12 months but there's not a lot of people who are are able to see around the corner and like also convince you of it and then also like actually believe that it's going to happen enough to where they're like they're like their the full force of their energy is behind it like you feel it when you interact with them I think there's a lot I don't think we have a talent shortage in crypto but I think we do have like a vision belief inspiration shortage so yeah I would just encourage people to just tap into whatever inspiration sources they have because I think we're that's gen generally what I see lacking the most in my conversations conviction and communication love that Ben what about you yeah one sort of Riff on the conviction thing is I think a lot of there's a lot of talent like Nat has said there's a lot of people who want to build cool stuff um but there's just a like crazy scattering of attention um like you go you have like a hundred darts versus one spear being the analogy like it's super rare to have one person build one thing um for like a long time period um versus like hey I kind of have this side hustle and then I also was like involved in this other thing and I'm advising these five things like you don't have the Steve Jobs is overused as an example um but if you look at even Zuck like some of these bigger Founders where you're like yo I did one thing for 20 years and absolutely kicked ass at it crypto doesn't really have people like that or they are very few right um you know you think about Raj and toally as good examples of like yeah we want to make this our our life's work that's kind of the model right where you want to see more of that and I think a lot of Founders are uh non-committal so it is really that conviction Point um I also think if I had to add something completely different um just like being able to find good people to counterweight your weaknesses um is important sounds obvious but I feel like there's a lot of people in crypto who are like you know you would do really well if you had a COO you would do really well if you had like some other person to just like help you with this Vision so even if you get to conviction uh being able to build out people around you uh is key for some people that might be a comm's person but no that's another great Point as well one uh one I'm curious what you guys think about this this idea is one thing I feel like I've seen in crypto is people get like enamored by the tech I think all of us probably included and you're like holy like this is awesome like I just want to build something here they like all right like I'm I want to build something on a blockchain like let me back into the product idea which probably isn't the best way to figure out what people want versus going the other way we like hey like here's a product idea I'm fired up to build I'm going to go build it and then I'm like hey like all right let me plug this thing into crypto rails and I get benefits X Y and Z so there's like the path dependency of how you create this idea to bring it to to reality is what seems to matter here I'm curious if you guys see any of that of like Founders that are obsessed with crypto and kind of back into the product to build to be able to say like you're building something in crypto uh if you see more of that or the other way around where it's just like product people who are excited to build something awesome and figure out that hey using crypto makes makes my products better I am actually almost exclusively only interested in the second category from an investor perspective um cuz those actually because of the way you approach it end up being the things that are more interesting and useful because it's like I'm only coming to crypto cuz I I I had to and I just happen to maybe understand that I'm a tech person so I've been around the space but like that and you're honestly only really starting to see those Founders come in more recently I feel like but yes number two is like what number two it's kind of like this this conversation of founder market fit uh to throw out a buzzword of like you know you talk to people and you're like wow you really built to build that business right you know I'm thinking of uh like a friend of mine that's a good example is Adam from tala which is this like defi Hub on optos super random example but he has been obsessed with financial software since he was like 14 years old trying to do all of these different things whether it's like you know using Bitcoin to get around csgo market like skin markets things like this and so the convergence for him is like yo I just want to build Good Financial software that's not me I don't really care about that but that's him and that's like why you know some Venture people would get to wanting to support someone like that um but I think to your kind of original question there's definitely a barbell of people that fit on the the kind of the other side of the equation which is like yo I'm I'm an entrepreneur I want to make some money like I feel like I fit in this category what exists out there that I can build and there's nothing necessarily wrong with that it's more just like it's less of a venture conversation and more of like how do you get to making money pretty quickly like is there a way to drop a token and fair launch something like are you you know able to take a different route to find success um yeah so there there're sort of two buckets but the Venture side really is only focused at least in in my experience as well with those people with the vision since we're talking Venture what are you guys seeing these days that you are happy that you're finally seeing that you used to not see I guess like what is there more out of that like people are building I'll be honest I'm not really watching the market super closely these days like even even the Venture Market it's much um it's a little bit of like a a kind of stepback in reevaluate mode for me these days um but it but it has been nice just to see the more more people being serious building consumer stuff I think I just want to let that play out for a little bit longer um that is a trend as great but I'm not super like you know in the moment yeah I don't have too much to add I think um you guys did a great episode with Jeff from hyper liquid and it's a good kind of example of I think people looking at uh a few areas in crypto that have some product Market fit and thinking like okay from first principles how would we make this like even better so you're seeing some Founders take runs at at those sorts of things um and then it is more along the kind of experimental lines right like there's there's some consumer stuff I do actually think there's pretty consistent gaming ideas I don't know how much of that is getting funded um but there's a lot of people still kind of riffing on like how could we actually do this on on the blockchain gaming side of things um but yeah it's it's a little bit of a a lull after like a really intense six to n month um kind of runup if that makes sense that's and I don't know how to ask this because I always failed to ask about I'm going try what do you think of I guess valuations at this point for like in general because VC is you it's so hard to get an insight into how you guys do stuff so I want to get to that um I think valuation I'll I'll I think the the the what I've seen is that there's a little bit of like a weird thing where there's a couple companies in crypto that will get some traction and like you guys you guys saw the forecast around like that's public information out and and those companies will get these massive massive valuations and then it's like prior to that you know stuff is really I can be at a really reasonable you know seed maybe even cheap valuation but there's like not a ton of in between it's like it's either like too early or you have like a tiny bit of traction and then it's just like a trillion dollars so yeah it's a it's a little bit of uh not a ton of M middle ground it seems like at the moment yeah I feel like on that like higher valuation side of the the conversation it's it's basically this problem if there aren't that many good products prods are good Founders to fund in the first place and there's just there's more money sloshing around the ecosystem than there are good Founders and so that's why you just you get these pretty what you know what could see seem inflated uh valuations on these things uh just because you know there's a lot of money chasing not that many um investment opportunities and then like not said on on kind of the preed seed stage stuff um on the one hand it can seem cheap in relative terms whether people are raising at like 10 mil or 20 mil or five or something um and a lot of that funded but if you ever go and talk to people outside of crypto they're like what about that is worth $10 million like what like that even the low end is kind of whacked um so yeah it's a big it depends I um I noticed that recently my girlfriend's in VC and like they fund actual not actual but like real invest in a real company they're real VCS yeah no and I was like and some like just telling her about she's probably like insane yeah it's crazy dadel do you have anything to add are we no I know this has been a pleasure Ben and Natalie I appreciate you both coming on yeah thank you guys for for having us I feel like I'm famous now I've been on zero X research oh man hey if any other listeners out there if you love coming on if you love listening to the show we're always uh loving to have our power listeners on so hit up Bako on the DMS yep just send me Twitter DMS that that'll work work out but um guys also make sure to check make sure to check out liquid culture um Natalie and Ben's podcast as well as I guess Bane capital and Seed club rachio with the shill to finish yeah I love it we'll put the links in the show notes as well to all those things of course awesome guys thank you cheers have a good one y'all [Music]

========================================

--- Video 110 ---
Video ID: wRB9SWS_ClU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wRB9SWS_ClU
Title: The MetaDEX: Aerodrome & Velodrome Explained | Ace & Alexander
Published: 2024-06-20 13:49:47 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Aerodrome and Velodrome contributors, Ace and Alex, join us to discuss how Aerodrome and Velodrome are redefining the DEX model. They explain how the “MetaDEX” works, the flywheel it creates for users, and how they have helped shape the L2 landscape. Additionally, we talk about their Superchain vision, and why they chose to focus their efforts on the Optimism and Base L2s.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Join us at Permissionless III. Use code 0x10 for a 10% discount: https://blockworks.co/event/permissionless-iii
--
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
--
Follow Ace: https://x.com/Ace_da_Book
Follow Alexander: https://x.com/wagmiAlexander
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Pibblez: https://x.com/0xpibblez
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:15 Overview of Velodrome and Aerodrome
13:02 Benefits for Liquidity Providers
19:00 Success in the L2 Landscape
23:22 Permissionless Ad
24:36 Pear Ad
25:01 Relay, Slipstream, and Bribing 
41:30 The Superchain Vision
50:22 Betting on L2 Growth
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- -
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Pibblez, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 111 ---
Video ID: OxoTqgCpFwk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OxoTqgCpFwk
Title: Does Crypto Have Any Real Users? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-06-19 13:00:19 UTC
Description:
In this episode, the Blockworks Research Team dives into an age old question: where are the users? They discuss applications on Solana, real world use cases on Near, and competition among data availability layers. Finally, they speak on why infrastructure continues to dominate the industry, and what it will take for gaming in crypto to gain traction. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor LayerZero

Stay up-to-date with the LayerZero Ecosystem by following: https://twitter.com/LayerZero_Labs
--
Follow Brick: https://x.com/0x___Brick
Follow EffortCapital: https://x.com/EffortCapital
Follow Boccaccio: https://x.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:51 Solana's Execution Layer & Applications
8:54 Activity on Near & Data Availability Layers
23:14 Infrastructure Dominance
40:39 LayerZero: Angle Protocol Ad 
45:47 Crypto Gaming
1:01:06 Perp DEX UX
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- -
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 112 ---
Video ID: cxyUtPoC1-E
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cxyUtPoC1-E
Title: Hyperliquid’s Unique Approach to a Better Perp DEX | Jeff Yan
Published: 2024-06-13 19:09:16 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Jeff Yan, Co-founder of Hyperliquid, joins to discuss Hyperliquid’s journey and growth thus far. He provides insights into how they developed the HyperBFT consensus algorithm, Hyperliquid’s Vault System, and their plans to decentralize the Hyperliquid L1. Jeff also gives his thoughts on competing with Centralized Exchanges, and what’s in store for Hyperliquid in the future.

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.

Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://forms.clickup.com/45049775/f/1aytxf-16571/7XLRRC4YQAMEFKRLDX
--
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
--
Follow Jeff: https://x.com/chameleon_jeff
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Carolina: https://x.com/GoldDefi
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps: 
0:00 Introduction
1:50 Hyperliquid Overview
6:05 Competing with Centralized Exchanges
7:51 Hyperliquid's Vault System & Bridging Experience
13:59 The Hyperliquid L1
19:11 Building the HyperBFT Consensus Algorithm
21:26 Wormhole Ad
22:04 Pear Ad
22:30 Products Built on Top of the Hyperliquid L1
32:30 Decentralizing the L1
38:19 Bootstrapping Hyperliquid
42:10 Consolidating Users on One Chain
45:36 Future Plans for Hyperliquid
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- -
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Carolina, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
yeah so the the L1 will need a native token it's not even necessarily to pay gas I think people often focus on gas but the the main reason L1 needs a native token is is like you said for the the staking there's there's just no way to run proof of stake without um a native token and that is like in my view that is sort of like the only thing you really need in L1 token for um but it's a super important one like uh there's no way around it whing up with the Wormhole Foundation Steward of the wormhole protal the leading interoperability platform powering Crossing transfers for 200 plus multi-chain teams came unique Wormhole NFD just for zerox research listeners today pair is an Innovative pair trading exchange built on top of Simo users can trade trending narratives with one click from Blue Chip narratives such as long BTC short e right through the whiff versus Bonk the Hat stays on simus intense Centric architecture enables deep liquidity source offchain and Broad onchain and combined with pair has democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional Traders before we get into today's episode just a quick disclaimer the views expressed on this podcast by either myself or any guests are their personal views and do not represent the views of any Associated organization nothing in this episode should be construed or relied upon as Financial technical tax legal or other advice all right let's jump into the episode what's up everyone and welcome back to another episode of ZX research today we're joining joed by Jeff co-founder of hyper liquid and order book based decentralized exchange thank you for joining us Jeff thanks for having me on um before we get started do you want to give a brief overview of hyper liquid and how you guys see it fit into the space both as a DEX and an L1 sure um hyper liquid is is most well known as an onchain pers deck uh it really took off around six months ago um at this point I think it has a lot of captured a lot of the Mind share of um decentralized perpetrators and has really pushed the boundary on what can be done and what it sort of table stakes in terms of ux for decentralized trading um to the point where most users uh who trade there uh use it as their primary venue even over centralized exchanges that that they also have the option to use um so it's been really fulfilling to to sort of like see that through and and push the push the boundaries on like what's possible there um these days though uh hyper liquid has also expanded uh into being more than just a venue to trade perss um in the process of building out the decentralized exchange uh the the the dev team really had to invest a lot into infrastructure so that included building our own L1 and then um innovating a lot on the VM on top of it as well and at this point a lot of the work has been done to where we want to have this infr support more than just pers trading uh it's a very unique opportunity um hyid um unlike most other L1 has a lot of the key ingredients to a financial ecosystem has a bunch of users who love the product and stick around and and use it um has a lot of liquidity uh one of the I would say like top 20 tvl l1s despite being only one application really um until very recently uh and yeah and I think liquidity and users are are the hardest things to get for a for an ecosystem and so given that that's in place and then a lot of the infrastructure is as well uh we're excited to sort of build out this next chapter U of hyper liquid yeah I'm also I'm looking forward to the L1 I feel like it's one thing that a lot of per dexes are trying to do but I don't think it's been done very well so far and I'm excited like your perex is fantastic so I'm excited to see how you guys are approaching that um and I want to talk about the L1 more later later on but first I kind of you guys came into the per space let's say like over the past year and you've been very successful what do you think is like the space is obviously very competitive what do you think sets you guys apart like what's some things that you think you did well compared to other decks is that uh led to you guys getting getting a lot of Mind share um yeah I think on on the surface building in exchange or or a deck is a very simple it's a very simple problem like everyone knows how it's supposed to work it's not order books are not rocket science uh but the devil is in the details and I think it really takes uh a team with with heavy background in quantitative trading at least um to even EXT stand a chance to building a good um exchange whether even if it's a centralized exchange and then when you make it decentralized you have to really have a strong background in in um understanding like lower level infrastructure and like how to how to scale scale out uh a fully onchain solution to this problem so I'd say like it's it's not one specific thing um it's you like building exchange is like at least a hundred different check boxes you need to check and if you're missing any one of them like if your UI is bad the Traders don't understand it if your API sucks like market makers can't trade through it if your liquidity sucks uh like no one no one can everyone experiences very high slippage like if any of these things fail then then no one going to use your product and so I I think really it's like our team um came from Quant trading background uh so checked a lot of the the harder boxes to check and then we really pushed ourselves to to figure out what what we were missing and to check those boxes um and and yeah it's really like a lot of hard work in grinding like listening to users uh there's there's no shortcut and there's no there's no one secret recipe um it's just like it's just like marathon of of building this endlessly like iterating and building this this product like not being satisfied with with any shortcomings and on that what do you think is required for dexes to reach parity or at least increase their market share um when compared to centralized exchanges in terms of Perpetual dexes yeah I think that's sort of a mystery to everyone um in my perspect from my perspective I think every exchange kind of needs to do something new whether centralized or centralized so if you're if you're binance and you were looking at bitmax and just thinking like how how can I how can I be bitmax like back in 2016 or 2017 or whenever they were thinking about this uh I I don't think they could have like I think they really needed they really needed to come and innovate and offer users something that's 10x better uh and I think for binance the big thing was like they really they really took over this spot market and like had longtail listings and then by that time by the time they they came into the perss um the pers competition on centralized exchange side uh they had a lot of the users and and sort of like you know spot sort of incumbency advantage and so I think like deck's coming in kind of needs to ask the same questions like what can we do better than binance it's not just like uh you know like build something that's like close enough and then like users R switch over um so with with Hyper liquid we we innovated uh on just about everything we could and I think like in many regards it is it is actually better uh than than any Central you can trade on um and then in other regards it's like it is like kind of reaching parody and I think there's like for things like liquidity and just like throughput and responsiveness for market makers like that that stuff is it's not it's really important and there's no easy way around it you just kind of have to like build good Tech and so that's that's another thing that we focus on day in and day out I want to kind of talk about the Vault system because you guys don't only have The hlp Vault but you also have individual vaults like I can create a vault and tell people look I'm going to be let's say pair trading over the next six months and I can encourage people to deposit I feel like this isn't a vault system that's been tried very often and I thought it was a like talked about this on a earlier podcast as well I thought it was a great marketing tool as well because people obviously want to post about their vault I um I kind of want to understand if you thought that this approach was successful like as a product and why you guys decided to launch this because as far as I can tell it's I think there's only like two more products that are like this and they're not very popular uh yeah this is a pretty funny story because we actually built the Vault primitive it really is a primitive in the L1 so people think it's a product but it really is um just like an L1 op it's it's like a signing primitive so like when on hyper liquid uh the nice thing about building an L1 is that you you get to customize like the ins and outs of it and people think we're just like making excuse to make an L1 but like it's actually very essential to building a good product and so the Vault primitive is like it's like if I want to sign on behalf of an address um I have like many choices I could I could have the private key to that address and sign using it and that's what that's what all the general purpose um l1s use um and that's cool like you know if you're an API user you're probably gonna use that but like the Vault primitive is is like pretty cool because you can you can create this address and then you can sign on behalf of it but like not have permission to like move the funds in that address and this address ends up being this sort of like copy trading primitive um and really the only reason it was built was was to release hlp um but there was a bit of an afterthought of like well like why not just you know like we have this whole thing Bill like why not just like let people use this primitive like as permissionless anyway and who knows like maybe people will like come up with cool strategies um I was thinking initially things things like Unis swap pools could be like V2 pools especially could be replicated as like a very simple Vault strategy um and it would it would just perform better because it wouldn't have this um I guess like it wouldn't be it would be like it could actively get out of the way of toxic flow unlike Unis swap which gets arbed um but turns out nobody really cared about that but they like took it in their own directions and and had a lot of cool innovative ideas and honestly it kind of exceeded All my expectations and it took it took many months before people like realized they could do these things and so it was kind of this like sort of exception to the rule where um seems like usually you need to really think about a product but sometimes when you build the right Primitives and uh nobody else you can't do this anywhere else else then people will just like naturally uh kind of use it and and like Market it so yeah that that's really the whole story like not not really some like uh deeper thinking behind it cool and um your bridging experience is probably one of the most seamless I've seen in terms of uik it almost doesn't feel like bridging and so I was wondering how did you guys approach this what were some choices you had to make maybe in terms of trust assumptions and also if there are plans to add bridging from other chains and how how this will look like in the future yeah the bridging we've thought a lot about I think we actually have probably spent too much time thinking about it like I sort of regret how much time we spent um but uh the end products like people people can see the bridge and at least at least it's open source and we got audited twice um people can read it's it's just like you know 2,000 lines of solidity um but it it's just a custom Bridge so the the trust assumptions are that the bridge is secured by um a quarum of the L1 validators uh and there's a system by which um if there's some exploit uh there's a wider set of of sort of like monitors it's just sort of like the dispute idea behind the arbitrum bridge where where the bridge can be locked and then it requires a quorum of um cold wallet signatures by the same you know state stake weighted validator set um to unlock it um I think that's like basically the whole thing uh but there's like a lot of details there and then like integrating it seamlessly with L1 like you said which which makes the ux actually good um I think this is this is probably like at least a quarter if not half a year um of iteration and work uh and and yeah I think we we consider many Alternatives like like IBC or um maybe some other like more bespoke solutions But realize that like the the bridge is really like the first thing that someone interacts with and uh if if you sort of Outsource that to another project or protocol then you risk like that thing not being optimized for what you're trying to do um and our experience with like other Bridges was was generally that it's like they generally leave leave some ux to be desired and so we kind of just you know to took the took the work of like building the whole thing ourselves um and then yeah as for your other question uh the the ultimate plan actually like with the hyper liquid evm coming out um a big reason is is to be able to support um a a more diverse and more sort of like institutional set of bridges so um one particular thing we're super excited about is is uh supporting native usdc uh and so right now like this custom bridge is is somewhat of a bottleneck to getting like institutional Capital onto hyper liquid because maybe an institution like doesn't want to use arbitrum and like you know it's just like sort of the single point of entry for the for the arbitrum bridge onto the hyper liquid L1 um but once the evm is there uh cctp will let anyone uh sort of like trustless as trustly as you can like burn usdc on One Source chain and like M hyper and so those things like that um you know other also for other spot assets uh we want to solve this like whole problem uh in in a relatively General way and that that's actually a big motivation behind um putting the work into this hyper liquid EPM as well yeah that um makes a good segue to the next question I had regarding the the hyper liquid L1 it feels like a few months ago there was this shift towards extending U dl1 and not be only a perex and was this always the plan or what was your rationale behind it is it something that that you noticed made made sense along the way uh it definitely wasn't uh our plan all along um initially we were just we just wanted to do anything that that would be helpful for the for sort of like crypto Community as a whole so I I guess I back came a bit this was 2022 and we were trading pretty heavily on a lot of centralized exchanges and in defi as well um and kind of had just like a pretty good view of everything was going on and and we're kind of using a lot of these protocols that were coming out and realizing that they were basically all um not very good uh and so when the FTX thing happened we we felt very strongly that like we should the the SP the space sort of like lacks Builders like FTX was sort of like this big icon and like you know they were like built four Traders and they kind of like betrayed a lot of trust and then like but you know like people like oh like this is def's moment to shine but then like we were just like trading on Def all the time and we were just like there's no way like any of this stuff can can can match what FTX um had going for it and so it it just felt like what could we do best like we could just like we could just build an actually good decentralized exchange that you know it's like fully onchain um can sort of scale to actually like just scale to the scale of Finance uh as a whole but also uh you know start kind of humbly and like actually get users like start with a market that like we we knew in and out and so that was that was always the initial plan was just like what can we do like what can we contribute and um but slowly like as we as we sort of do things and then users users sort of give us positive feedback I guess like the sort of ambition kind of just grows and and there's a bit of just like you you initially assume that everything is good and you just need to build this one thing that you're really good at like like potentially really well suited to building but you soon realize like I don't know like you maybe just need to keep going down the stack to build it more and more and then at some point you're like okay like I should just we should just like know also release this this like all this other work we're doing and let other people benefit from it and so the L1 kind of came from a lot of users a lot of lot of our our users are actually like really good developers as well like uh want to make these dashboards like want to um want to build these products on hyper liquid like want to launch things and we've always just been like okay yeah it's like mostly a per deck though like but let's see how we can support you um and at some point it just like it just clicked like yeah we have all these like really talented Builders and community members and why not just like actually give them the tools to do everything they want to do one thing um you mentioned in there was that you guys are fully onchain um I think like a lot of people assume that most order book Protocols are fully onchain but they're not like a lot of them move their order book and matching engine offchain um or at least parts of it how are you guys managing to keep everything on chain like what is your approach that you would say that doesn't have or face bottlenecks and you can put everything on chain fully yeah um initially we used tendermint because it was the most battle tested um consensus mechanism that was easily like modified uh so uh and with with some modification it wasn't too hard to get it to do around 20,000 transactions per second um so that was the initial thing and and like initially just there just like wasn't that there just like weren't that many orders so it was just it was fine um but but yeah at this point uh hyper the hyper L1 has fully migrated to uh I guess what we call hyper bft but really it's I want to say like we didn't actually invent this consensus stuff like there have been a lot of like really good research and almost all the l1s use this sort of like consensus research uh from the last five or six years so you know credit where credits you like we're not we're not consensus researchers we just like read these papers we're very impressed by the metrics spent half a year reproducing them and you know going from academic paper to production implementation is is not that easy but like the core ideas are are out there and we basically just did the hard work of implementing it um by hand and I think just paying very close attention to all the low-level details to make sure that the throughput doesn't like doesn't degrade as you actually implement it um and so at this point um the consensus is not even the bottleneck like I think if if execution gets faster that consensus will just keep up I think the bottleneck is is first execution and second the like Hardware like Network bandwidth Etc and then at some point it's like um I'm sure that the Bott neck will be the consensus again but but like I really think that at that scale it's like you're you're basically you can basically run bance on like fully onchain and um still on that can you describe a little bit how the new the hyper um hyper fbt um is different from tender yeah um the the the core difference is just that tender is based on older research so at the time it was written this like hot stuff had not been written and I and I assumed that hot stuff was heavily inspired by tendermint and other algorithms like basically the whole like standing on shoulders of giants thing is definitely true in research and so I would just say that it's uh it's like an iterative improvement so um like one key difference is is tender uh has like sort of some like built-in waiting um so just just like just like how the algorithm Works they like time scales whereas with uh with Hyper bft the the algorithm itself is like more asynchronous so like you don't have to say how long do I need to wait before I do something in this in this like multi-step process you just the the the steps look more like uh once I have enough votes which in this case is like more than two-thirds of the stake um I'm happy to like vote on this block and progress to the next step and like no one no one anywhere no EV validator anywhere in this network is uh in the happy path of of algorithm is is waiting for a designated amount of time so like when the network is is Flowing smoothly and people are not timing out an algorithm it progresses as quickly as um information can be transmitted between the validators I think that's like that is like one big core difference um that that that's what basically lets the block times like not really have a lower bound um and I guess another big difference is that tender tender was implemented earlier and is a result of I think a lot of trial and error and began as an academic implementation um was more research Focus so there there are just like a lot of small things um in the code that are like not that interesting when you look at them one by one but when you add them all together um do just like make a huge difference in in production performance woro is the leading interoperability platform for multi-chain Bridges and applications with over 1 billion messages sent and 40 billion in value transferred wormo leads the industry and cross chain message volume and total value transferred if you're a builder woro has an extensive sued of tools and infrastructure to securely build multi-chain applications you can use Wormhole to power D5 nfts governance and so much more and Wormhole supports over 30 blockchains and six different run times came unique Wormhole NF just for zerox research listeners today F out a form prove that youve list today's episode to receive a PO app and you'll get an email over the coming weeks to claim your limited edition nft pair is an Innovative pair trading exchange built on top of Simo users can trade trending narratives with one click from Blue Chip narratives such as long BTC short e right through the whiff versus Bonk the Hat stays on Sim's intense Centric architecture enables deep liquidity source offchain and Broad on chain and combined with pair has democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional Traders you mentioned earlier that you guys have a lot of people building uh on top of you or you had and then that's how you guys kind of evolve the product I feel like that's the dream of most um like developers but I kind of want to ask you guys are I assume you're allowing permissionless smart contract deployment eventually on the hyper liquid L1 or maybe day one is there um are there any products that you're looking forward to for people to launch like a new Vault system or uh any of the sorts like GMX in its early days gained a lot of attention just by people building new products on top of them so I'm wondering how you're thinking about that yeah we're pretty happy to let the community do whatever they see fit so we we're trying I think that the nice thing about general purpose platforms I think I mostly say bad thing bad things about them because it's always in the context of like well you can't use this to build a purpose de I think I've like just tweeted this like over and over again and um and I still believe that but the but there are really cool things about permissionless smart contract systems um which is just that like you don't need to say what you want people to build you give them the tools and they build it I think that's like very powerful um our vision though is like how the two fit together um I think this is a quite unique to hyper liquid and I think potentially we should be we should be explaining this more to people because people assume that we're this evm is just coming because like evm is cool like people can build on it and like maybe maybe we think people want to build on it but that's the the the real reason is it's like this sort of like like it's it's gonna it will be the thing that takes the hyper liquid L1 from a very focused like application chain um it will let it kind of grow fully into the application which which is you know at this point like trading like spot and pers trading um you like in order to get in order to do perose trading like like a big thing is we want to make it easy to on board and so like the evm solves that because they're all these like bridging protocols and they they love to integrate with evm that's like the first thing that like any any one of the big bridging protocols like makes sure to integrate it's it's like okay that check that box um spot trading you need bridging of like canonical Spa assets from other chains like you know eth BTC Soul um the these these things like you know also solved by the bridge um and even more importantly like you you really want native assets on your chain like why has salana done so well it's it's because that it's because like there's this new wave of Builders who who Cho salana and like build on it and when your native application is on salana um you're like obviously like the most natural place to trade the native asset is to not Bridge it somewhere else but to like just trade it on the Chain if it's possible to do on your chain and like hyper liquid is the best place to do that and so it there's like there's natural Synergy there with with building as well so there are all these reasons that like really like ANM in some sense is like is like a generalization solution of this like already scaled out system so instead of like starting with the general thing and then like scaling it out we're like starting with a with a scaled solution um which which we we pretty confident can can scale to be binance and and and bigger on chain and then like building the generalization automically into that um that that's kind of like the vision so um concretely I guess it's like we're not s we don't expect there to be like rep replicating things that are like what hyper liquid L1 has natively right now um on the evm like people are welcome to do that I don't expect that to gain that much traction given that users of hyper liquid probably are using it because they like order books and like GMX Sal all like not sure that's that interesting yeah but something like there's a huge long tale of finance that is that could be built natively but I think is better suited for these permissions things so things I I I think would would be really cool would be like U like a borrow lending protocol um there are a lot of there's a lot of work been done there on on the evm there a lot of like really big projects a lot of tvl and um these kinds of things you know it's not super like gas constrained it's not super high throughput but it's like super valuable like if you can if you like one of their biggest requests is like can I deposit eth as a collateral and and then trade like you know either do the funding ARB with eth itself or like trade some other coins that are usdc margined and this suddenly like you know it becomes like like we don't have to build that into the L1 itself which is quite a big undertaking there can just be this like borrow end protocol automically built into the evm that's compos posable with the burp snacks so things like that I think are like really cool and um and people have already expressed interest in building these kinds of things so I'm really excited for for that kind of stuff are you worried about congestion or block space at all if you're allowing other Primitives to build on the L1 um I mean from what it sounds like the l1's very performant and it should be fine uh likely but I'm just wondering how you guys are planning on approaching that yeah so we're not I think another big misconception is we're not like pivoting to building a performing evm or anything like that so the I I believe on hyper liquid the the evm will just have less demand and and I kind of hope it is like that um because if you look at like I I don't know I haven't run these numbers maybe you know but if you look at ethereum and you look at end user transactions that go through that like do something that is already done a hyper liquid so like that includes like Unis swap like usdc transfers um it also includes like L2 blocks uh that are actually on the L2 side like end users being doing these like simple Financial operations like if you added all those up like I don't actually know how much of um ethereum's block space that is but I would I would guess it's a very high percentage um and so like when you move all that to like some native application I do think the like genuine demand for the evm space um decreases so it's sort of like an an alternative way to scale an evm which like no one really talks about is like is like you take the things that really shouldn't be built on an evm or like any virtual machine for that matter um things that really like really ought to be built natively into a protocol do that and like that does just alleviate all the congestion um and so that that's like our hypothesis going in I think like if there is just like act actually like immense demand for this evm then um you know I'm not saying that it can't be scaled but uh I think we would we would want to see we want to like see evidence that that's going to happen um before before sort of like formulating a plan around it yeah that that makes sense and I'm really excited about some features uh now with the the native evm just maybe for a little bit of context so just this Monday you announced that the the hyper liquid L1 will um support a a a native FM and as I understand it a really exciting feature brought by this integration is that the hiip one out assets will feature the atomic transfer with the corresponding erc20 contract and so what can users expect from from this upgrade how how do you think it will change the way they interact with the product yeah so the the thing you mentioned is is the is the example we gave I think it's the most obvious one for for why this evm is not just some isolated new feature um so the the idea is like uh like right now very very soon people people will be able to permissionless um deploy hip1 and hip2 on Main net which we're super excited about uh and we think we will will already be really cool for a lot of Builders um but with the evm I think this gives you this gives Builders confidence that um soon they will literally be able to do whatever they want um so you you can right now you can you can launch a uh hip1 asset with with a corresponding hip to like hyper liquidity which is this like on ch um order book liquidity provision strategy uh and you can do this today and then when the evm launches um The Hip one and two deployers will be able to like specify a um a corresponding erc20 contract on the evm state and the evm state and the other L1 state are are composable there are like atomically one state that is agreed upon by consensus and so there will be a mechanism by which uh hip1 token balances and erc20 token balances um are fungible in some sense so it's like it's not a bridge it's like it's like an atomic transfer basically um and so this lets you uh if you're if you're a builder and you're thinking about using evm which I think many Builders are um and you're looking for someone to build I think it's like a really strong pitch to The Builder because um because like for a builder the important the two important things are like which chain you're building on and how can I get how can I decentralize the supply of the the governance token or or the gas token or whatever whatever you're issuing issuing for your um for your project and the first one you know it's like yeah pick evm pick svm whatever um second one is like okay like probably gonna have to go to binance buy bit coinbase whatever and like I kind of asked them to list your token and they kind of the exchange has a lot of leverage in that discussion and um I just think it's like not a very good system and so hyper liquid being this completely open platform to trade on chain um and to have and and to have that be automically happening on the same chain you're building on I think is like really powerful um and so yeah if if you had binance and ethereum or or whatever scalable solution you wanted um atomically composed into one unit then like that is sort of the the vision for the hyper liquid um evm perfect um last question on the L1 current Traders uh they don't pay gas to use the L1 um how will decentralization and like introducing a native token affect costs and what challenges do you guys think you'll have as you introduce this and try to decentralize the validator set yeah so the the L1 will need a native token it's not even necessarily to pay gas I think people often focus on gas but the the main reason L1 needs a native token is is like you said for the the staking um you can't there's there's just no way to run proof of stake without um a native token and that is like in my view that is sort of like the only thing you really need in L1 token for um but it's a super important one like uh there's no way around it and um you on hyper liquid there's no plan to require the L1 token to trade um obviously things can change like maybe some maybe there's some like novel new mechanism by which like trading like makes more sense and involves L1 token but um there's there's no reason to think that that will have to happen um so the the thing you mentioned with with with trading being gas free is actually not it's not like a it's not like a Band-Aid solution it's not like it's it should be costing gas but it's not it's rather like the L1 itself is um is is so custom that we that we can actually have the same properties as having gas like a native gas token charge per transaction but rather have it be through this other mechanism um when when the transactions of like when the transaction been considered are trading um you can basically use a combination of fill rate and trading fees to make guarantees about how much is paid per I guess like per throughput or per uh you know State per like State bloat um and that really is the purpose of gas and so like as long as as long as the protocol is charging for what could be dos whether it's state or throughput based um it's fine and so the the system hyper liquid like at first glance sort of seems like we're just like brushing this under the the covers but it's actually been thought through very carefully there may still be issues with it but I think the fundamental idea is sound um and I think there's like a lot of write up in the doc about how this stuff works um it does let it does force people to kind of modify their strategies a bit if they're market makers but people usually have at this point it's kind of well known how to adapt to it and I think it's quite a scalable solution and gives the nice property like you said is like if you're if I'm a user first time using hyper liquid I don't need to go buy some like random token I don't want to hold just to use it yeah that makes sense and um I was thinking the points program ended at the beginning of this month um but hyper liquid actually managed to maintain its position in the top three verb texes in terms of daily volume at least and compared with other points programs I noticed that you didn't draw much attention for it for example with boosts multipliers or other Partnerships explicit rules do you find like that this helped attract the the right type of users or what do you think was your secret here besides it being a good product um yeah it's it's a good question I think we didn't think too much about how we could Market the points I mean there there are just like like we're pretty big Believers in simplicity so it is just you know it's it's a number it doesn't have any value it's meant to it's meant to um like it's meant to signify to a user like how much they've contributed to the protocol and we we kind of like just feel like it's like simple it's self-explanatory and really we don't want people thinking too much about like that number like he said we want this product to kind of speak for itself but it's a little bit of like something for people to talk about something people like maybe like catch their attention someone else talking about their points like oh let me check this product out and and I think it by and large like worked um to that effect and people generally like the product and we're pretty happy with with that outcome um I I think a big I think like one big thing that we took a gamble on and that I think has paid off is um is just making the points completely opaque um I think a lot of protocols launch points with the intention of inflating metrics um I don't yeah I guess no comment on whether that's like a good or bad idea but if you're doing that you kind of want it to be explicit otherwise you're really not getting the value you want like if you would rather tell someone like you will get one point for every $1 in fees you pay and then people know exactly how to calculate like they may they may just have like some formula in their mind and they can calculate and do exactly what like what inflates the metrics more um we felt very strongly this is like not a good idea like we don't care about short-term metrics um and so taking that gamble I think was was good because uh these there's like a large set of users who I strongly believe like you can just kind of look at the numbers like they make up a very large fraction of the volume on most uh other per Dees and and dexes in general and chains in general um there's just like large set of users and they're very like I don't know they're they're like very fleeting and mercenary and um not that they don't provide any value to a protocol but I think we just decided that uh not super valuable to hyper liquid long-term Vision I feel like those um the points programs that you mentioned where they're very explicit are and they inflate the volume or activity or what whatever they're usually as far as what I've read they're usually to entice um funding or like VCS Etc and this is actually one thing that I wanted to ask you about is that you guys chose to bootstrap the protocol instead of raising external funds what was the choice behind this and like how did you guys end up actually doing that and boost strapping the protocol because your fees are reasonable it's not like what GMX fees were a year ago it's like on open and close you pay something double of what other protocols asked for yeah um I guess F first I'd like to clarify the last point which is that um we actually the dev team does not collect any fees from the protocol so all the fees um go to a mix of the Insurance Fund and the uh and mostly to hlp uh and and so like yes the fees the Fe are low I think we very very strongly it's like so early in Defi and there's so many ways in which defi is harder to use than CI still that that the fees that fees being low is like sort of uh a bare minimum to getting some new users so that's a product decision that being said the protocol has collected a lot of fees and so if if it were a business it would be very profitable um but that being said it is not a business and I think we could potentially be more clear about this we we try to say it like every so often but like the yeah the team has never taken um even a scent of of the fees and this is because we just like we believe so strongly longterm in the project that uh we just don't we don't need the short-term uh money and we don't we don't we want we don't want to people ever to be like have anything to say about like oh this like Insider teams like you know making so much money off these fees like uh I don't know there like a lot of negative things you can say um in that line and I think like a lot of a lot of protocols do make this choice and and kind of have to suffer those criticisms and so um yeah that's how that's just how we operate and um as far as fundraising I think it's like a similar similar story um I think there's a lot of interest in investing uh but but ultimately hyper liquid is is is very like long-term oriented so um if the goal is to is to really be the platform on which all Finance happens uh this is like a very a very long-term vision and um there's a lot there's a lot of hurdles there and I think I think one very important thing will be like what decides the like ultimate Financial platform of the future uh will be that there are no Insiders on the base layer I don't think V I think VC's provide a lot of value I think it's like I I think a lot of the economy you know like has VCS to think for that and and um I don't want to on VCS in general it's just um there's a very unique opportunity with Hyper liquid to be something more like Bitcoin where like I think if B if Satoshi took you know a pre-sale and or like or or or like VC invested in like satoshi's initial mining setup or something like I don't know like I think Bitcoin just wouldn't be Bitcoin um and not not saying not like not like literally comparing hyper liqued Bitcoin but I think that is like one prerequisite to being um a neutral platform and uh and that that is like the Ambitions are just that big and so uh we are like check that box and I think it will be important yeah and maybe zooming out now a little bit more um I wanted to ask how do you see the longer term future of the space in terms of multi-chain dedicated chains one winning chain because it seems like there are highly contrasting approaches even within the per space for example vertex Edge and Hyper liquid we could say that vertex Edge accepts the premise that there will be always a lot of users on different chains and so tries to aggregate this liquidity through offchain matching so that deployment on more chains brings more liquidity to every chain and Hyper liquid maybe takes the opposite approach of growing its chain with more use cases and more protocols kind of consolidating users in one chain how do you see this yeah just how do you think about this yeah um so I'll copat this by saying that I don't actually think I don't have too much time to philosophize on like super large scale stuff so I'm probably not the best person to ask for for this question but my but my personal view is that it's somewhere in between like um I I think there should be I think Finance should happen on one composable chain but I don't think everything should um so like if you have a game where the you know like the items are tradable and there are millions of users using it and like doing things like I really don't think that ought to be competing with like you know like derivatives on bitcoin where where Bitcoin is like The the Reserve asset of the world it's like just like completely different scales of sort of like importance and um I think it's like totally fine for those to just like not compose at all because like there's no reason for them them to compose um but I think Finance happening on a bunch of different chains is just bad like um bridges are super risky I think right now it's fine because crypto's so early and like generally I think teams are well intentioned and um even centralized exchanges like I think broadly like they they're like mean well and like are trying to trying to do good things and um but but it's just like it's just not the like it can't possibly be the ultimate solution um and so if you don't think centralized exchanges are good I think I think you should have a similar skepticism towards Bridges because they're just it's just like layer removed it's still like a lot of trust assumptions going in and just like not um not I guess like automically uh composable with other things and so yeah I think the I think with Hyper liquid we've always at least thus far we've always just thought of ourselves as like we're trying to build what's good for defi because that's obviously the product Market fit that crypto has found and it's it's very clear like even if even if crypto is good for nothing else I think um it's it's very clear that it's like a better Financial system it's more it's more accessible it's more equalitarian than like as the world you know as inequality grows in the world I think it's like more and more important for like for for finance to happen um on chain and so um in that narrower scope uh I I'm I guess I'm a huge proponent of uh like a single chain yeah I agree with you I um I think anybody who's used um defi enough knows that fragmentation like is just horrible horrible ux and not in just in the sense of like you're not having fun it also like diminishes efficiency and just actually trying to get benefit off of defi um I have two more questions for you Jeff one is what are you guys going to be doing for with Hyper liquid over the six to next six to 12 months like what are the plans and the second one which I'm going to ask now because I feel like you're going to answer it uh and I want to ask it how do you see the competition landscape um for hyper but now versus in a year mhm um yeah so we're a super small team uh think people often pretty surprised we actually uh we're five engineers and we're um fewer than 10 people total um and so we're we're not like those teams that you know like pretty common in crypto where it's like you you have a very very long-term Vision like raise a lot of money and sort of like have this like manye road map um I think that's cool it's just like that's just like not our strength we're very much focused on like the next thing to build I think it's like we're very we very confidently are stepping in the right direction but we don't plan out like a 100 steps um so six to 12 months I think um I think by then the evm should be live uh the network should be decentralized um and I think those two things were very bullish on but I think they're also very uncertain so depending on what happens there like there might just be like a ton of issues that come up and we just need like that just ends up being the highest priority um to the extent that there aren't I think uh it will be whatever it takes to continue pushing hyper the hyper L1 and the and the ecosystem around it um to being the place that like Financial applications start to flock and like start to build around um so whatever you know whatever kind of pain points developers come up with whatever you know if like users market makers Etc like start to face issues um as it scales um you know me whatever comes up there I have a lot of thoughts there but probably not the right question to answer right now um whatever comes up basically um that that will be that will be our focus and at at the end of the day it's it's always it's always the users and the definition of user is like always changing so initially it was Traders and it's like you know Traders market makers now it's like Traders market makers Builders um yeah whatever like whatever they need uh and we can help with um that that'll be our priority and as far as the competition question goes there's I probably don't have anything super insightful there either we don't really think that much about competitors it's not really clear who our competitors are either I think it's there's like not there aren't really any projects trying to do the same thing which I think usually is a bad sign like if you're if you have a startup and nobody's competing then it probably means your idea is bad but I think we're just I think hyid at this point is just like trying to do such a general thing while still having a laser focus on the core product it's it's very unique there um I mean the the chart that I always look at the number I always look at is like bance pers volume in the denominator and like hyper liquid pers volume in the numerator and like uh so um looking at that like yeah I mean I'm I'm always extremely impressed by by binance and I guess like the top Central exchanges in general they've they they do such a good job at um you know they they like do one thing very very well and um you know put their users first and uh yeah and like and manage to like maintain those users like it's like binance in particular like they've gone through so much and users still trust them and use them and like that I think like I you know I look at it a lot I'm like I'm always impressed by the volume numbers um but from our perspective it's you know we're building something different like defi is just you know earlier it's it's more nent it's like for for a lot of people it's it's not it's not time to switch yet and we recognize that and um yeah so we like we think our we think about our competitors we're like yeah you know whatever we can learn from them we try to do but we're also trying to pay our own way and I I think uh everything that hyper liquid has done well so far I think has largely just been like not from studying competitors and like trying to emulate something but but from just like like thinking about first principles and coming up with something entirely new so whether it's like you know like the vaults primitive or this like um I guess like even how permissionless spot listings work or like having gas list on per order books which no one thought was possible um like this liquidity Vault that like does Market making in an accessible way that anyone can posit into I think these are all like firsts and these are the things that hyper liquid are are known for now so I think our goal is always just like continue continue like inventing new things and that and I think that's also like what really adds value to the world like if you if you like find see something comparators doing well and like do it like just slightly better and like get some of their market share I don't think that actually um that doesn't really move the needle much on on ADV dancing defi as a whole perfect thank you so much for coming on Jeff this was like one of the most interesting conversations I've had so far and I'm I feel like hyper liquid uh is something that I just like can't get enough of kind of it's because you guys are kind of how do I put this uh not secretive but I guess not as public as I would assume uh with interviews and everything so I'm actually really happy to have a for example I wasn't expecting you to be such a onchain maxi it was kind of surprise it's good to hear yeah we're we're often just busy coding like I I spend most of my time writing reviewing code and then thinking about product and so yeah my like Twitter game and interview game is definitely like pretty pretty bad as far as Founders go but um glad yeah thanks for having having me on and it's always good to you know to chat in long form with with people and I think yeah you had you had really good questions hopefully my answers were not too confusing your answers were perfect thank you thanks thank you so much we have teamed up with the wormo foundation stewards of the wormo protocol the leading interoperability platform powering Crossing transfers for over 200 plus multi-chain dabs Wormhole isn't just a bridge it's the leading interoperability platform for multi-chain applications so go and claim your unique wormo nfts just for zerox research listeners today hit the link in the description to fill out a form and to prove that you've listened to today's episode and receive a PO app you get an email over the coming weeks to claim your limited edition nft [Music]

========================================

--- Video 113 ---
Video ID: 2pFFyV47qkg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2pFFyV47qkg
Title: Making Sense of the Current Trends in Crypto | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-06-12 16:20:10 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Tolks from PageOne and Kez from Parsec join to discuss their thoughts on the current market environment. Our guests dive into the polarizing subject of celebrity token launches, how Telegram’s blockchain ecosystem flew under the radar, and more. They unpack the Bitcoin ETF flows, the upcoming Ethereum ETF, AI Agents, Memecoins and Social Tokens, and the Base Ecosystem. 

Thanks for tuning in!

As always, remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely their opinions, not financial advice.
--
Special thanks to our sponsor LayerZero

Stay up-to-date with the LayerZero Ecosystem by following: https://twitter.com/LayerZero_Labs
--
Follow tolks: https://x.com/_tolks 
Follow kez: https://x.com/kez4twez 
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio 
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy 
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres 

 Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38 
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt 
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA  

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
--
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:22 Bitcoin ETF Inflows
6:00 Thoughts on the Ethereum ETF
13:56 Sanctum's Token Announcement
23:41 Echelon Prime Announces a New Game
26:32 AI Agents
29:03 LayerZero Segment: TraderJoe
34:54 Celebrities Launching Memecoins
39:38 The Hyperliquid L1
45:17 Telegram's Blockchain 
53:22 The Base Ecosystem
1:04:00 Ordinals & Runes
--
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter 
- -
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Dan, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
one of the interesting things about telegram is that you know the US is their not their least used country but I mean compared to other social media like I mean telegram's presence here is essentially just crypto people and that's it but it's massive in other parts of the world so it's one of those things that I just want to keep an eye on because with that distribution and that amount of users it's not something that I think you can kind of it could very easily you know just spark a fire overnight and explode compared to you know gradual growth that you know steady growth month over month that you can see before we get into today's episode just a quick disclaimer the views expressed on this podcast by either myself or any guests are their personal views and do not represent the views of any Associated organization nothing in this episode should be construed or relied upon as Financial technical tax legal or other advice all right let's jump into the episode what's up guys welcome back to another episode of ZX research I'm joined by talks from page one and C from Park before we get started even though you just heard Ren give our disclosures I just wanted to highlight that especially in these types of episodes where I'm hosting external analysts Market participants anons Etc we're talking about coins and protocols that may be more out on the risk curve than we usually do um make sure to keep that in mind nothing is ever Financial legal business or tax advice on this show and but specifically for these episodes we're discussing products more out on the risk curve and that is something to be especially cognizant of before we get started um talks we've already heard all about you kez do you want to give a very short introduction as well as some background on how we got started in the space yeah JM JM thanks for having us um yeah my name's kez I work for parac finance um my how I got started I originally bought the top in 2017 I feel that this classic story forgot about it um and then just got back into it in 2021 that's pretty good that's like top in 2017 is quite impressive to be fair because you've been in for a while I feel like usually when I talk to other people they're like oh I about to top in like 2021 and then I yeah I feel like a lot of people a lot of people do that buy the top their first cycle and then just kind of either completely forget about it or you know just take a pretty chill um until the next cycle yeah um all right what are we looking at these days what are you guys interested in what is like the sector that you're focused on I think for me and I think that the market at large is you know we're kind of just coiling under alltime highs right now with the inflows this week have just been absolutely ludicrous we're sitting at um just shy of one and a half billion of inflows this week so far with uh gbtc getting some positive inflows as well and uh no outflows from then this week too um so I think that's top of mind for for everybody right now obviously with the BTC inflows uh BTC eth BTC that's top of mind for everybody as well obviously with the E ETF being the the next likely rotation um we're seeing at least this week it's kind of uh after that candle last week we've kind of s out a little bit and I think that the market I mean I'm sure you guys see on on the TL it's uh it's pretty funny you can kind of gauge what ebtc is at by the state of the TL and how arguing yeah um so that's obviously the the number one top of Mind there I mean the inflows this week are just I mean they're they're pretty ludicrous so I think a lot of that comes on the back of uh all the political the well the major political shift we saw over the past week two weeks um so we'll keep monitoring the flows but I think one of the main questions is kind of like why aren't we higher and I haven't really seen a good necessarily explanation for that um there's yeah there's some people speculating about the the basis trade and maybe you know you long uh is it long the um uh B short the part yeah yeah so I don't know I mean I've seen a few people mention that and it doesn't really seem like there's a lot of conclusive evidence um we have seen pretty large selling above 70k um every time now so I think the fact that we're sitting above 70k kind of right at 71 just hanging out there is a good kind of a good relative strength from from the market compared to you know back down below it because the selling above 70k for whatever reason whatever entity has been pretty ridiculous every time now I think we've been what four times yeah I mean yeah this is a four top yeah I mean I don't even know who's selling at this point like above 70k it's like but they're like relentlessly doing it um I actually check the INF like I usually don't check infos at all I'm generally not interested in them um but like apart from knowing like oh it's positive it's good it's negative it's bad but like I checked and on the fourth we had like 900 mil of inflows net inflows which is ridiculous yeah it was a 886 million I think and I mean I'm generally with you that and especially the longer that the flows go on like the market was pretty reactive when the ETFs first launched but I mean the longer they're live like the less the the inflows and outflows kind of matter in my mind um as long as it's not in how the market reacts like when when it was first started trading the market would fully re act to like strong positive inflows or or negative bonds and these days it just doesn't even have any effect but yeah the last few days have been Lous and um I don't know like uh we've talked about a bit toes I refuse to be bearish regardless of what's Happening Here we're just like just chilling under 70k for like the the fourth time but yes I would like to I would also like to know why um you know 1.5 bill inflows in a few days is not pushing us higher than it is what do you guys think of the E ETF with this like when it comes do you because to me it's very obviously a bull like something that's bullish but like every single thing that good that good that happens on in in crypto like CT has somehow managed to say oh actually this might be bad um which me seems ridiculous but I like yeah they're like oh like will be disappointing okay cares it still flows like yeah I feel like I'm starting to realize especially now with like the fact that we have actual sizable um institutional flows coming into crypto now that it's it's just like an echo chamber of the same you know I don't know how many people um kind of just forming their own opinions but it by and large doesn't really have a huge effect on what is actually happening especially with Mages you know yeah more more so with the the low ones yeah I think um that was I don't remember if I tweeted something about that a couple weeks ago or not but I think the the kind of like Echo chamber and influence of crypto Twitter at least on Majors like you said cuz like I don't think it's ever been as irrelevant of the flows in the um and the TR five money coming in like it's just I mean one and a half billion this week alone so far three days is I mean those are just they're ludicrous numbers so yeah wild won tra me yeah exactly but yeah I mean previous Cycles like you know sentiment and stuff like those gauges were I don't know they were pretty valuable and obviously they're still valuable now um but I think like the general CT consensus for majors and I mean Majors Drive everything um like I said it's it's kind of been it's its least impactful as it's it's ever been and that's something that I think the the market and the participants are especially on CT you're kind of slowly waking up to a little bit and I don't think they're necessarily where they should be um and accepting that fact but that's nature of the game when you have you know hundreds of millions shoved in every day yeah yeah yeah I I almost don't even want to talk about it because it is just like the Hot Topic on on Twitter at the moment but like it's it's pretty wild how miserable everyone is and how like just the infighting and you know [ __ ] you say every day on Twitter when we are where we are if you just take a step back and kind of look at the look at the charts I mean BTC is sitting at 71k but yeah it's it's fascinating um but yeah as far as the E ETF goes I mean I'm expecting still I think probably late June first week of July launch um until we get some news that that would change that that's kind of my my base case for now um and I mean like we just talked about like you know people can make up whatever you know stories they want about it but it's it's ridiculously bullish over I mean short mid and and long term in my eyes so I mean we'll have some eth e to to chew through just like we did with gbtc um but I mean open up the the floodgates to the flows that we've seen to BTC are just I mean there's going to be a more of a repricing soon I think and I think that's kind of what a lot of people are confused by as well is why eth BTC has been weak this week um but yeah I mean I would think that that changes at some point in the near future yeah I hope so I think if it gets any worse like sentiments going to go horrible the thing is that like I was on CT when BTC was 20K and below and it wasn't this bad like obviously like people were very like sad and depressed but it wasn't at least like people were vitalic wasn't arguing on the timeline is it you know like I don't know but fascinating yeah I generally agree like apart from BTC inflows e inflows like we also have like Canada just announced that they're going to cut rates um we have Kramer asking gendler about the on live TV it's like I don't know it feels unreal to be crying on the timeline um yeah it's a wild time that's for sure but I mean it's yeah I I don't know how to interpret anything other than you know up from here so and with eth specifically I mean the flows what's interesting about the projections I think generally the market is expecting like 20% of BTC flows like total but that 20% was a lot lower before this week and obviously you know you can't a three-day sample but the you know if you're getting 20% of say a billion in a week even 700 million like that's a lot different than you know four to 500 million especially with eth's market cap obviously being uh being much less so I mean I mean the impact is going to be if the demand is 20% of what we've seen and I mean I would maybe take the over on that um there's just going to be I mean there's a natural repricing coming so yeah totally and also you know 30% of eight locked up in um staking as well um yeah I agree it's pry it's pretty hyper bullish just waiting just waiting the um charts and crypto Twitter just feel a little bit in limo at the moment everyone's just kind of waiting for something to happen yeah we should get uh some S1 I think the S1 uh submissions and feedback from the SEC should maybe be um today or tomorrow early next week and I think that'll that'll finally crystallize the the next eth move so yeah one thing I feel like is kind of affecting it is because when the BTC stuff was originally announced like the ETF it I think trading happened relatively quicker or at least maybe it just got like clarified a lot quicker that there would be this but I feel like with e we just didn't receive that much news yeah I think talked about for a long time with Bitcoin and like eth was like you know the odds were 20% up until like a few days before it happened so you had this rapid repricing and kind of all the news came out at once but yeah you're right we haven't had the um s1s and whatnot since yeah the timing that timing makes it makes it a little difficult I mean the BTC ETFs I think we're live two weeks maybe even less than that actually I think it was the next Monday I think it was approved on that was Thursday right and I think it was the next Monday so I mean that that could be it I mean there's I don't know I guess there's necessarily not reason to to force a trade and once you have official Clarity but um yeah I'm surprised we haven't seen a little more front running but I I think it'll come any any day now so and to me e is like a it's a better like if I was trafy I would be more interested in E than BTC like obviously BTC has store of value digital money it's the original uh cryptocurrency but like eeve has the whole staking thing it's like I just think that trfi is a lot more interested in something that's both yield bearing and like it can CL it as like the internet of money or whatever like of that sort so yeah seen some takes on the timeline in which people are kind of uh supposing that potentially this was kind of endgame for Larry the whole time because you know's there the whole tokenization like tokenizing the world um thesis and that you know maybe the getting the BTC ETF 3 was just to kind of get to eth in the end but we'll see yeah um apart from ETF news I feel like two big things that happened I think yesterday let's let's start like as soon as possible like what happened very very recently we had sanctum announced their token cloud and we had prime launch staking like um I don't know if either of you guys want to cover any of those but I can start off with giving like a short intro on sanctum um basically sanctum does lscs in case our listeners aren't familiar they do lstd products on Solana they have two separate products they do either bespoke lsds for validator so like helas runs a validator and they can launch their own LSD through sanctum or they do kind of like a onetoone liquidity um pool and swapping for lsds so they have their own LSD called Infinity which is backed by a bunch of other lsds and it makes it easy to trade they use like a new pricing system based on stake accounts and like directly the chain instead of like X YK um they announced their token Cloud as I mentioned um I think the most interesting thing here is that they're going to launch at 50 mil FTV on yeah that's a pretty key point isn't it that just seems stupidly tap for what it is with kind of no competitors as well or very little at least on salana um but yeah they they're launching at the FTV of what they raised their first round at back in 2021 which is uh even that is just like a very kind of a sign of good faith isn't it um but yeah they did a very long tweet and blog posts um it's it seems very well thought out they seem well intentioned and they they kind of just overall seem like they know what they're doing with this token launch it definitely feels like slated to be one of the better airdrop token launches that we've seen as of late yeah I mean Solana tokens have also just been like in this weird SP where it's like okay let's say for example Camino Camino is very key architecture on like key infrastructure on Solana it's the number one lending yield app whatever but it's at 500 mil that's quite a bit but it's also not a lot based on what even that feels to to me for like what it does and like like it doesn't have like 250 mil tvl or something no it has like 1.5 Bill oh [ __ ] well yeah yeah right no but that's what I mean but also the other issue here is that people don't care about Solana defi at all yeah you know it's like just uninterested but I mean 50 mil FTV it might be like we have a couple of guys on the team and they were just talking about it and they were like everything on Solana launches either at 10 Bill like Wormhole and stuff or it launches at like 500 mil where the upside is either there's no upside you're just going to see like steady selling and you see those messages on telegram that's like oh new sell for Wormhole OTC 60% discount or it's like 500 what are you gonna get on that like for Camino people aren't interested in D5 but 50 mil and I like like you said cuz I like that paragraph that he wrote I mean he took like he definitely knows how to do a Nar like narrative he was like oh we did it on purpose so that like we're not like the other guys funded by VCS and we against sex listings and stuff like he's really playing to the populist um yeah crowd I think it's good I think it's interesting yeah yeah I agree I'm excited for sure um me and toes I know about you but we've been farming it for a while now um yeah and also just using it like even before they announced Wonderland I think we we had deposited into like in and Jupe soul and stuff yeah I mean everything about their launches is just awesome too I mean you know you can say some of you know the no sex fees and um you know no VCS like some of that can be lip service or whatever but I mean they backed it up with obviously the the 50 mil it'll be you know a fair launch on on a DEX like that valuation is incredibly friendly to to retail and average Market participants and then I mean 18% float at launch with 10% of that being air dropped is is just awesome so um I I really hope that other teams I mean I hope sanctum launch goes goes great because I hope that other teams take a page out of their their notebook I mean they specifically singled out that you know they could do a season two and keep tvl and then use those metrics to raise it a higher valuation and you know kind of like the the points game that we've all come to know and that's become tiresome and it was incredibly refreshing to see a protocol acknowledge you know that's what's happening amen and we're not doing that um was that are they the first in like a hot minute to kind of cut that [ __ ] short instead of like you know just running it forever oh yeah yeah definitely I mean I didn't really even end dat in mind necessarily but you know when that came out yesterday I was I was very pleasantly surprised so um yeah I did not expect it that fast it was six weeks they ran Wonderland for six weeks like you know teams do four months they do six months they do a year like I think blur in total was like a year in the end before I can't remember if it was season 2 or maybe season two ended or something but yeah definitely incredibly refreshing agree yeah margin fight has been going on for like a year and they they keep saying we're not gonna have a token and I'm gonna start believing them if they keep saying it and they because I'm just gonna give up um yeah I think like like you said talks I hope that other teams take note and realize that I mean I hope it goes right so that other teams can take note and realize that they should be doing a bit better of a job I'm doubtful though the incent like I the incentives just don't align at all it doesn't make any sense um yeah I mean the the incentives are the problem there but I mean it's I don't know I mean it's it's a two-sided thing too you have to obviously they um I don't remember exactly who their first backers were what the terms were and whatnot but I mean it there's a little bit of of onus on on the VCS and stuff too to I mean obviously they want stuff to get liquid sooner but um um you know I mean tvl and and these metrics in general like you can prop them up for for however long you want but if you really truly want to you know build something make a difference stick around like you're not going to find that out without going to Market without the incentives for the market to be there so the quicker that you can learn that is also incredibly beneficial to all parties involved because you know if there's pivot pivots necessary if there's you know tweaks that that need to be made things along those lines like you find that out quicker too so it's it's definitely kind of beneficial all around um like you said bu I mean the the incentives are a little tough for if you want to keep you know keep the tvl in there and then raise it at higher valuations um but hopefully we see we see a shift going towards more what sanctum did yeah I think um like he he even wrote in that in that tweet thread like we fully expect TBL to you know have a significant drop after um after this um but I think that's so brave and like you said I think you need to let something fly if you're going to kind of play the long game on it like eventually the incentives run out for both PCS and like you know your users and um yeah it's got to either fly or fall once that happens so why not do it earlier if you have a successful product yeah sanctums also kind of Lucky though because they like they're the only ones that do that product um I do see like if you're lending product why you need tvl for much longer and you can't really take that risk because like just let's say Camino and margin fi like at the end of the day okay Camino has their own yield product margin fi has their own LSD whatever but they're the same like in this they're the same segment they're lending um so if margin fi needs to keep up TBL for longer they like have to technically like do or they should shouldn't I don't want them to but they have to overdo the points program so that they can keep up the TBL because there's a very successful alternative I mean with um sanctum there isn't like where else are you g to go if you want to get like the best technically the best price at what it is for like to swap your lsds then you have to use sanctum there's no other competitor yeah I mean yeah that's fair I mean I guess I would say like I like I said I mean there's there's benefits to to launch into too and the fact that you know you get feedback and you see what is what is real and what's not I mean I think you know you run programs for points programs for so long and you have um inflated tvl like you know if you're going on six months nine months 12 months like you might start convincing yourself that you know the protocol and what you build is is better than than what it is and those numbers are are real so I mean it can it can get a little tricky but yeah I mean are they're they're definitely tough so I mean I I get it from both sides but I think at the end of the day what again like what sanctum did was was incredibly incredibly refreshing um and hopefully we see a little bit more of that going forward all right um the second thing was Prime Prime's the token for Echelon Prime which has a tradeing card game everybody's familiar with that they're also launching a new game called parallel Colony with AI agents and like a simulation think like Sims space colonization and AI agents instead of the like instead of you controlling it your Sims your it's an AI agent you talk to it you say do this do that for the AI agent they need to have a AI agent framework called wayfinder which will have its own token called prompt the only like and what happened yesterday is they launched uh Prime staking for prompt so you stake Prime you prime stakers earn 45% of the Native token for wayfinder prompt um the only reason I wanted to actually bring this up is like everybody knew about this months going in that there going to have this it's been on the forums for a while but I think this is the first like I guess popular experience of like launching the staking product and giving people the option to lock for fre years and I never lock for fre years but I've seen people lock for fre years so I want to like understand how you guys think of locking up stuff are you lockers or like are you like minimum locking I don't care I want to be as liquid as possible I I think uh like what KZ said at the intro you know everybody kind of buys a top I think almost everybody also kind of locks a token and then regrets it of it yeah it's kind it's kind of a r of Passage um but yeah personally no I mean that's that's not for me at all um I think genuinely or generally people discount liquidity more than than they ever should and that should always kind of be Paramount so that's kind of where where I stand on that yeah I I've never I can't even think of a time that I have locked um I'm definitely not a locker um but I remember boss saying his what was it last cycle um some gaming thing anyway that if you do lock for an extended amount of time like you'll slowly learn that you've pretty much just rated whatever the current value of that is to zero because you know you have so much time left I think he roundt tripped a pretty big bag on um what was it he was talking about the other day def5 kingom had a locked in there there's a bunch of people locked in that I think but it's crypto Valley's had it recently is that it no no this was last cycle it's like a bit more of a mainstream one anyway I don't um generally you remember when they were clowning that kid like that 17-year-old kid who sold 900,000 dfk top yeah that's exactly where my mind went that was so funny um my second question related to this the reason that I brought this up is that I've been doing a lot of research on AI agents um I don't know if they're real yet we'll find out soon enough but I feel like there are no good AI agent tokens out there like there are limited good AI tokens out there but no good AI agent to I don't know if you guys are familiar with Olas um Morpheus obviously didn't do very well it hasn't done very well so far um but that was the main reason that I was like interested in Prime for a while it's just that they have like at least some and I know the team is like relatively competent they have they built a good game which is very difficult to do in crypto um they're like teasers look good so I'm I'm like that's my hope with that this is the AI agent token yeah I mean I think that's that's definitely fair um and I think that's a lot of the value of of prime going going forward is you know that that prompt token and what that could possibly be um everything kind of in the the AI sector and I mean agents too I mean that stuff is you know people can write it off as as vaporware or down the line or whatever but you know if you if you miss something like that I mean you're you're going to be kicking yourself because the valuations can get incredibly silly very quick um so in Prime I mean like you said they've they've built something successful already um I mean the team's great uh so yeah I mean I don't mind making that that bad at all um because again the I mean the reward there is just it's it's massive obviously it's kind of you know up until this point it's more of like a pie in the sky thing like you know the AI and crypto and and agents and stuff but I mean I do think um that stuff is going to be it's going to be real it's just the timeline's a little uncertain I don't think necessarily anybody knows but making making bets on that are are just kind of one of those things where you kind of just have to do it uh because again like the you know the rewards are so great yeah it's at 2 billion right now FTB right um if it turns out that it is like you know it does kind of get up there as one of the top AI Agent M share tokens as well as being like Prime the game um yeah you could definitely see that DV going into something silly down the track you know Ai and memes have kind of been the strong things strong sectors this this whole cycle so far um and to be honest I'm not really expecting that to stop yeah all right before we move on let's have a quick word in from Trader Joe thanks to our fantastic sponsor layer zero all right guys for this week's layer zero segment we have blue head of marketing and growth of Trader Jo joining us thank you so much for coming on Blue yeah no worries thanks for having me just to kick us off uh do you want to tell us a little bit about what you guys are building over at Creator Jo yeah sure so um uh for those don't know Trader Joe is the decentralized exchange or I like to refer to us as an onchain token Hub and our key offering is yeah just giving people the ability to instantly swap tokens at very low cost uh I guess a bit of history about Trader Joe's so we launched in the middle of 2021 on the Avalanche blockchain and we've since expanded to other evm chains such as arbitrum and more recently mantle via a cousin Dex called merch and mo and um to date we've facilitated over 110 billion in lifetime training volume uh and if you know we're we're just a team of just really passionate kind of Builders you know we our mission from day one has just been to to make defi easy and accessible for everyone we want to drive adoption of you know defi technology uh and we'd like to take a a first principal approach to design to help drive that mission forward forwards you know we're all about making def5 more accessible improving the user experience and generally just making it easier for people to come on chain and swap tokens I mean you guys are doing a great job just like anecdotally Trader Joe is one of the first xes that I ever used and I still use it if I have to like on a chain that I'm on just because I like it um how does layer zero fit into create a j yeah so we um we integrate layer zero or layer Zero's Omni chain fungible token standard that was back in February 2023 so just over a year ago now uh and and we did that just because we wanted to support our multi-chain expansion Ambitions so we deployed our decks onto arbitrum the end of 2022 um and then the next natural step for that was okay how can we bring the Joe token into arbitr and how can we expand further as well you know if we want to roll out to other medium chains we also want to make sure that the Joe token goes with the platform as well so you know we obviously chose layer Zero's of standard um to kind of evolve that Joe token into well more of an omni chain offering and that was a really easy decision for us as well was stood out back then um amongst other options that we had uh in terms of you know in in all areas we're looking at you know how can we make a token be transferred across different chains um with Max efficiency uh with security with being able to offer the perfect user experience that that we want to offer our users uh you know layer Zero's of stood out and um uh it's it's you know ever since we integrated it the feedback has has just been amazing like our users happily Bridge across the different ecosystems with Joe we've um we've had over 350,000 messages of people just trans erring Joe back and forth between arbitrum uh and mantle uh so I you know I think that that volume that we've seen is just a testament to the the experience that users have by being able to transfer their Joe back and forth perfect um I'd also like to hear a bit more about what's like on your road map over the next six to 12 months yeah so we've got a ton of exciting products and experiences coming to Trader Joe and the ecosystem um over the next six months and I'm sure everyone always kind of says the same anyway oh we're building really great stuff but like I I really do mean this right I think Trader Jo has probably had a relatively quiet start to the year um but a lot of what we're doing is now coming uh into fruition so um I think the first thing I can tease is we'll be using layer zero technology more uh and I'll probably leave it as that for now but you're going to hear about more expansion coming very soon um and then I hate saying it's coming very soon but yeah it's we we'll be expanding more using layer zero technology very soon uh really exciting and then we've got our Jo V3 product that's coming in early summer it's a new to defi protocol con token Mill we announced that name a couple of months back but we've um we've had to go back through the design process iterating on the original spec a few times as we were running into computation constraints on the evm but we're kind of at that position where we're good to go we're building that now an early summer token Mill will be coming to the Trader Joe ecoystem and then back end of the year in Tangent to Joe V3 we're also working on Joe V4 um you know I don't think anyone's really aware of what jv4 entails but they'll find out relative ly soon as well um and the vision of jv4 is that you know we see a merger of product types in the deck space over the next few years and jv4 is a product that takes that first step to realizing how we envision a deck evolving um in the coming years so that's a really exciting project that's yeah coming probably at the back end of this year oh sounds very exciting thank you for hopping on Blue yeah no worries thanks for having me what do we think of mother um yeah I honestly I I wrote about in the P weekly last week actually because there just wasn't much else going on um at the time but you know we had Caitlyn Jenner first everyone was frantically trying to figure out if it was real um turns out it was real but it just was very grifty uh the the kind of language he was using uh you could just see that the intentions were kind of grifty and then a few days later she launched a token on e um as well and then we had all the you know the other kind of dless rappers and stuff that launched one but credit to Iggy she there's just something different about the way she's approached it um she just feels like she gets crypto Twitter a lot more she's pretty good [ __ ] poster she's kind of been working for her bags this whole time and uh the token has been responding it's doing incredibly well actually I think it's at like 170 mil or something now yeah I think so I mean it's somewhere ridiculous here let's look at this I don't know if you guys can see it yet I mean this just sent me this morning to be fair like yeah yeah um it's the for our listeners who are just like not on video um it's Iggy's tweet about vitalic it's just so funny um but yeah I thought like it was at least relatively non- grifty I don't know um we'll see I mean to me like anytime a celebrity launches the token it's grifty but if it's like less grifty than the other ones I guess it's like a net positive my like I think the big thing about this was that anom was very involved in this whole thing um and I really has definitely contributed to success for sure um but yeah I agree like it's definitely less grifty doesn't mean it's still not grifty and like the biggest counterargument that I've the way I've been kind of thinking about it is like someone comes in and launches a token on the first day like you know what are the intentions there yeah they could come in and do anything else buy Bitcoin buy e buy soul buy current memes like just get involved in like you know communities if they want to um I don't know use that platform to help spread crypto whatever the reason is but um I don't know it's been she's been doing pretty well so far we'll see if it goes to zero in the end yeah I mean once once it's up above 150 I mean I don't think it's ever necessarily going to go to zero just because no yeah um but yeah I mean I mixed mixed feelings on it obviously don't want you know everybody coming in and just launching tokens there's better ways to to join the the community but I also think um I don't know like you said I mean the way she's gone about it if there's kind of a right way I would say that everything has been ticked every box has been ticked in the right way and um nobody's you know nobody's forcing you to buy or anybody to buy so you know they they're permiss platforms as you know attention um attention Peaks up like it's just you know it's it's things that happen so uh you can you can sit and watch for a little bit and I think it was it was pretty clear that you know she was going to stay around at least for for a little bit and I mean it's not the highest bar in the world but I mean attention attention is one of you know in the internet area is one of the most valuable resources in the world so I mean she's winning that attention game right like the discussions that were all over crypto Twitter last week and and even this week and now like viall getting involved and everything um and you know the hate for it as well often a pretty good recipe for number go up yeah yeah I think like a lot of people say hated coin about like a lot of coins that are not hated but this is definitely like a hated coin Co um yeah and I think for fair like I'm not a big hater um I loved the New Classic the album was great but um I guess the coin is okay like yeah she stayed around for a bit it's fine that's revolutionary but it'll be nice it is what it is you know it's just it's another tokenized detention coin and she's good at captur retention so that's that's I mean he rocking a mad lb now too part of your feel that yeah that just goes to show how grifters always wear [Laughter] madlad yeah a little bit Happ um I've been kind of pretty into it for the last couple months I suppose since they um since they launched spot trading and per since they debuted spot trading with per uh I didn't really know much about it before and I feel like like probably a lot of people still think about it just as like a pers platform but it's shaping up as a lot more um you know they have so it's a pers platform but now they have spot trading as well that's just gone permissionless too so there's an actual ecosystem that can kind of start getting built and um start getting built there um the it's a it's going to be a fully-fledged L1 basically a fully fledged very high throughput evm L1 um it's it's actually on test net right now I haven't tested it but um yeah yeah I um I had Jeffrey on the podcast I recorded yeah I did I did it's supposed to come out next Thursday though um but I mean the dude was like first of all it was a pleasure to speak with him because sometimes you'll talk to these Founders and it's not great no one that I've ever talked to I love all of my founders that I've talked to but um I mean he was also like surprisingly very very like a decentralized maxi uh he was like I want everything on chain um I want and the thing the reason I'm mentioning that is that for example dydx has their order book offchain um hyper liquid has everything on chain which is not as efficient and definitely more difficult to do than the alternative so yeah and I mean they've done have you looked at the Block Explorer like seeing those transactions stream in it's like it just looks insanely it's ridiculous like either they're cooking the books or they've really built something over here yeah um yeah but like you said I also got interested after the Spots Market spot markets I um generally not a per Trader I like that these like this is the second protocol SL whatever like larger um product that launched its own meme coin um so there was one with Jupiter uh puff and mantle and then there's per and then you earn points by longing spot coins I mean it's just it feels like a recipe for Success it's pretty it's pretty incentive aligned between like both of them well because it's you know usually it's a triangle you have VC's Founders team and users but they haven't raised like it's been completely self funded so far so the expectation is that um a much larger percentage of the token when it does come will go to users so yeah basically just have users and the team and feels yeah quite incentive aligned for um both parties yeah talk see any takes um not really no um I mean i' kind of been watching I have a a little bit of purr but other than that I mean I don't I don't trade on there too often I I really should um but yeah I mean it's just another you know another founder like and team like we were talking about with sanum obviously this entirely different because there's no VC funding whatsoever um but it's it's refreshing uh to see you know kind of his commitment to to the to the right things in the space so um those are the type of platforms that like to give you know volume and and attention to so I'm excited to see where it goes from here yeah me as well um I don't know we'll see they have a pretty good like wallet system I I don't know if you cuz um also noticed it but like just bridging not wallet system just bridging over there it doesn't feel like you're bridging at all it just feels so smooth um usually that's why I don't like us like separate l1s for trading stuff but this just that is one thing I'm confused on though actually you might know why why do why you only Bridge from arbitrum why like it's kind of made it feel like it's arbitrum and that's even some people that I've talked to about hyper liquid have just assumed that it's an arbitr perex because of that as well yeah um they built their this is like I need to relisten to the podcast because I asked them this um as far as I remember they built their own bridging infrastructure and they built through arbitrum so I think that's why um and that's another thing they built a lot of their own stuff like yeah they don't use a lot of external stuff at all which is kind of crazy no VC funding and like you're building everything in house like as good as possible it's it's been he was like a high frequency Trader before or something right or a market maker or something something along those lines yeah yeah yeah he was um I think he was in Market making before high frequency trading team kind of small as well I don't know I didn't ask okay maybe that's just an assumption I don't um they're not very public though um that's one no they're not and they don't they don't tweet very much and they don't kind of like they're not loud on the timeline uh maybe that'll come later but right now it's definitely just like heads down building and man they've they've shipped and delivered well so far yeah um talks I'm gonna pass it to you for ton because I don't know anything about it about ton um oh man where do I start I guess uh I don't know I started kind of getting interested I think maybe two months ago or so um I mean ton is the best performing i1 token year to date um so and it's obviously in the top 10 now but um yeah I started digging into the ecosystem a little bit you know maybe a month or two ago started buying a couple things over there just experimenting and it's uh it's pry good user experience um obviously the thesis there is just the distribution that that telegram has it's uh it's pretty unparalleled and how many US they have now yeah like 900 million plus wow yeah wow wow yeah obviously you know that doesn't translate to to a you know one one user of anything or you know one 100th or anything like that but those that distribution and that funnel just can't be ignored um I would say generally speaking I'm pretty against kind of like web 2 companies like integrating crypto features but it goes out of the window with uh T and telegram for me just because of you know social medias like Network effects uh so yeah I I like I said started exploring that and I mean they had some uh they have native uh tether now they have um they have some incentive funds for um for creators uh they have easy you know easy onboarding create a wallet right inside side chats um so I think it's kind of I was gonna ask that like the wallet on boarding process they have these 900 million customers um users like is it just like an opt-in you know like I can because I haven't even tried but you know go to your settings and like create a wallet that's tied to your phone number or something uh yeah I believe so I actually haven't done it myself uh but I think they have you know kind of like a 5k limit or something before and then I think it's kyc so okay yeah so I don't know if uh if that I mean I would assume that'll eventually change um but yeah so I've just kind of been exploring that ecosystem and just kind of you know watching what's going on there especially because you know CT is very I'd say probably I mean it's us-based the US not us-based but predominantly yeah Us hours um one of the interesting things about telegram is that you know the US is their um not their least used country but I mean compared to other social media like I mean telegram's presence here is essentially just crypto people and that's it yeah um but it's massive in other parts of the world so it's one of those things that I just want to keep an eye on because um with that distribution and that amount of users it's not something that I think you can kind of it could very easily you know just spark a fire overnight and explode compared to you know gradual growth that you know steady growth month over month that you can see there's uh there's the recipe there for you know all of a sudden people being like oh [ __ ] like you know ton and the ecosystem is here um so they launched uh they did have not coin launch that was was that but um yeah so they had it was it's kind of like a um in chat or in Channel like simple gaming interface but I mean they have I think they have seven million people in that telegram the Twitter has I want to say like n million followers um wow so yeah that launched up to 2 point I think three billion FTV last time I checked but uh the interesting thing is um I mean the volume for for NCoin was above everything other than BTC and eth last week that was and you'd come back every day to the to your charts and just say it off like another 25 to 40% and top of the volume as well yeah I didn't even realize I was e that's crazy yeah so um the ecosystem I mean it's a little it's a little Bare Bones right now um but I mean that's where the opportunity lies so I mean you can look at you know tvl charts and it's I mean tvl is minus School compared to to uh most other chains but the users you know the transactions the everything every other metric the distribution the funnel all of that stuff is I mean the size of it is unparalleled so that's something that I uh I've been exploring and you know I check in at least once a week yeah I um the re you know what I was like thinking about with this is that it has like two potential narratives one is what you mentioned whatever like some form of an ecosystem um growing in the US as well as like in the West is what I assume uh you meant because telegram is like you said primarily a nonwestern app like it's especially used in Eastern Europe um and I was almost wondering if like the number one use gates for it could be they onboarded usdt um if it could just be like being the Tron of not Asia you know what I mean yeah yeah yeah yeah it just feels like the most natural fit like I know that that's not particularly like good um valuation wise but at the end of the day like it would be more usage like more or it them pretty well without any mind share apart like in you know kind of our circles and general yeah so it's something to watch I mean and I mean the ton like telegram um I mean the foundation everything is you know they're they're very committed to to supporting you know crypto and things that are built within telegram so I mean that's another aspect um that is pretty pretty unique to ton so um like I said all of you know if you just kind of toss up the the metrics of um tvl you know deck trading volumes things like that they're it's not impressive at all but I think the the seeds are are planted for you know some some very very explosive growth so um I think uh was it maybe last month privy the um you know the smart wallet that built you know they built all the the mobile stuff friend pet all the easy onboarding you know just kind of click and and send they uh they started integrating with with telegram and um ease of use of building like directly in in channels so there's a lot of things kind of behind the scenes that that are kind of building up in my mind and then again you have more users than um I don't know by many orders of magnitude than any other you know chain or you that distribution funnel is just I mean it's unrivaled so it's something watch yeah I mean you can see the the growth start to pick up there yeah I mean this looks pretty ridiculous I mean obviously all of these can be faked to an extent um active addresses transactions tvl um maybe not tvl but like they can be faked but still this looks like pretty ridiculous growth and I agree with you I mean 900 mil users yeah obviously you're not going to capture all of those guys but I mean the this like if you're talking about social fight this is social fight exactly you know like yeah it seems social fight is coming in a few different forms that we uh didn't expect everyone was kind of you know like fch fantasy and then now we got celebrities making mem kinds and um and T yeah I um actually talking about frch this is one thing that I wanted to ask and I've been thinking about it a lot is like what is base coinbase beta on chain and I think the thought process behind it is like obviously coinbase smart wallet launched which is like huge a but it's also I don't know how much of that is going to go to base coins um and specifically which ones because which one represents the ecosystem well enough um I think there's like three lines of thinking it's DJ friend and arrow but I don't know curious what you guys think about that um yeah I don't know much about Arrow but I would say I don't know theoretically you'd definitely think that friend I suppose I suppose it didn't it kind of launched at a bad time for the bass Eco didn't it whereas djen kind of had like prime time um as lots of stuff was popping up on bass um but yeah DJ and friend being like bass beta definitely makes sense um yeah are you asking which one though over I don't know I um I actually like arrow is basically a DEX coin um they it's the other like Vel Drome is on op stack and then on is on optimism and then arrow is its like counterpart on base I um yeah I had a pretty crazy uh run recently right in the last couple mons yeah yeah yeah yeah and that's why I was like like in obviously you don't think of like Dex coins as being the representatives of a chain but there are so few like legitimate because base launched at a time where D5 was not as popular um and it's still not very popular right now that there aren't that many like legit tokens um and it doesn't have an L1 token L2 token obviously I don't know if it ever will will have one I um I've heard some pretty like sad stuff about that that made me actually no I'm still I'm still very optimistic yeah I'm still holding I don't know as far as kind of like pure beta goes I don't know if there's necessarily like a like a crown token um I mean dgen strength the past couple weeks on updates has been something that that I've noted I mean it's been up there with the top performing coins on on upd um obviously they raised was it 150 million a couple weeks ago so um I I would say probably probably djen and then I mean maybe friend pet too they're pretty close to to coin yeah actually brought that one up something that I don't know do you either of you guys know much about friend pet or like I I I gave up on it because my this is one of those things that I sold way too early oh yeah oh yeah me too it's like now I can't ever look at that chart again I think I bought it like onek market cap or sub 1K market cap when the limit was like you can only buy a dollar per wallet um anyway I think that is also a really good candidate for um Bas beta and like base game fire it's really like is it kind of the only candidate for base gameplay yeah they have one more called sexy I don't know if you guys know it it's like e XY but it's not oh yeah oh that's right yeah um but yeah soot looks pretty good yeah you know there's there's a few main tokens on there but I think similar to the the ton convers like the smart wallet in coin bases distribution like the funnel they have again is I mean it's not on ton levels but it's you know it's yeah it's pretty big it's it's pretty massive they they command the US market and that's not going to go anywhere um anybody you know us- based who who comes on on chain is generally going to be through coinbase so um even you know while while volumes are are a little down on on base and there's going to be some quiet periods but I think the you know the thesis there is similar to ton and that the distribution is it's pretty unparalleled so it's a thing that you know you just want to place a few bets and you know if it doesn't work out it doesn't work out but that upside you know the upside case of bringing on you know tens of millions of users and being able to to easily navigate you know any token to any base chain coin and you know getting listed on on coinbase hypothetically like all that stuff is you know the thesis is very clear yeah yeah you want to have some some bets there just for for down the line yeah and just commanding the US market means you're commanding 40% of the world's economy it's like yeah exactly the marginal I mean the marginal wealth of like the user that would be brought on is is kind of what you you want to Target there so um yeah I mean we'll see I mean coinbase is um you know they're they're incentivized to they're making a lot of money from base too so yeah the incentives are are very align there so I think I think um you know kind of with uh with sports betting and um sites like that you know they have all these promos and you know first bed is free $5 bonus beted etc etc I think you can start eventually might see coinbase start to run you know some type of just onboarding you know get on chain know we'll pay your you know whatever 205 $10 of of eth in a in a smart wallet you know you can create in five minutes claim your eth like some of the stuff that you know they can run like promo wise and funnelwise push people down to base is I mean it's it it can get pretty nutty pretty quick so I don't think yeah I think that makes total sense I I agree I assume they'll be running some like I don't have coinbase but I assume that whenever you're like oh I want to withdraw e or usdc the first option is always based right so I think that'll continue I think they also to do like free gas on basee which would be huge I mean Base gas is so low but I think still like if you're a new user if you just don't have that much that you want to spend um like gas May bother you um so I think that's also like depending on application you can have it for free so that's pretty good as well yeah all those yeah all those type of things is again back to the T conversation like that's just stuff like that is something that I am more than comfortable you know placing a few bets and if it doesn't work out it doesn't work out but the the RR there is is pretty big so yeah I mean I I keep eyes on on base stuff pretty much every day and and monitor the volume so um yeah it's it's it's exciting so I think people you know overestimate what what the short-term impact just like you know everything in life but the the long long-term impact of you know everything that coinbase is doing the funnel they have the smart wallet all that stuff is is just awesome for getting people on chain so yeah I I yeah I agree I remember when uh when trading Bots first became a thing like you know like unibot banana and stuff and people started to catch on to like the whole just the idea that you that it was quite easy to onboard someone you know they didn't even really have to know that they were being I don't know it's just completely different to like creating a metamask saving a private key like withdrawing from a centralized exchange um you know going to UNIS putting in the contract address Etc like you just fire up Telegram and um send some some me or whatever and then pry came out um you know same thing there like you almost you could almost use like friend Tech and stuff without kind of needing to know that you were in crypto um and yeah that combined with exactly like you say the funnel that coinbase has will be big down on the track some point yeah mean those are those are pretty much the three I mean eth soul and and base I mean we can get to to runes and ordinals I'd throw those in there too but I mean those are pretty much the three chains that that I'm pretty pretty focused on so I was gonna get upset that you didn't mention ruines but you did so yeah um you know what was so funny on bass last week when they did that well it was sad that Normie got um hacked but I don't know if you guys saw the video they released M no oh then I can't bring it up but I what it was was basic um Normie got hacked obviously it was like one of the popular meme coins on Bas and then they released a video like three days after getting hacked and it was just like a character hanging himself and I was like why the why would you ever Savage why would you ever post this from your own account but um that's like one of the things that's been on B I feel like Solana has I guess they have de oh Brett there Brett Brett's at 1.2 billion now yeah I think has been up only I was meaning to ask was that the cabal coin everyone was talking about recently it kind of like nuked because they realized that 40% was owned by was that coin yeah that was that was Brett yeah I think it now2 bill yeah I don't remember exactly how low it got but I mean the fud was uh and I'm pretty sure it was you know very very valid criticism Insider controlled um but yeah it's up to 1.4 billion now I mean nobody talks about it like there's no mentions of it it's just kind of just goes up it Wicked to 200 mil whoa je yeah it's up 7x from the bottom that just I don't know it feels like a bad meme I'm not gonna like maybe I'm no I agree like I'm not I don't know much about it but like it definitely doesn't scream um appeal I suppose like you know some meme coins do V like virality and whatnot yeah I I mean there are very few funny memes anyway like they're funny if they're going up but even if they're going down there not at all so that's the that's the dirty secret isn't it all right um I think I think that's it I think we've covered most do you guys have anything else do you want talk orinal at all or I'm good if not you know what I wanted to bring it up but last time I talked about it on the show it it was the local top and so now now a bit worried but like I guess I can I like basically what I wanted to bring up was that I wanted to show this I feel like people aren't looking into this I mean Park KZ you guys have a fantastic um ordinal charting as well but for my purposes I wanted to show this is that I don't know if like you guys were early into runes um ordinals like Bitcoin ecosystem at all but like the way that I remember it is that when you were buying and selling ordinals initially you were buying and selling through Google Sheets which is like yeah yeah and then you were like asking the the guy who launched it to hold it for you for a few weeks while you set up some form of a wallet and then you would set up the wallet and then um you were like afraid to burn it cuz like they're all inscribed on a SAT um and now we have this like this is a proper chart proper book and I think this is something that I was talking about with like Daniel who's another analyst on the team and it was that like his point of view which is very fair is that the ruin trading experience is horrible the BTC trading experience is horrible that like ecosystems bad but I think it's like I mean this stuff just gets exponentially better always like you go from discords and Google Sheets to like an actual interface then magic Eden picks it up then you have marketplaces everywhere okx and then you have like finally proper charting proper tools to buy and sell and I'm sure that they're going to launch some form of a telegram but over the next few months that makes it even easier to buy and sell stuff yeah yeah for sure yeah totally I agree I wasn't as early as that I wasn't buying stuff off spreadsheets but yeah that's uh was that like a was it even 18 months ago now um I think it was around that that ordinal started but yeah the tech has actially increased um and even runes in the last runes on Magic Eden in the last um you know since like a few weeks pre-launch um brc's to now what they have is is pretty crazy yeah I mean it like it got so much we'll see I mean these some of these things are like obviously not going to do particularly well but in general like like you mentioned talks it's all E Bas I think runes ordinals anything on BTC like you have to at least keep in track of just because it if it gets that Narrative of like Providence the mother chain this it's patriotic to buy stuff on bitcoin you know yeah no I mean I mean the wealth obviously the wealth created through BTC over the past years has been absolutely nutty too I mean I don't think there's necessarily good data on you know the early BTC people wanting and or actually spending on on runes and ordinals but um I mean it's it's again one of those things like the wealth is there and you know the the interface is getting a little better it's still it still sucks trading runes I mean just it is what it is um but yeah I mean it's it's something that they definitely need to to keep an eye on so and I think the the ticker like each ticker too I think can only be used once if I'm not mistaken yeah yeah I think that's another like lowkey benefit is that with you know pump. fun and I mean with eth gas being low and you know there's such saturation of of memes and tokens that there there can't be you know repeats and the same thing over and over on on BTC so I think that's kind of like a um a pretty pretty lowkey thing that that can benefit run runes specifically so yeah that makes sense yeah they're also like decreasing the amount of letters that you can put um I know this isn't like particularly Innovative but I thought it was cool that like I think right now it's 13 letters so it would be like the the one I'm looking at right now is called like dog go to the Moon I think that's 13 letters and every like I think every like some period of time they shorten it so it'll be 12 letters 11 10 until it's like 4 32 um which is cool because you're forcing like whatever Creator it is to pick some for of like a decent name or and you're like you can't just Spam random stuff which is also good I mean it's expensive anyway but yeah I mean that's yeah like I was saying I mean the the saturation across uh other chains is is is pretty big and I think people are getting a little a little tired of it so I mean that's that's definitely a plus to to BTC with the fees and and the weird naming conventions that kind of limit you know the number of stuff that that can be launched so um compl opposite of Sal right like a mass disp tokens being created a day when it's youing off liit on bitcoin but yeah something to watch moving forward for sure yeah um all right guys I really appreciate you coming on thank you yeah thanks for having us both this is fun yeah was a blast anytime um hopefully once this is we'll get we'll get the good pump on the coins like last time we recorded whole time like when's it going to happen but yeah hopefully uh we'll be right with with how we started about you know things going up from here so we shall see but yeah thanks as always it was it was fun yeah it was a pleasure good job boys have a good day you later [Music]

========================================

--- Video 114 ---
Video ID: _8-P_Kq-dqs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_8-P_Kq-dqs
Title: Navigating DeFi in 2024 | Matt & Aryan
Published: 2024-06-06 15:39:36 UTC
Description:
In this special analyst round table episode, Aryan and Matt of CMT Digital dive deep into DeFi in 2024. Topics discussed include the emergence of restaking protocols, the challenges of toxic order flow, and the shifting dynamics of crypto valuations and incentives. The conversation also explores the potential of intent-based execution, the economic security of EigenLayer, and the challenges of balancing low float with high FDV. Thanks for tuning in!

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice.
- -
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.

Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://forms.clickup.com/45049775/f/1aytxf-16571/7XLRRC4YQAMEFKRLDX
- -
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
- -
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.
Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
- -
Follow Aryan: https://x.com/Aryonchain 
Follow Matt: https://x.com/mcasto_
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction of CMT Digital
5:04 App Landscape Retrospect
10:11 Future of Cashflow Projects 
15:53 Tokenized Equities 
20:35 Intent Market Structure 
24:08 Wormhole Ad
24:46 Pear Ad
25:11 Avalanche Ad
25:53 Restaking & Economic Security
36:37 NEAR Thesis 
43:12 Arweave & AO Thesis
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Ryan and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
you know look at Pendle for instance like Pendle you could have been buying Pendle at around 5 to 10 mil fdv at one point in time and now it's above a bill so I think that's what's really cool about this Market is that it gives retail the ability to deploy Capital into existing protocols that trade at or below private rounds you get to you know deploy Capital into a market that trades like Venture in my opinion you know some of these things are pre-product and pre-revenue and you can buy them liquid which is effective liquid investing but with a venture framework behind it which I think is really cool and that's one of the things that like really enticed me to start deploying Capital to this Market when I first started wh teed up with the Wormhole Foundation stewards of the Wormhole protocol the leading interoperability platform powering Crossing transfers for 200 plus multi-chain teams came unique worm NFD just for zerox resarch listeners today pair is an Innovative pair trading exchange built on top of Simo users can trade trending narratives with one click from Blue Chip narratives such as long BTC short e right through the whiff versus Bonk the Hat stays on Sim's intense Centric architecture enables deep liquidity source offchain and Broad onchain and combined with pair has democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional Traders Avalanche is a smart contract platform that has a novel consensus protocol subnet infrastructure and the hyper SDK toolkit which allows web free developers to easily launch custom powerful block blockchain Solutions you can start building today by checking out the link before we get into today's episode just a quick disclaimer the views expressed on this podcast by either myself or any guests are their personal views and do not represent the views of any Associated organization nothing in this episode should be construed or relied upon as Financial technical tax legal or other advice all right let's jump into the episode what's up guys welcome back to another episode of zerox research today I'm joined by Matt and Arian from CMT digital as well as our very on Daniel Smith from the research team thanks for joining guys thank you for having us thanks for having us on wor um before we get started do you guys want to give a short introduction of yourselves as well as CMG digital yeah for sure um I'll give you an intro on CMT first and I'll dive into an intro myself so U Matt and I both work for CMT digital uh CMT digital we exist as the blockchain Investments and policy and Regulatory advocacy subsidiary of the CMT group and the CMT group is a larger proprietary trading firm by background um the CMT group itself is established in 97 around the Genesis of electronic trading in Frankfurt Germany so uh really had a adoption uh approach to technology when it comes to trading markets and uh that's been a kind of core focus of the firm since Inception took the form of electronic trading through the '90s high frequency trading throughout the 2000s is ultimately kind of the lens through which we got interested in blockchain and digital assets starting in 2013 so CMT digital was established we joined the blockchain association to start Gathering some legal and Regulatory footing before making initial investments in 2015 um spinning up the crypto desk in 2017 uh we're also an RA in the space and uh we launched our first Venture Fund in 2018 um I joined at the beginning of venture fund 2 uh back in 2021 so I've been here for about 3 years now we're on our third investment vehicle we've supported over 150 portfolio companies to date and uh we think of ourselves as generalists within the space really looking to invest in companies that are either using blockchain technology to bring efficiencies to markets external to blockchain historically or actually investing in companies that are iterating on the blockchain infrastructure itself whether cryptographically uh bringing in new uh Primitives or kind of iterating on the blockchain stack so pleasure to meet I got my start at the blockchain research institute in 2017 in Canada with the tab Scots and uh yeah pleasure to join you guys today thank you and on my end I've been here at CMT digital for six and a half years now started out as a junior Trader as well as researching and executing event driven trades and was an early defi user or myself using uh idex shout out to idex back in 2018 for trading my PA and then out of that experience was a really early defi user including you know everything that um you guys are probably doing back then lping in the curve as BC run PC pool pre uh curve launch and bought a bunch of baskets of of a bunch of uh longtail defi stuff including you know synthetics yarn even like stuff like zot HED based and pretty much every food farm under the sun which effectively translates to what I do now for CMT perfect um Matt just to kind of go off that I since you've been in let's say def5 for the past six years or so how do you think like the app landscape is now especially like at this period because I feel like there's more infrastructure than apps currently do you think there's like a lot to do on chain or were you having more like fun and it was more interesting for you back then that stuff was like very new it was more fun back then in the context of everyone was making ridiculous apy obviously like when Sushi swap launch for instance their Uma pool was doing like I think it was like 30 to 40x APR out of the gate which was absolutely insane those sort of opportunities are obviously no longer present The Meta has changed a bit whereas back in 2020 users were more engaged in posting assets as collateral on these food farms and then using that to farm the underlying token for an insanely High APR that has effectively been farmed into um Oblivion but we have this new interesting meta that's formed over the past few months in particular with Athena launching which is points farming on on that front um it's obviously very highly dilutive in its current form and the trade has become overcrowded um post season one of of atheno um being concluded but I still think there's a few other opportunities particularly within the Pendle yts that could be potentially interesting yeah I um I looked into those points programs um like the Pendle and using it to trade but I never thought that it was like particularly beneficial because like you said I I feel like they got diluted up really quickly and then Igan layer had a whole issue with how to reward them um I think they later fixed it up but I I actually want to talk to you guys a bit about points programs like how do you see that working out over the next six months let's say do you think we're going to go back to regular old Air drops or do you think we're going to keep having this points better because it like worked really well for Pendle gearbox did quite well off it as well just like farming points what do you guys think I'm under the opinion that um it it's kind of on a Case by case basis right like you saw like Renzo kind of um screw it up in terms of just user feedback from that that pie chart that they rolled out um I I think it really comes down to how teams are effectively allocating these particular allocations on the airdrop side of things the uh on on the Pendle side you know I'm sure you guys saw but s usde is now allocating more of their yield to Holders of of S of state usde and so I think there's some interesting opportunities there particularly like if you look at the you know the the July 25 expiry YT product for Sude um if you run a few calculations you can see that um the um average uh APR right now is quite high and on a profit percentage basis you're looking at probably around 90 to 100% APR assuming that um that assuming that the yield you know effectively stays around that 37% price point and assuming a 5% allocation at the current FTV level which I think is personally pretty reasonable just given the season one was 5% and that seems to be like the general framework too you're seeing a lot of teams allocating in that 5% trunch um going forward but um you know as I mentioned before too like we're seeing like TV alls explode you know swells above two Bill uh ethery you know is is above four they're like four or five last time I checked and so um it is becoming a pretty crowded environment but I still think that they're selective opportunities um particularly within the pendal ecosystem to add to what Matt's saying I think it's down to the LRT providers and also the uh platforms like Pendle to ensure kind of high transparency surrounding some of these assets um I think with brenzo it it was a case of you weren't exactly sure what the underlying claim was too and so that's where you saw that deviation start to form and so it's about having that deep liquidity uh at the token level to support kind of free movement in and out of something like you know wrapped e e in the case of eifi as well as being able to be comfortable knowing that the asset is properly representative of of the underlying claims and I think that's something that is uh more of a trial and error process especially at this beginning stages as we're seeing these Primitives come out um a lot of this stuff is being tried for the first time on the reaking level so um I'm not expect I'm not it would be naive to expect everything to go perfectly I kind of want to get you guys' opinion on cash flow projects like staking to earn some form of protocol earn Revenue how do you I feel like those projects have largely died out um I think the only one that's like relatively popular still is maker Dow how do you guys see that that space evolving do you think we go back to the roots and like not Roots but I guess what we had over the bare Market where everyone was searching for some form of cash flow or some form of like Revenue yeah I mean at a high level we've seen massive dispersion within the market YTD I personally am under the opinion that we continue to see this particularly within the defi environment which has undergone a ton of innovation since it became a household name four years ago but in in Maker's case too I think you're very well positioned to capture a cash flow narrative as well as you know what they're doing with endgame doing their 24,000 to1 red domination of uh Supply so that cuts price significantly which should in the Boost Retail demand which is consensus at this point in time you know they recently injected 300 mil into you know State usde die and then usde uh die pools on Moro and then you know as you know I'm of the opinion that as users Loop their exposure to stake usde we should see borrow you know hover close to the underlying yield which just you know increased a 37% Target and as those converge you know know in theory we should see this integration granting maker um higher state DDE yields going forward and they have obviously the option to you know inject an additional 700 mil die obviously fantastic you know if you look back at the previous quarter of this year it was a strong one for them again uh they doubled run rate Revenue to 422 million know driven by naturally higher interest rates post eth launching obviously so they're sitting on that narrative well obviously you know gearbox is to and then um you know it with igen layer launching too um we should see that be another Catalyst for improving their already robust run rate too which is you know on their subow structure too and you know they recently launched Moro vaults which are you know it looks like they're earning you know 7 mil annualized from that alone um and then you know as I mentioned before with with launching too you I think you'll see some pretty heavy incentives for resters post launch and that kind of turns maker into this you know massive ethereum yield Farm in itself in my opinion yeah maker is really interesting I you mentioned their Integrations with Morro and uh using their d3m credit line it's it's been really fascinating to me to watch their revenue composition shift away from rwas and into Crypt back loans um that's kind of been if you remember like Q4 2023 that was like the risk right they were this rwa focused asset that was acing a ton of yield specifically uh from these rwas and it was like 60 to 70% of their their income was or sorry the revenue was coming from RW and we were in this High rate environment where consensus was rates were more likely to go down than up uh which would have a negative impact on maker Dow's revenue and so we fast forward to today and that shift has greatly uh pivoted away from rwa now rwa comp uh have a competition of about 33% of their Q2 forecasted income Revenue again sorry and uh it's been interesting because that's not really for a fault of rw's Revenue decreasing uh in q1 2024 was 26 million uh throughout the q1 and in Q2 it's trending towards 32 uh it's really just the idea that Crypt back loans are actually coming back and becoming a useful source of re of income for Maker Now yeah we've seen some interesting pivots within the RW space in the context of relying effectively on t- Bill yields in a high rate environment to drive Revenue which we we've seen you know that was Pro proliferating at the back half of last year right but like for example you know Maple which is a um a liquid holding for us um you know they they had a very uh interesting mechanism launch last year that was tokenizing t- Bill through a lending mechanism and you know I think at its peak they had about 80 roughly 80 mil in uh net deposits um at its peak I believe but then you know we're seeing some really interesting stuff Devi uh devolve with their private credit facility you know like even like last night we saw like three mil get deposited into their direct pools you're seeing like 200 accounts created uh consistently on a weekly basis you know tvl has you know 2x for their secured lending arm and their aggregate tvil across products uh recently you know surpassed 175 mil which um we haven't seen since uh 2022 um so you know that's really cool to see too A lot of these teams have been pivoting to offer these new intuitive products to combat um potential for uh rate height decreases over the next year or two one thing I wanted to ask related to these like real world asset shifts is how you guys View tokenized equities like we had I think we've talked about this like internally over the past few weeks and on my end I don't see like I think there's no real demand for it right now and I don't see there being really any demand for it in the future but what do you guys think do you have like a I I think it's down to what the post tokenization uh use case is going to be and I just don't know if we have the depth in product offerings at defi level to be able to really make it attractive for people to because it's it's it's not trivial right you have to figure out where the custody is how you would actually go about tokenizing this Equity piece um what legal and Regulatory considerations then come with that and then H where are you going to deploy it and actually put those assets to work um I think that is changing uh you know we're seeing uh increasing numbers of particular markets being formed for this uh both on the private and public side you know provenance blockchain has existed for quite some time and has multi-billion uh worth worth of you know real world assets tokenized on their chain um I think it's about kind of how do these environments that are then going to be holding these tokenized equi going to be expanding to the rest of defi to actually increase the alert to uh make those assets productive for me I'm not entirely sure how concrete The Tam is for tokenized equities in particular obviously for um tokenized t- Bill yield that's attractive particularly for you know Dows that want access to safer yields in a higher um with a higher rate that you receive versus let's say you know depositing usdc as collateral on a and it's fixed so you know what the payouts going to be it's it's predictive over time which makes it additionally more attractive and it's a passive vehicle for collecting yield without much activity needed to manage your position whereas you know if you want tokenized access to a US traded equity in you're living you know 12 hours ahead of time somewhere halfway across the world managing those positions becomes a little more difficult in theory in my opinion given the time stamp duration where you're not based in the US and there's also the thought of like who exactly if they crypto native are going to be buying these things um me along with all of you are um are probably are trading crypto because that that's where our core Edge is I just don't have any Ed you know day trading Apple call options yeah I completely agree with you m that's that's also been my thought process it's like I don't think I would have ever used it and I don't really see the demand for it that much um kind of Shifting away from Real World assets what narratives do you guys what narratives are you guys excited for over the next 6 to 12 months is there anything that you're specifically focused on so I'm I'm taking a kind of broad look at uh infrastructure and execution I think the execution Frameworks pretty pretty generally across the board are shifting and becoming more generally interoperable um we're seeing the rise of uh alt VMS existence across different environments we're seeing the rise of uh attention to intense based approaches at least and uh ongoing debate about kind of where the margins should exist within execution um and so spending a good amount of time thinking about those different topics and and exploring the different Landscapes um generally I'm of the opinion that execution is going to become increasingly uh multi-chain and uh leaning towards more of those intense based execution approaches it's just a lot of the intense approaches are very ambiguous right now and it's unclear largely how we're going to get from a declarative kind of uh transaction building uh format as exists today at the evm level to kind of a more generalizable execution framework that allows you to kind of have multihop execution SL multi BM execution and so that's pretty interesting to think about and pretty multifaceted in terms of different infrastructure pieces having to coordinate together to uh support it who are the key players in that world because to me it seems like it'd be sort of the market makers that sit behind those intents right like the applications surface the user intents from the user and kind of shovel them towards these market makers that play a key role and then there's probably some intent like infrastructure right like some RFQ model across is building this dbridge is building this um there's many other players in that space But I'm just curious how do you think about the landscape there and who the important pieces are I think market makers to begin for sure but I think market makers involvement actually provides a longer tale uh term approach for actual infrastructure coordination and the reason I say that is because market makers are going to be essentially fulfilling all of these uh lower hanging fruit intents at the beginning at least um and in doing so they're build up a backlog of data of you know what are the most common Roots what are the most common asset swaps what are the most uh common sort after things for users and in doing so then have a database that can be used to actually build some of these more commonly traversed paths across the multi-chain graph um and that would then allow the more decentralized solver markets to collaborate and start fulfilling some of these routes potentially more efficiently than market makers would themselves um and I think it raises the question of where should the margin lie within intent execution should it lie with the market makers themselves or should it lie at the uh Meb infrastructure level um and yeah that that can get quite fiery in terms of a debate yeah that's let's let's take it let's take it there then if we it's a fiery debate that's the fun part right and so it's interesting because the if we get end up in that world like all right where would I want me as an investor like where do I want to put my attention to then because market makers will are sort of just like private entities maybe you can get like an equity play there um but I'm to me it doesn't seem like the guys in the middle the middleware so like the RFQ infrastructure kind of gets any cut of this right it'll be like the market makers demanding their side of the cut and the app ler demanding their side of the cut which largely they might use to return to users and some fure end State um but is that a good way of thinking about this like to me it seems like the RFQ infrastructure that sits in the middle is it's kind of just hard for them to get any meaningful margin agreed no I think the margin will lie with the market makers to begin with like I mean you're going to have the cost of a defina native execution and market makers are naturally incentivized to match and just underpin that and so as the market making uh intent performance space becomes more competitive that bar will naturally get pushed further down from where the defi execution is uh but in doing so they're kind of a trojan horse because they bring the data that will allow the more decentralized solver networks to then undercut them uh and so then the decentralized solver networks then start setting the bar in my opinion um and will market makers then be able to compete with that I mean depends on how much Access Data they have I would argue yes probably they will um but I think it is not unconceivable that the decentralized solver uh networks will be able to kind of hold the margin at the end woro is the leading interoperability platform for multi-chain Bridges and applications with over 1 billion messages sent and 40 billion in value transferred wormo leads the industry in Cross chain message volume and total value transferred if you're a builder wormo has an extensive sued of tools and infrastructure to securely build multi-chain applications you can use worold to power def five nfts governance and so much more and Wormhole supports over 30 blockchains and six different run times gber unique Wormhole nft just for zerox research listeners today fill out a form prove that you've listened to today's episode to receive a PO app and you'll get an email over the coming weeks to claim your limited edition nft pair is an Innovative pair trading exchange built on top of Simo users can trade trending narratives with one click from Blue Chip narratives such as long BTC short e right through the whiff versus Bon the Hat stays on simia's intense Centric architecture enables deep liquidity source offchain and Broad onchain and combined with pair has the marketized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional Traders the age of interoperability is here with the launch of teleporter Avalanche becomes a seamlessly linked network of many sovereign blockchains that communicate so smoothly they feel like a single chain teleporter is an evm compatible cross chain communication protocol built on top of avalanche for mess it allows any evm chain on Avalanche to send messages assets and data to one another in a simple fast affordable and secure way teleporter and Avalanche rep messaging provide a new foundation for how Avalanche blockchains can communicate and how developers can easily build cross chain applications out of the box build anything you want any way you want on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for web FreeX check it out by clicking the link below Matt what about you what have you been looking into over the past couple months so the the two things that I found to be intellectually interesting over the past couple of months is looking at restake rollups and particularly with swell because they've amassed a pretty large amount of tvl over the past um past month really they've surpassed two bill of tvl understandably so um this is kind of the the general playbook for reaking services uh you know they launch and within 30 days they have amassed more than a billion of tvl um resulting in in massive appetite for the underlying I think what's interesting in the swell example is not just the you know kpis that they managed to hit quickly it really comes down to the fact that when their token is staked it acrs sequencer fees and um I think that in theory this should uh solve a pretty big problem within the L2 environment in my opinion whereas you know existing l2s such as optimism and arbitrum have in my opinion this disconnect between the sequencer and the token holders where essentially by staking it to ACR the fee as a user um it effectively negates th that pain point between um holders and the sequencers in my opinion and um they've already accured on the fee side more than a million dollar generated on a 10% take rate too so if a bull market comp analysis is produced I think personally you could see that hitting five over time and it just like kind of with these kind of variables too it just seems to me that they're positioned really well out of the l2s to kind of capture this D5 activity as it relates to uh reaking over time and then I I also think too like another Avenue too that I'll I'll mention here is that um um The Avenue for enhanced staking rewards coming via igen lay for users who opt into uh restake and receive that extra yield by delegating to an operator who supports you know ABS is on the network which um should pose the same opportunity cost as staking eth but with the caveat being like this one is the larger value prop as it allows users to kind of you know capitalize on restake rewards as well and then the other thing that I've been um looking at recently that I find to be really interesting is um just like toxic order flow in general and different mechanisms that are being integrated and created today to combat that particularly from um both like the uh historical I perspective right that uh LPS are having to deal with as well as um lvr as well and kind of you know interesting new mechanisms that Protocols are coming with you know you you have ambient that's been doing some cool stuff in this regard um you know the the big thing to me too is like that needs to be solved for this to become a g viable trading solution is uh latency obviously and like you're seeing that too with bonding requirements being cut for the cow's amm and um I I think you know over time you going to see some really cool stuff kind of emerge from this that negates uh to varying degrees toxic flow accured to LPS within the Dex environment and I think we're going to see some pretty cool stuff too being launched at the back of um univ V4 launching as well particularly with Dynamic fees and how those kind of relate to um cutting lvr I think the toxic flow point is also important for thinking about the intense uh development um obviously intense networks solver networks as well as market makers are going to be more incentivized to go to venues without toxic flow and so when looking at methods of capturing uh the actual conversion from the transaction execution as it exists today to intense it's really a function of where does that good tox non-toxic flow exist and uh how can those solver networks then plug in yeah um I actually kind of want to ask you guys about Matt you mentioned that these projects these reaking projects they get one bill in TBL in like under a month and there's this huge appetite for these I asked this to Sham as well but I want to under like I lay has 15 billon TBL that's a whole lot of security and I just don't know if that's like even NE at this point how do you guys think about that do you like do you think there'll be a mass outflow eventually or do you think they'll manage to incentivize these resters so I I wrote a relatively long paper on reaking it's on our website and it kind of dives into this point if anyone's interested in diving in fully it's a banger it's going in the show notes thanks then um but I in that paper explored kind of the risks of raking and I don't think that reaking poses a risk to the economic security layer kind of as uh has been discussed before uh to the point of kind of cascading security risks I I think the longer taale risk of something like Igan layer or abss that operate on top of Ian eras what's going to be the long-term draw for a delegator to stay uh delegated within a certain number of abss um and with that I mean the post igen layer points drop or whatever the current incentives are um what's going to be the longer term draw and if it's just 4% or if it's just the base yield but denominated in that ABS token I think that one thing is really important is is how closely correlated is that as's economics to ethereum itself if there's kind of really high correlation between uh the as's value and ethereum's value I.E if the AVS is kind of deriving its value from ethereum itself what is it bringing to the ethereum ecosystem by existing as an AVS and I would argue that AVS is are best positioned when they are uh valuable in their own regard as opposed to being a derivative of of ethereum now I'm not saying that all derivatives of ethereum but you want to be bringing in value that's external to ethereum to ethereum through igen layer um and I think that is also then incentivizing the delegators to continue receiving the rewards as it is kind of valuable in in of it in and of its own right and they they are therefore more likely to you know not just sell and uh compound into eth um I think it's also a matter of for avss as they're looking to launch on top of igen layer um it is really a non deterministic future layer level of security that they're going to have access to and so they need to get comfortable with what's that minimum sort of bar uh of security that they need to be safe and uh what do they within some confidence interval expect to have at some future point in time um and I know that it's very early for Iger and this is all kind of stuff that's being actively worked on and I don't think there could be a better team behind a proposal like igen ler to uh be kind of thinking about these things uh but it's just some of the points that we considered during our research that's interesting you mentioned the yield Factor here as well because me boost has about I don't know about let's call it a 90 95% opt-in rate neighborhood that's probably a little high um and it adds about 25 basis points to staking yield so it's it's like not that much um when you when you look at it on percentage basis but everybody is still collectively opting into it um how do you think about the dynamic there and and the idea that you know maybe it doesn't take a massive yield number for E stakers to say Hey you know this is like marginally extra work for me I'm going to do this anyways well I think also I think this touches on the argument that happened between kind of Renzo and ethery um because with me boost what are you opening yourself up to in terms of risk um it's it's kind of a set amount of risk that doesn't really increase but with every additional ABS that you delegate to the risk is compounding and it's it's also not related risk I mean they're both slashing but the ABS could set very different slashing conditions and so you're getting compounding levels of risk the more AVS is you secure but not necessarily compounding yield because the yield is going to be differently denominated different assets not necessarily compounding in E and so I think the marginal gain that you get with each additional ABS is very much unknown the marginal risk is more known is there any world where slashing never goes live I mean if you think about salana right like salana wants to like eventually we'll have slashing but it's just not there today and it's not on the immediate step next steps right is there any is there any chance that Ian layer does the same thing I would say it's there is a chance yeah um I think it also speaks to the whole what do you want to be covered within the scope of consensus um and if there are mechanisms by which you can cryptographically verify uh certain actions or and and prevent them as a result uh that could be an attractive way of preventing uh having to implement slashing but I'm struggling to understand kind of what other mechanisms you could put in place to incentive align to align incentives and please let me know if if anything you've come across but I I found it hard to uh find alternatives to slashing reputation my friend the social layer classic I want to change I want to change tuna here a little bit Arian you and I have uh once once in a lifetime ago feels like chatted about near at quite some length and when I was looking at the charts coming into this pod and near has just been Rock Solid man they cannot the Market's kind of had some ups and downs over the last two months but not near uh I'm I'm curious what's the boss tell us tell us about the near thesis is that is this thing still alive or what so the near uh Foundation has gone through some changes in the past year I mean IIA has taken the helm again um I think near What drew me to near back in 2021 was the strength of the infrastructure in my opinion I really liked the Doom slug finality Gadget uh I liked night shade like charting I think they're one of the only monolithic approaches to uh horizontal scaling that I've come across and I'm quite a big fan of horizontal scaling um I think n has gone through a process of trying to figure out its place within the ecosystem and it's reached what I would argue is a little bit of an inflection point in that they've got this critical mass of tooling uh whether it's developer tooling for things like Java whether it's uh Library support or whether it's kind of the SDK itself um indexing as well as a public good they they've kind of reached this point where it can be expandable um it's just a matter of where do they want to sit do they want to sit the private in private key infrastructure level for chain abstraction and kind of coordinate everything that way do they do they want to uh be more of a kind of defi native environment for kind of fast finality do they want to lean into the EA layer uh for fast finality or is it kind of a mixture of of all um I think we're moving in that chain abstraction thesis for execution anyway I would argue that's what intents is leading into too so um I see an increasing area of potential engagement for Nia and it's a matter of what sort of Partnerships can they uh put in place and what sort of problems can they solve for project teams that exist today uh that would really help them uh capitalize on this opportunity that's interesting is it more of the chain abstraction side or my like really dumb left curve view of this has just been fast chain good right salana has had a great uh last six months Su and Aptos are starting to put some of the pieces in the right spot of course the last two months of those two specifically have been quite brutal but um yeah is how do you think about my idea of just fast chain good look I think fast train good but I'm not going to kid I mean n hasn't had the the user experience that salana has historically and I think that has been a huge barrier to adoption um the wallet infrastructure specifically hasn't been great and I think that's stuff that the team absolutely knows about and has has been working on so perhaps through these updates that we're seeing coming through this year um that will change significantly and is one that I'm definitely keeping my eye on um as a very early Paras and ref user it would certainly help me if that did come back but uh I'm not particularly counting on it yeah the block Explorer falls into that category too but but Matt I'm curious how you view this whole this whole near situation any thoughts on on its development and where it's headed I think there's something to be said about the fact that near did not launch at a in my opinion ridiculously high fdv I think it was somewhere in like the 500 mil Mark initially and I think that there is importance here with giving retail the ability to put on position in the liquid environment into these up upper tier l1s as perceived by the market at a valuation that isn't obscene to the point where you're paying you know 50x above what private markets were pricing it at 12 months prior and on that kind of Point too we saw salana do that really well there's a bit of survivorship bias with it but you know salana didn't raise a ridiculous amount of money at an insane Val and then they launched during the trough of 2020 and you know back then you were able to put on positions for you know sub a dollar for a decent amount of time too and so I think from an FTV launch it a really awesome opportunity retail to buy it at a reasonable liquid valuation out of the gate and then it is Al potentially really attractive too from just the the general AI point of view too right like reail loves Nvidia um Nvidia trades at large multiples above of above revenues but um it cann't gives people like an onchain exposure to this AI narrative in a quickly growing protocol as well I would I would also argue that Nar yeah by the way we love n uh one of the one of the approaches of near is they are a sleeping giant in the sense that they have a ton of users now those users have no idea they're on blockchain especially in the case of something like sweatcoin or uh kaai Ching I mean these are I remember in my apartment building when I was in the elevator uh there was a guy and he pulled up sweatcoin on his phone and I mean maybe he was a crypto native guy but he just uh seemed like it was someone who had come across sweat as the walking app and and as a result of the blockchain experience being so abstracted away from them in that app historically uh they've been able to onboard now those users have no interactions with blockchain today but if the tooling and if the environment for that adoption does improve then it allows them to onboard kind of these large bases of users that haven't historically been involved yeah I I feel like the AI near narrative is Ari in what you mentioned where it was they were really trying to find themselves a little bit but I agree with you I mean I had no idea Kai Kai was on near and also sweatcoin as well I have no idea and I'm sure like if I don't know I'm sure there's like a million who also don't know um I want to ask one last question I wanted to ask this after we brought up near but the I keep getting sucked into these like VC High FV questions because they like fascinated they've fascinated me over the past few weeks um I know that you guys have been looking into AO AR I kind of want to understand the feis behind that because I've been hearing it quite often um about it and like like near it's been doing quite well that's one of the charts that I checked before we hopped on so so in terms of arweave and AO so arweave is a is a investment that we we've had for quite a few years a thesis on R weave is really around the permanent storage aspect um now arwe historically has somewhat struggled to find its product Market fit within that permanent storage aspect whether it's a lack of historic product uh differentiation or uh diversity in terms of the different types of storage that they can offer um it kind of didn't Encompass a full solution that would allow anyone to switch completely over from their current provider um but are we is at a position now where it's kind of just the infrastructure is built and it's ticking along and it works um and so what I think is really important and beautiful with AO is that it brings a whole new paradigm uh to arweave itself you now have this storage layer that is not only IM mutable um and permanent um you can have kind of non-permanent storage on there as well now but also allows you to plug into the State Management aspects associated with blockchains and compute on top of of blockchains and that hasn't been historically available so what that opens up I think is a whole new depth to rwe's capabilities you can now not only store things on it but form arbitrary proofs over it or have triggerable events in the form of you know KRON jobs in the case of AO um and that I think brings a level of liveness to the storage layer that hasn't historically existed and gets pretty excited when you think about corresponding State changes in other environments due to some State change on our weao um and I think generally that's one of the narratives you know liveness within smart contracts reactive smart contracts whether it's event log based coordination on a multi-chain environment or whether it's you know through something like our weave AO um yeah it's pretty exciting yeah the token sync angle is is quite interesting as well and AR I want to dive One Step deeper onto one of the other uh the piece that you mentioned around like smart contract livess what's like a example that you could provide of like why this may be useful I think it's useful for just an I mean I think it's multifaceted useful um you can have obviously you can have the the the well sort after things like limit orders stop loss um but I would argue that that's not kind of the full realization of the uh potential offering for for this technology you you really then allow multi-chain execution as a result of uh these this liveness so if you have like uh so if you have a smart contract that changes state on one chain that can emit an event log that is captured by some protocol that then coordinates a signing event on some other chain that allows some initial function to continue through this multihop process um right now we don't really have something that can coordinate that endtoend process and so I think Beyond just implementing more richness within execution and how you want to structure your execution I think it allows you uh more depth across different environments in terms of your execution as well thank you guys um thank you so much for hopping on and joining us this was incredible thank you for having us we really appreciate it the opportunity to come on and really enjoyed our conversation fantastic Daniel thank you as well yes of course we'll put the the link in the show notes to uh some some ways to contact both Matt and Arian it's been a fantastic uh conversation guys thank you both for coming on and cheers have a great rest of your day thank you guys take care likewise talk later we have teed up with the wormo foundation stewards of the worall protocol the leading interoperability platform powering Crossing transfers for over 200 100 plus multi-chain dabs Wormhole isn't just a bridge it's the leading interoperability platform for multi-chain applications so go and claim your unique wormo nfts just for zerox research listeners today hit the link in the description to fill out a form and to prove that you've listened to today's episode and receive a PO app you get an email over the coming weeks to claim your limited edition nft [Music]

========================================

--- Video 115 ---
Video ID: 91gX05DvO9w
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=91gX05DvO9w
Title: The Search for Reasonably Priced Tokens | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-06-05 19:45:47 UTC
Description:
In this episode, the 0xResearch team dives into the world of Solana DeFi, exploring the potential of undervalued tokens and discussing the disconnect between quality products and token valuations. The conversation also covers Polymarket's impressive growth, Arbitrum's controversial $250M gaming fund, and the risks exposed by Linnea's recent sequencer pause. The analysts examine the challenges facing crypto gaming adoption and debate the merits of meme coins versus prediction markets. Finally, they discuss Vertex's innovative approach to solving liquidity fragmentation across different chains.

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice.
- -
Special thanks to our sponsor LayerZero
Stay up-to-date with the LayerZero Ecosystem by following: https://twitter.com/LayerZero_Labs
- -
Follow Ryan: https://x.com/_RyanRConnor
Follow Carolina: https://x.com/GoldDefi
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
0:36 Linea's Pauses Sequencer  
7:37 Arbitrum $250m Bet on Gaming
22:01 Polymarket Success
34:16 Layer Zero Segment: Stargate
41:29 Sub $500m Valuation Coins 
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Ryan and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 116 ---
Video ID: yPY4Y34WIgo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yPY4Y34WIgo
Title: Magic Eden's Contrarian Strategy to NFT Trading | Zhuoxun Yin
Published: 2024-05-30 15:49:14 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Zhuoxun Yin, COO of Magic Eden, joins to discuss the evolving NFT landscape and their journey across multiple blockchains. He shares insights into the challenges of building NFT marketplaces on different chains, Magic Eden's multi-chain expansion strategy, and their new cross-chain wallet. Zhuoxun also offers his perspective on NFT market cycles, emerging trends like NFTfi, and Magic Eden's mission to make NFTs accessible to users of all levels. Thanks for tuning in!
- -
Follow Zed: https://x.com/@ZhuoxunYin
Follow Dan: https://x.com/smyyguy
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.

Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://forms.clickup.com/45049775/f/1aytxf-16571/7XLRRC4YQAMEFKRLDX
- -
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
- -
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.
Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:25 Bitcoin NFT Ecosystem Focus
19:22 Wormhole Ad
20:00 Pear Ad
20:25 Avalanche Ad
21:07 Magic Eden's Moat
32:03 Magic Eden Wallet Positioning
43:34 Trading UX & UI 
51:27 Future of NFTs & Magic Eden
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
because if you think about it we already made the contrarian decision to start the company on salana which at the time was very much not where a lot of the nft activity actually was right the majority like 90% was actually on ethereum even just from the outset that we are not like dogmatically you know aligning with like this chain or that chain it's more just like where do we think some of the um new and exciting uh use case experimentation is going to happen uh and we should just be there for that because as a platform we should be Gnostic to all of that wh te up with the Wormhole Foundation stewards of the Wormhole protocol the leading interoperability platform powering Crossing transfers for 200 plus multi-chain teams came your unique worm NFD just for zero X research listeners today pair is an Innovative pair trading exchange built on top of Simo users can trade trending narratives with one click from Blue Chip narratives such as long BTC short e right through the whiff versus Bonk the Hat stays on Sim's intense Centric architecture enables deep liquidity source offchain and Broad onchain and combined with pair has democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional Traders Avalanche is a smart contract platform that has a novel consensus protocol subnet infrastructure and the hyper SDK toolkit which allows web free developers to easily launch custom powerful blockchain Solutions you can start building today by checking out the before we get into today's episode just a quick disclaimer the views F on this podcast by either myself or any guests are their personal views and do not represent the views of any Associated organization nothing in this episode should be construed or relied upon as Financial technical tax legal or other advice all right let's jump into the episode what's up everyone and welcome back to another episode of zerox research we have a fantastic episode lined up today as we're joined by Zed the co-founder and CEO of magic Eden today is Monday May 13th but this episode will go live in just over two weeks on Thursday May 30th as a reminder you can use code 0x ZX research 10 for 10% off your block Works research subscription thank you for coming on Z hey thanks for having me guys nice to nice to see you both um before we get started do you want to give a short introduction on Magic Eden and you guys what you guys have built yeah for sure so magic Eden we've been around since um September 2021 uh feels like a lot longer than that but it's only been two and a half years but we're uh uh cross chain nft Marketplace um so we support uh nft Marketplace on um I think five yeah five chains now so ethereum salana Bitcoin base um and polygon and more recently we've also become a multi-product company in that um as part of building out this cross chain experience we've realized that there's a lot of gaps and limitations to the ultimate user experience that you can offer to uh to people who were coming to the product and which is kind of what brought us down the path of building a also a cross chain wallet uh which is the magic Eden wallet um so yeah it's been a pretty interesting journey across many many nft ecosystems ups and downs of nfts and they now expanding Beyond uh Beyond nfts as well so happy to dive in and and talk about any of any of the above perfect um I think just to kick us off I want to ask you guys about shift towards the Bitcoin ecosystem a few months back I'm not sure exactly how long ago but kind of want to understand like your decision process behind this and how you guys decided to approach this yeah great question it's funny because I feel like more people know about us for Bitcoin than or at least it feels that way than for anything else which is kind of crazy um because it's a relatively new part of our business um so it I'll go back with just a little bit more background and then um I'll share about the specific Bitcoin decision but very very early on in the company maybe about three or four months in we always knew we would become a multi-chain uh company and we just didn't exactly know how that would play out but we we had that uh pretty clear idea in our heads because if you think about it we already made the contrarian decision to start the company on salana which at the time was very much not where a lot of the nft activity actually was right the majority like 90% was actually on ethereum and um so that that kind of shows a little bit about um maybe like what our mentality is um even just from the outset that we are not like dogmatically you know aligning with like this chain or that chain it's more just like where do we think some of the um new and exciting uh use case experimentation is going to happen uh and we should just be there for that because as a platform we should be agnostic to all of that um but if you would ask me when we start the company do do you would I have thought we' be building on bitcoin I would have absolutely said no with probably a lot of conviction um because I just didn't think it was possible right there was not really a way to do it so with that background when um the ordinal protocol did come out in the beginning of 2023 so yeah a little over a year ago it it definitely peaked our interest immediately because um I mean there were many many ways to read it but our reading of it was that oh for the first time you could build a something very very similar to nfts uh on bitcoin and it would be a way for users to basically stack their Bitcoin um which obviously people want to do right uh that's kind of how we've seen a lot of the uptake in many of the other ecosystems whether it's trading fungible tokens or trading nfts earning yield like all this kind of stuff right so it opens up that whole whole world and it it didn't take us long to actually get conviction on the idea I think it to probably took us end to end about two weeks to get our head around like this is something we should do mainly for the fact that we felt like if people were interested in those kinds of use cases on a chain like ethereum there's there's no reason why that also would not be true for Bitcoin um so this was early 23 we made the call took us about 3 four weeks to kind of get started on on on building this and um from beginning idea conception to launch um yeah probably about a month and um yeah the rest is history so I would kind of call it like it's funny people now sort of frame it as like a yo we totally changed the company to become a Bitcoin company it's definitely not like that uh but Bitcoin for sure has been a really exciting ecosystem and it's become obviously a much larger part of magic eaten but it's definitely just one of the big steps along our um journey to become a cross chain um cross chain company were there any like additional challenges uh with launching support for Bitcoin versus like any other particular like say evm chain or even salana I'm just curious about you know given that it's a utxo model versus a ledger based system I'm curious if there's just any other pain points uh that kind of came up in the Bitcoin process when indexing ordinals dude so there was so many problems yeah yeah I mean I can't I can't even count it's like yeah too many to to even mention but number one yeah it was it probably took us um number one like a week or two just of scoping just to see if it was possible to build a Marketplace like that in and of itself we were like not even sure if that was possible it ended up being uh yeah my co-founder Rex he he ended up just spending a bunch of time to do the diligence and he came back and was like yeah I think the answer is yes I think but we got to do some work here and that was even before we even built the thing um and then yeah a lot of the work that we had put in to enable nfts on Solana and ethereum it was not totally transferable on the especially on the back end because of EX exactly this like the utxo model right indexing was totally different um there wasn't even really a standard of how to index we kind of we were making it up along with other people in the ecosystem around like a canonical way to do that um there were not even things like the concept of a collection didn't even exist on chain which you take for granted like these things on salana and ethereum um and then now I'll give you another example of like just ux challenges now it's like when you people are trading things like runes you have to account for the utxo model because it's things are not exactly fungible right because of the way the the utxo uh thing works so how do you then have to do you enable people to split utxos like how do you do that so there's all these like Downstream ux implications let alone like just building the right system to enable the expansion uh super challenging um and now like one of the things we've done to to to mitigate and like at least um come to resolution on a lot of this is we actually have built now like a full stack Bitcoin team so not not just like um you know back in engineering like it's like a whole engineering team around Bitcoin it's a whole operations team around Bitcoin so that you know the operations team and support team can read like Bitcoin transactions which are really different to read versus other chains there's a uh BD and marketing team so it's kind of like we've now built up a lot of that muscle but in the beginning it was really really hard because um we did not have a lot of the internal like deep Bitcoin knowledge we we we had to kind of like learn it uh so which makes this whole thing even more crazy because um yeah it's like a full stack bet that you have to internalize and at the time it's very hard to put your mind and wrap your head around like how many things you actually have to do when you build a a new Marketplace people kind of just think it's like yo snap your fingers like turn on the Chain you're good to go it's it's it's really it's a lot more than that so um yeah we've had to think about a lot of this since since then too many examples man I'm like getting getting PTSD just thinking about it yeah that's funny it was a bit of a leading question I spend a lot of my time in onchain data and started got my start in the evm world on ethereum then started you know messing around with salana and then started touching Bitcoin data uh so I I I know the trials and tribulations all too well but one other followup I had there is you mentioned runes and so you know you spend all this time you're indexing ordinals that's all based around this one type of protocol uh and then someone's goes on and builds runes which is supposed to be somewhat of an improvement in some ways on on the ordinal style of thing of creation and and really leaning towards a more fungible uh what looks like a fungible token you know I personally have my doubts on whether or not it really feels like a fungible token uh but I'm curious so basically the point here is there's one standard you build around and now there's like a new one you're like okay so now we you know you guys have integrated Rune support um presumably there'll be another one in the future would be my assumption based on this pattern and I'm curious like how do you think about having to continuously build support around uh these New Primitives that come up and like the challenges there versus something like uh I guess even ethereum nfts have kind of gone through some Evolution over time but maybe at a bit slower Pace yeah dude this is actually a really good really good point because um I could name many many examples on all the chains actually where this is happening um and in some ways I think this is the reason why it's like you got to be crazy to build an nft Marketplace because it's like you got to deal with all of this like I'll give you some examples okay on bitcoin it's like orinal uh even before runes there was blc2 and then now there's now there's runes and there's actually many more there was like BLC 420 and BLC whatever there was like all these random ones um on Solana there's like you know pfts token 22 um yeah there's many there's so many of them um and then on on ether as well so it is really hard because you actually um the goal actually the perfect world is actually that people just um kind of rally around A single standard as much as possible because then you can just build it once and that takes care of that indexing layer and then everything else you can just kind of like yeah it right from there when you have to then add many many of these standards yeah it changes it definitely changes the kind of infrastructure you need to have um on bitcoin for example we we actually did build bc20 initially uh we have since stopped supporting it because we just as a team we just didn't have the resources to actually support everything uh so we kind of took that out and then we ended up doing runes instead because we think runes is actually an upgraded um you know fundable uh um standard and and I I accept your your comment about like fundable is not really fully fundable right it's kind of like it is somewhere in between because because of the utxo model it's like they're more like trading bundles of fungible tokens um rather than true fungible tokens but it's like a step in the right direction I think um and yeah a lot of this complexity I think it's it's multifaceted it's kind of like we have to do some thinking and internalization about should we or shouldn't we support these things which is more of like a strategic question and then there's a secondary execution question of like okay if we're going to do it like how do we actually do it and how do we actually maintain it because the cost isn't so much uh can we just do it once it's like you got to you got to continuously maintain indexing uh otherwise yeah otherwise you can fall behind pretty quickly um so we've done that through a combination of uh building it inh house but also partnering with with um third part who can help with powering some of this infastructure uh so as an example on evm we we work with the third party who can help us because what we want to get in the business of is how do we enable rapid chain expansion because there's so many evm chains right and it's like largely similar not not exactly but largely similar um so indexing I think over time will probably become fairly commoditized whereas something like Bitcoin it is so new and it is so complicated there is some moat to be had by actually building that stuff in house and making it first class right I think the same is true still to some degree on salana although over time I think it will also become more or less like taken care of um so yeah anyway like not the same approach for all the chains is the short short of it I think um uh but on bitcoin we have we have done it like fully inh housee I have um I want to ask about a bit about building on bitcoin um the first thing is that it feels kind of like uh ethereum and Solon for example they just naturally lend themselves out to some of like nfds for example but on bitcoin uh especially with runes there's a lot more pressure on the app player where you have to kind of deal with some of these things as opposed to on the evm and svm it naturally comes how do you guys approach that like how much do you want you said you want to build most of these things out in house because it's like important and strategic but how does let's say like the community work the building Community work around that like are there other builders where like we're going to focus on splitting utxos and then you guys can exclusively focus on marketplaces or are you as magic trying to let's say bring that all under one app yeah yeah it's uh this is exactly the exercise that that that uh we've gone through a few times now on bitcoin um and I'll I'll give you guys a real example of something we talk through as a team just to give people a bit of insight into some of the sausage making behind the scenes which by the way is not always very pretty um but for runes yeah there because it was so new like the thing was going live on harving day and no one it's like not as if you could build it and then test it you know because it's it's the thing itself is not even live so it's like kind of a weird it's probably one of the weirdest launches that I've ever been a part of uh because usually you kind of build things in a way that's like you it's like iterative you go into beta and then you like make sure that everything works and then yeah and then you kind of release from there so there was definitely a question of like what should we actually build and it's like do you want to build the trading experience do you want to build the etching and minting experience do you want to build the discovery experience um Do you want to build splitting like there's all like basically that entire like these set surfaces right and I actually will just Yeah we actually were originally going to build the discovery experience first because we were not like that confident that we could build an actual trading experience for day one because it was so like time compressed um and eventually we figured out that we could probably build the trading experience so we ended up building that first um and to answer the original question of like do we want to just do everything the yeah I think the answer is is definitely not because there's two there's actually two much to to build and um I'll give you an example of one of the things we we we did in the early stages was we because we were not going to build minting and etching on runes we decided to work with uh a couple of Partners on that uh so if you see on Magic Eden today there is like a a mint like a minting runes button that takes you to luminex for example um and and like luminex has been an amazing platform to like just discover all the things that are like in progress um and then they have a link back to Magic heeden for like post Min like trading um these runes right which is which is great because that allows us to focus on making the trading experience really really good which there's there's just like more than enough to do um right now and uh um and we can continue to work on like how do you bring more of the minting volume and everything towards magic Eden like yeah over over time but uh super happy to be to be working with others on that and and my broad philosophy on it is that even if you look at nft ecosystems just on other chains yeah there's so there's actually so much depth that goes into it right there's like all of these platforms products that focus on various parts of that chain it's like yo you need someone who's G to do pre-sales someone's G to do like whiteless tools someone's gonna do like analytics someone's going to do nft Marketplace over time maybe there's some convergence and cons Val but I think it doesn't really make sense to do it at the very very beginning or like the early stage of when an ecosystem is getting built out um so right now on bitcoin it's like yeah it makes a ton of sense for us to just like focus on a couple of lanes do them exceedingly well and then hopefully the users like it and we can start to build more and more from there but um yeah I think that's sort of how we think about it it's a it's like a trade-off wormo is the leading interoperability platform for multi-chain Bridges and applications with over 1 billion messages sent and 40 billion in value transferred wormo leads the industry in Cross chain message volume and total value transferred if you're a builder wormo has an extensive sued of tools and infrastructure to securely build multi-chain applications you can use worold to power D5 nfts governance and so much more and Wormhole supports over 30 blockchains and six different run times clber unique Wormhole NFD just for zerox research listeners today F out of form prove that you've listened to today's episode to receive a PO app and you'll get an email over the coming weeks to claim you're limited Edition nft pair is an Innovative pair trading exchange built on top of Simo users can trade trending narratives with one click from Blue Chip narratives such as long BTC short e right through the whiff versus Bonk the Hat stays on Sim's intense Centric architecture enables deep liquidity source offchain and Broad onchain and combined with pair has democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional Traders the age of interoperability is here with the launch of teleporter Avalanche becomes a seamlessly linked network of many sovereign blockchains that communicate so smoothly they feel like a single chain teleporter is an evm compatible cross-chain communication protocol built on top of avalanche forp message it allows any evm chain on Avalanche to send messages assets and data to one another in a simple fast affordable and secure way teleporter and avaline cor messaging provide a new foundation for how Avalanche blockchains can communicate and how developers can easily build cross chain applications out of the box build anything you want any way you want on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for web 3 de check it out by clicking the link below so you mentioned something pretty interesting around there's might be a little bit of a moat on say salana or Bitcoin where doing a lot of this groundwork uh is still really really challenging versus the evm side of things where she's been become more commoditized for one reason or another and if I look at I pulled up um nft ps.org here and it's just like a breakdown of volumes by chain and then marketplaces on those chains and Magic Eden has done 55% of volume on salana over the last month and 78% for Bitcoin um versus you know much lower percentages when you look at like something like ethereum main net polygon or base or three evm chains and so I'm curious do you think that plays a role um in kind of why you guys are doing outperforming relative uh on on salana and Bitcoin relative to the evm chains or is that just more broader reflection of your business decision to focus on bitcoin and salana oh good question um I think on I don't know if it's either of those reasons um I think that yeah it's sort of it's like it's multi it's like multifaceted in that there's definitely some element of this that is like a um what what is what is like the unique what is Magic's unique ability to to penetrate in each of these markets right and um if you look at the history of of um of magic Eden and where we've done well it's we've done really really well when we've entered markets that basically have a lot of like it's like high velocity of activity which kind of that what drove a lot of the act like our salana business basically in the early days even even till now um and we we through that we developed a lot of like brand recognition as being the the main sort of place the main venue to access salana nfts and I think that's also true for Bitcoin where we we were pretty early right we weren't I think I don't think we were the first one very first we were maybe like yeah the second or third we were there very early and and then I think we also built a lot of infrastructure for the whole ecosystem like open sourced a bunch of us stuff and I think that actually probably has more to do with it it's sort of like entering the ecosystem at the right time and then and then having the right like product and like uh shipping velocity to then match the ecosystem such that you develop that brand recognition and and I I think that on evm um we've generally been very very late entrance um that's true I think for all of those chains actually eth Bas and polygon um and but but I think that's actually okay because I think that the way that I see um and the enery market as a whole sort of evolving and our place in it is that it is kind of unnatural in in some ways for for a Marketplace to have like 90 80% of the market um because at the end of the day it's like it is basically open liquidity right across um across across across everyone because it's all onchain and and therefore I think the the real mode is just over time as more and more assets and and value is kind of split across many many chains you kind of want to be the the layer that is able to aggregate as much of that as possible such that all of the inventory just becomes available and therefore you know you might just want it might work out that maybe you're like 30% of all the markets but um but that actually is massive because because like it becomes such a like fragmented space over many many many chains um and we we'll start to see less Trend towards like one one player becoming like 90% I think that's already becoming generally more and more true uh on definitely on evm and then I think probably over time on the other ones too um so yeah I think even though it's sort of quite a different profile we kind of look at it at an aggregate level across all of the all of the ecosystems and that's sort of the drive and and motivation for us to to then add as many ecosystems as possible what are um I mean as you mentioned you guys were really I don't think you were the first I think there were like two marketplaces before you but when you entered Bitcoin I feel like was the right time to enter Bitcoin because before it was just way too difficult to use and like you guys shipped a proper product especially under magic eeden name it was um like I think it was a good entry what are some other let's say evm or nonm chains that you guys are looking to expand into or do you see any other of these because you kind talked about fragmentation of liquidity across multiple chains how do you see like magic eeden approach that you said you want to be a layer but what are some I guess like over the next six to 12 months where do you see magic eating expanding more into yeah definitely um yeah so I don't think we'll we're going to be able to expand like to every single uh every single chain um but I think definitely we will be adding yeah quite a few more uh through to the end of the year yeah the exact ones TBD I think that we doing like a lot of diligence and and kind of scoping it out but I think a few that were keeping an eye on for sure um are some of the other um evm l1s that's a that's like a definitely um and I I include like the parallel EVMS as part of that right so like it's like yeah Avalanche like say monad like and maybe the latter two are kind of more um like yeah mad towards the end of the year right um given given their timeline um and then yeah keeping an eye on like a bunch of the l2s I think in general there hasn't been as much activity in l2s um at least that's yeah from what we've observed um obviously a lot on a bunch on blast sort of like incentivized volume that's happening on blast at the moment um but other than that I think very we're seeing relatively little um and and there's also a pretty interesting set of Bitcoin l2s that are coming to Market um I I used l2s generously as well as as a ter for Bitcoin uh they're not they're not like true native Bitcoin l2s but they are like yeah it's kind of like what polygon was to ethereum right before there were like true optimistic rollups and things like that um so keeping an eye on that like I was just in Bitcoin Asia the last four or five days and that was a huge massive theme of that entire week um people pretty excited about just yeah some of the experimentation on l2s so I think that's another area where we keeping a pretty close eye on with regard to bitcoin l2s I assume that those will be easier to integrate with than it is with the Bitcoin main chain right because that like those building on top of them the developers are ensuring that they have more compatibility than Bitcoin does yeah yeah a lot of them are actually um going the route of like M compatibility um so it kind of you know this like oversimplification but kind of just adding another evm chain um so yeah so so we'll see but there are also different approaches like uh some some are yeah trying to use like other Technologies as well um but for the most part I would say most of them are generally taking some kind of evm approach um so yeah tldr is like just more chance which is kind of crazy it's like it's like we don't I know if we need a lot more but that's what we're getting so that's the world we're entering into and you mentioned doing due diligence on these chains before you launch on them could you kind of walk through what you guys consider as a Marketplace before you launch on a new chain yeah it's a mix of both uh technical diligence in the sense of like we want to get a really strong and robust technical understanding of how the works not not just for our own Comfort but also if if we can see if there's any like um technical Innovation that we can bring to the table as a result right uh salana is like the perfect example where we wanted to build it on salana originally because because it was really fast and cheap right so then we thought we could actually build a different a different nft experience to what was was available on on ethereum L1 um and same as for Bitcoin it's like super slow and expensive it's like the opposite but at the same time you can build stuff that's really different there um because because it's inscriptions and all of that right so that's the first thing we sort of really deeply understand um the what's technically possible because then that drives the user experience that you can end up building then the second part of it is more like um this is I guess more applicable to um um chains and ecosystems that are that are like live which is what what is actually happening there like what is our point of view on um where we think this chain is going to go um because when we add Chains It's not just like we add it as like something in the code and then onto the website it's like we mob like what I was saying before about Bitcoin we mobilized like a whole team like set of people around it and you know for example on bitcoin we we built not only the marketplace then then we invested in building like a ordinal launch pad to then help um projects and creators launch on bitcoin and for us to enter the market with a strategy like that it's like you have to believe them that like creators will want to come and do this so so why do they want to come and do it why why do they want to do that over say launching it on any of the existing chains today like what's in it for them right and you have to we have to have like conviction around that answer and maybe the answer is different and it's like some other way we think the chain can grow but I think we have to um we we do the diligence to get conviction on that before we go launch there because we know that the opportunity cost of launching there and then nothing happening which isn't always totally in our control that's a pretty big opportunity cost because we could be working on many many other things in the company um but I think that's basically the two things Technical and then like ecosystem uh getting a view on like how bullish is everyone on this chain what's the activity who are the users who are the creators will other use cases emerge like that kind of stuff yeah it makes sense that there's a bit of like a qualitative and quantitative aspect to weighing that out and I'm curious how this parlays into your new wallet um you know launch the launch of the wallet is relatively recent and starting to get some great traction and as I I've actually used it it feels good it's comfortable uh it's been a great ux for me personally and I'm just curious how like all right so how do you think about the the bifurcation between the wallet and and the actual like web product right or the marketplace like if you're going to add support for one where you always add support for the for the other or these sort of like two independent products that are growing both under the magic eating umbrella but kind of at their own speeds yeah dude that's a great question so because it's good because it's something we've been actually talking about quite a lot internally recently um so let me answer it kind of in two parts the first is um why did maybe I'll share a bit about like why we built the wallet and then the second part I'll answer kind of like how it ties with the marketplace all all that so so the the thesis behind us building this wallet was because as we were launching all these chains we were actually uh we kind of discovered a problem that yeah that we I guess we always knew about but we didn't fully like like Brock the extent of it which was as a user and you come to Magic Eden and you want to suddenly use Bitcoin like trade ordinals it's like oh [ __ ] I've been using I don't know metamask or something right previously and now now I have to go go get a new wallet to do this thing which is another layer of friction right and then I have to go get Bitcoin I have to like do something with my exchange or like and then trade and then send the Bitcoin over so end to end it's kind of like man that's probably going to take like for forever you know it's going to take hours at least it's quite a lot I'm laughing here because this is exactly my story with how I started using the magic yeah same with me I remember when I first bought my first orderin I was like oh that was terrible I can't believe we're like getting our users to go through this like this is awful so um anyway then we realized that that that is not a Bitcoin only thing that's kind of a general problem like say we went and added like I don't know say or something it's like yeah magic eeden users go have to go get another wallet now to be able to do stuff so that that problem basically compounds so it's like say you add you know n Chains It's always like you know n minus one or something of like wallets that you have to have users have to have okay so that was a fundamental problem we were trying to solve so then we thought okay cool let's build this multi-chain wallet so users don't have to go through that experience and uh let's also make it a core core use case within the wallet that users can go between the assets very seamlessly such that if you were a user on eth or Soul or something and you suddenly now want um ordinals you can swap Soul or eth to bitcoin and then get going straight away to circumvent the whole like let me go like go through an exchange and then send the money back like super convoluted um so that was that's the underlying rationale and it's been amazing to see the uptake so far so I appreciate you Dan like using the wallet it's like very happy to hear that it's it's it's it's meeting the the need um but it's been really cool to see um over half a million people uh download the wallet uh so far it's only been out like two and a half months and um and the line share of activity is actually uh ex do people doing EX exactly that it's like going between Bitcoin and and and ether Soul right as a core core use case so it's really really cool okay and then to answer the second part like the the the actual question uh here around like how do we then see it with the marketplace and stuff so they are two independent products in the sense of they should not be reliant on each other to like grow or like uh scale and that's a really important um fundamental concept because as a wallet you have to be credibly independent right it's like the wallet cannot just only do magic eeden stuff otherwise like it's not that not useful we have to maximize the usefulness of this wallet for people so therefore it should do much much more than just magic Eden stuff um and then conversely it's like yeah for the marketplace we cannot only just support magic Eden wallet because a lot of users we know also use other wallets it's like it's chill so they are run independently in that sense where I think there is some connectivity is if we can um uh utilize the fact that we are building both to then create something that is an excellent experience and that is basically uh there like kind of two main elements there one is like if we can create like really nice seamless nft use cases in the wallet like imagine like yeah minting imagine like open additions and claims and all these kinds of things uh all the stuff that you you like and use for nfts in the wallet and then also the cross chain swapping to enable access to new ecosystems right like that enhances the mag Heen experience for sure but it's not only just for magic he it just generally is a really good for for cross chain stuff um so I think it's very likely over yeah over if we play this out that the wallet will end up supporting a bunch of chains that the marketplace will not right uh at least they won't go exactly hand in hand um and I think that's that's to be expected uh but we will be finding ways to like Drive really nice experiences um for chains where they both are supported uh because because yeah there's some like delightful things you can do once once we are we can connect some of the core like nft and and trading use cases uh between the two so more to come on that front but uh the first step here is just get it out with some of these core chains and get people like minimizing the effort and and friction to go between them and I think so far it's been been doing doing uh doing amazing yeah I love the approach there and and to go deeper on specifically the wallet side I just want to get your take around crypto ux as a whole right so crypto is great and they provide you the optionality of self- custody and truly owning your assets but I have to imagine that the average nft Trader probably doesn't want the like if you of the spectrum of like maxing out your security versus maxing out your ux my gut which just could be totally wrong but my gut would be most people probably want to maximize the ux and their trading experience and so when just even like the thought of you know managing a private key and having to like log in with this one password and if I forget it I better hope I wrote down my my seed phrase correctly and all like all the steps that are required in self- custody and I'm just curious how you think about that because I could imagine a world where we have some like lot like a I don't know like maximum Securities setting on your wallet like sort of like when you go on a UI you press like Advance mode right that's when I can like get my private key and all that but the reverse of that is where I just log in with a password email and a password or whatever it may be and like I can just log into my wallet I don't have these like clunky hex strings of addresses or or private keys or like basically trying to maximize the Simplicity and Abstract away all of the complexity uh for the user and does that resonate at all with you or there something you're trying to do or think is is valuable I'm just curious like what you think the user uh the magic Eden wallet user would want yeah definitely so um I actually fully yeah pretty much agree with everything that you just said and uh I'll I'll let me share as well like how this manifests in um some of the decisions we've made like and and maybe how we think about the future so today we don't really like us as a product and a company we don't go after normies right like at all and by Normie I mean like yeah like I don't know like my my dad or something you know who's like not definitely not like doesn't have a wallet you know like doesn't doesn't even have Bitcoin we're not going after any of those kinds of users it's like coinbase is going after those users right that that's like that's good and the reason we don't go after them is because yeah that that Journey even if we wanted to say reach them which we probably could we could you know do some like ads and a bunch of others like marketing to get people into the top top of the funnel but even if we wanted to do that we we wouldn't because yeah that onboarding journey is just too messed up it's like too complicated you have to basically be motivated already to come down this journey and uh yeah so for that reason we don't even focus on that segment of users so I really actually agree with what you were saying about I I don't know if these are these are actually my words of describing it's kind of like a graduation path where there is some like very seamless um like a social login experience to create like an account create a profile which maybe has a wallet behind the scenes that the user doesn't really know about um and get them using magic Eden and a bunch of the stuff that we have and then once they are doing like enough transactions or they've hit some amount of value in their wallet then it makes sense for them to be like yo you're sufficiently kind of down this Rabbit Hole you like go get go download like The Magic eeden Mobile Wallet now which is purely non-custodial right and then start using that instead and um that that I think is basically the journey that we want to get to um whereas today we are we are at yeah we're we're not even at step one in that when you come to Magic Eden you have to bring your own wallet right there's no social login type of experience and then even if we had that there's no way to then link it to like a a non-custodial wallet so all these things I think are very very possible to do so um that's what makes me pretty excited to uh continue down this path because we already have like pretty interesting exciting content and like stuff to do on Magic heeden like lots and lots of users are hitting the page every day I do feel that like many many more people will will want to experience it so once we get some of these things built it should become way easier like 10x easier for for people to to get experience some of the fun um within magic Eden uh but this is like a very iterative process it's kind of like step one building that uh cross chain wallet step two some of this like social login stuff step three is like how do you then bind all that together to like create that graduation path so users can uh no matter what segment they're in they can kind of come in at any stage of that Journey perfect um yeah I agree with both of you I I'm I I like the idea of a graduation path and I feel like they there's there have been attempts at building some form of um cour work for crypto where you just move on move on move on but it hasn't been done quite like effectively enough um one question that I had for you guys on the more on the nft marketplace side is that recently at least over the past say year um I feel like there's been kind of a shift in what nft marketplaces look like um specifically that the new newly launched nft marketplaces have more of a trading ux like almost as um similar to what a Perpetual Futures product would look like you guys have have not launched this um at least as far as I know what's the like is that something that you guys are planning on launching and I guess more broadly I kind of want to ask about how you view this um shift like because when I view magic Eden like you said uh Solana is very fast and Bitcoin is very slow so I feel like magic Eden in itself is very suitable for Bitcoin because it doesn't have necessarily a trading setup um how do you view that is that something that you guys are considering like maybe you're going to launch a trading interface for salana but on bitcoin you'll keep the classic look what do you think yeah I think the answer here is actually more based on um what does the future look like for the actual assets like what kinds of assets are these you know which I I actually don't really have an answer on it because it's like hard to put a stake in the ground but what I will say is that uh over the last six once I I definitely think there's more blurring um between nfts and like tokens right in that now now yeah that's obvious through like 404s but also more obvious as like a as like meme coin trading has really picked up right um so to the degree that that Trend continues yeah I do think it's valid to to basically um explore more of these like trading related experiences um and I I would say that magic Eden is like we're like somewhat already on that Journey uh just not maybe not as explicitly as maybe some might think and I'll give you two examples of that one is like we we built runes trading uh which already is not like definitely not like a full-on like Autobook exchange yet but if you look at it it's like some very very very very MVP version of like an order book because that table that we have on runes is effectively just here are all of the orders that people are willing to sell at right so that's number one and then number two is that in our wallet you can already swap between various fundable tokens and um I think that'll continue to become a bigger part of Mag Eden over time um are we interested in building like like prot trading kind of stuff um probably not for the sake of it because I think our core user at the end of the day is like we want to serve retail users so I think that if that's like the underlying like foundational philosophy um then we probably will not be going down to the nth degree of building like a bunch of really professional trading tools like we're not going to build like perpetuals trading or something like that that's like way too you know too Pro but would we build like more um more tools that allow for retail traders to trade and that give them like more signals and and um uh help them make better decisions when they trade yeah that that that is conceivable because we think the retail audience can be very very massive right whereas the pro audience is like relatively small um so yeah I don't know if that fully fully answered your your question but to sum it up I think it's like what are the asset types um we are already somewhat building some stuff that more resembles like uh fundable trading and we're definitely interested in it um but a lot of this is going to be a gradual Evolution um so long as that the assets themselves are moving in that direction if they continue to be like I don't know like gaming nft items then then it's kind of a different story right but I think it's a little hard right now to put a stake in the ground around what those assets will be no that makes sense um kind of related to this do you guys have any or actually I just like to hear your thoughts on nft finance or like nft f i feel like it was a big thing last year or maybe a year and a half ago and everyone was like nft Finance gonna be the big thing this year we had ERC 404s SPL 22s a bunch of stuff on salana and then now it feels like all of it is just not discussed as much what do you think of like I guess launching borrowing or lending through magic e or amm pool which you guys have right yeah yeah um no I I think N5 is still really really interesting and still has like massive potential actually um I think that probably what you are describing about like some of the stuff being like less hot right now versus what it used to be I think that's just a general um it's like a sign of the times in that right now nfts are no one's really even talking about nfts that much I think um there's we've seen more people just talking about ordinals and runes than just nfts in general right as an example uh and definitely mem coins have been really dominating the the Mind share over the nfts um but I think this is just normal it's like kind of a natural cycle kind of thing um I mean we also go through periods where no one talks about like fungible tokens as well uh you know I remember between like 2018 and 2019 like basically nobody was launching any kind of token so the this this is like very natural evolution in the market but if um we do see more like the next cycle of like nft spot trading gets another run then I would say 100% uh definitely we will see nft fi also um make another run um because in order for nft fire to really like have a credible Market you need the spot Market to you know be robust that's true for any kind of market right uh true for fundes too so um we we have seen probably from an N nft 5 perspective most of it has actually we've seen a lot of it actually on bitcoin recently just because ordinals went through a massive run there was tons of people uh borrowing against their nfts um their ordinals sorry um and it's probably going to heat up in the other ecosystems too and we we built amms on Solano um so you can kind of use amm pool like deposit into amm pools for nft collections on Soul um and we've actually explored Bor lend on on salana as well partnering with with some other people so you never say never but I think uh the core Focus for us I think would would still be the trading experience no I think that makes sense there as well one of the interesting points you mentioned was uh how no one's talking about nfts right now and that kind of brings up the nature of cycles and how there has been this bit of like a boom and bust in nfts in terms of like attention and price action uh when you compare even just last cycle to this cycle how do you think about what's next for nfts and like do they break out of this cyclical natur nature or is that just like a a fundamental part of crypto as a whole impossible question as boring as this answer sounds I just man I just think it's a fundamental thing in crypto it's kind of like uh uh somewhat personally I'm like desensitized to it all now after so seven years of of like doing doing this in some in some ways I do think nft is is definitely like even more cyclical right because because at the end of the day yeah it is like uh yeah they are like inherently inherently speculative in some sense um I do think that there will be that this will continue over time um and we'll continue to see sort of like ups and downs in the nft market but it what is true I think is that the Catalyst each time is going to be different um and that's why I think it's pretty cool we like what we're seeing now with like yeah the last six months like orinal and runes and then what we're seeing now is like a lot of people excited about um like like um some like new new ways to use NFS like this like trading card um fantasy top game right it's like it's slightly like a definitely a Twist on how nfts have been used and traded which is definitely a really interesting Catalyst there will be many many more catalysts um but just given the nature of yeah these are just these are assets that are tradeable so that just markets that go up and down uh I just think that we're just in for more Cycles uh for us like it doesn't really impact the way we make decisions or um how we prioritize things because as I said before like we just want to be the platform that's relatively agnostic right it's like just be the best place that people can trade these assets that get created in the same way that yeah like coinbase should just be the place where any type of token can just be bought or sold against USD that's like their core Core Business I think that's kind of true for us as well except um you know anything sort of like onchain value we want to be part of that right like any kind of onchain value no matter what the asset type we should be a the sort of the the fundamental place where people can can access that and discover that so um yeah just you know up up up down just just down for it you know just just just ready perfect um Z do you have any parting thoughts for listeners what does magic Eden look like in let's say six months to a year is there anything that you would want them to specifically look into that they would that they should look that they should do I maybe I this may be a little bit of alpha for your users it's like um I think the best surface that they should check out over the next six months is definitely the wallet because there's a lot there's a lot more coming yeah a lot more coming that I think people will be pretty delighted about so um if you're going to pick one thing to do on Magic Eden if you're not already on Magic Eden it's uh you should you should download The Magic Wallet perfect thank you very much for coming on yeah thanks for having me guys appreciate it yeah been a pleasure of Cheers we have teed up with the wormo foundation stewards of the wormo protocol the leading interop platform powering Crossing transfers for over 200 plus multi-chain dabs Wormhole isn't just a bridge it's the leading interoperability platform for multi-chain applications so go and claim your unique Wormhole nfts just for zerox research listeners today hit the link in the description to fill out a form and to prove that you've listened to today's episode and receive a p app you get an email over the coming weeks to claim your limited edition nft [Music]

========================================

--- Video 117 ---
Video ID: lSKkCE0x6wU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lSKkCE0x6wU
Title: Inside Eigenlayer's Vision for Decentralized Security | Sreeram Kannan
Published: 2024-05-23 18:02:36 UTC
Description:
In this episode, Founder Sreeram Kannan unpacks the present and future of EigenLayer. He dives into novel concepts like intersubjectivity, attributable security, and forkable tokens that underpin Eigenlayer's unique approach to enabling trust and security for decentralized protocols. Sreeram explains the EigenLayer economy of stakers, operators and actively validated services (AVSs), the market structure considerations for AVSs, and the key differences between Eigen staking and ETH staking. He also previews upcoming developments on Eigenlayer's roadmap such as payments and slashing. Enjoy!
- -
Follow Sreeram: https://x.com/sreeramkannan
Follow EffortCapital: https://x.com/EffortCapital
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Westie: https://twitter.com/WestieCapital
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.

Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://forms.clickup.com/45049775/f/1aytxf-16551/QZ3GT4GL9QGSUSUNRG
- -
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
- -
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.
Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:42 EigenLayer AVS, Mainnet, & Token Launch
9:11 Intersubjectivity Token Design
16:02 Wormhole Ad
16:40 Pear Ad
17:05 Avalanche Ad
17:47 Slashing Mechanism
35:59 Eigen Social Consensus Overload 
43:17 AVS Market Structure
52:49 Security Mining
58:29 Validator Bonds
1:03:10 3rd Token System 
1:14:59 Eigen Roadmap 
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 118 ---
Video ID: ZJI4Hl6Wzz4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZJI4Hl6Wzz4
Title: The End of NFT Scarcity | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-05-22 17:39:05 UTC
Description:
In this special analyst round table episode, Boccaccio is joined by the Page One crew - Boffin, Tervo, and Tolks - to discuss the evolving landscape of NFTs, tokenization, and memecoins. The conversation starts with the rise of fantasy sports-like games in the crypto space, such as Fantasy Top, and how they compare to traditional NFTs in terms of engagement and complexity. The group then delves into the shift from scarcity to abundance in the NFT market, the increasing importance of onchain reputation, and the potential for tokenizing real-world assets. They close out by discussing the current airdrop meta, the memecoin super cycle, and emerging experimental primitives like Rug.Fun. Enjoy!

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice.
- -
Special thanks to our sponsor LayerZero.
Stay up-to-date with the LayerZero Ecosystem by following: https://twitter.com/LayerZero_Labs
- -
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Tervo: https://x.com/tervoooo
Follow Tolks: https://x.com/_tolks
Follow Boffin: https://x.com/ninjaboffin
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:18 Background & Origin Story
7:30 State of Crypto Gaming
12:21 Dillution Mechanics of SocialFi Apps
34:03 Airdrop Meta
54:40 Onchain Assets
1:06:09 Onchain Bonds
1:06:47 LayerZero Segment: Radiant
1:10:07 Memecoin Supercycle
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Boccaccio, Ryan and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
so rug. fun it's like a competition between these tokens and the number one token in the pool and the number 10 token in the pool both get launched into a liquidity pool and the rest get rugged if there's 50,000 meme coins launched a day it's impossible to have any Edge in picking which one of these animal pictures from Myspace in 2006 is is go up sounds like a skill issue yeah turo they might put me in jail cuz you mentioned rug do fun on the podcast brother before we get into today's episode just a quick disclaimer the views expressed on this podcast by I or myself or any guests are their personal views and do not represent the views of any Associated organization nothing in this episode should be construed or relied upon as Financial technical tax legal or other advice all right let's jump into the episode what's up guys welcome back to another episode sort of ZX research uh we have something new and exciting going on today I'm joined by the page one crew bofin turo and tols um we're going to be trying out a new format like going forward we're going to do conversations with other analysts researchers participants Etc from time to time before we get started tols turbo bothen do you guys want to give a little background on yourselves and how you guys got started in the space I'm gonna have to okay uh I'll kick it off um I got into it I got into crypto in like 2021 fall 2021 I had been like crypto adjacent like I had some friends who were into it and I was just watching like nft sales basically and I just kept seeing like Punk selling for absurd amounts of money like the dumbest stuff in the world and I look at it and I was like okay like I'm just going to try this and if I if I lose this money like I probably deserve to lose this money and so one of my buddies from uh college was in Moon overlord's Discord and so he sent me an invite there and I basically just sat in the one from August until like perpetually um and so everything got shoveled through there just every pile of garbage and also every Diamond like it was September and and who went on to be the product designer of treasure was like just kept telling us to buy like treasure nfts and I was like dude I don't want I don't want to buy your your white words on black background like and then that took gol we basically saw like everything from there and it just kind of evolved from there yeah so I came in um obviously through Moon overlords Discord too that's kind of where we we all ended up meeting um but I came in kind of more through the uh daily fantasy sports and sports gambling Avenue I was playing um uh daily fantasy sports pretty much as the sole income leading up to co and then obviously Co happened and sports were shut down and I was very aware of crypto because um I mean through through gambling sites and and whatnot it was kind of a uh a background topic here and there and and I was never deeply interested in it until Co hit obviously Sports were done so um it was really kind of 2020 that I just fully dove in and and never looked back um so I've been aware aware of it since I'd say probably 2017 like I remember um some bch just showing up in my uh in my coinbase account at the time I was too dumb and just and soed and and never uh never decided to look deeper into into the space but yeah so I've uh I've been around kind of observing for I'd say probably close to seven years now um but fully since uh 2020 with football like fantasy football I guess fantasy sports wait I need to let bofin introduce himself and then we're going to dive into that I think it's kind of hilarious though that the law keeps adding on no okay like I've been in crypto since 20 12 like on and off where I was I think mining do coins I think I 2013 actually but no um I've been kind of on and off since 2012 2013 but I've been fulltime in crypto since 2020 or so when I kind of founded my own blockchain startup to do with like infrastructure and then sold that to a c and then in the meantime that's like my professional side but the Curiosity side was being on Twitter and CT and then I think as T and TOS have said joining kind of moonover server for nfts and kind of meeting the guys there and getting the market sentiment so on and so forth so yeah know that that a very quick background I thought the one was set up by you guys and not Moon Overlord but I guess you guys all joined and met there yeah yeah that's where uh where we where we all started started linking up there um and that's kind of how page one came together that's where when me and turve started uh talking in there and posting in there um I think we sent the first couple ones just in the Discord like in a separate Channel there to link out and then we started um publishing off of that yeah it was basically like it was like January 22 and I was talking to one of our buddies who was a mod about I was like Hey like if you if you leave for a week like if you're on vacation or something you come back and everybody's talking about something completely different and at the time there wasn't I guess there might have been and I just wasn't as exposed to it but there I feel like there wasn't nearly as much independent crypto reporting in 2021 2022 as there was even in like even in the bare Market it's like there were a lot of people like like nft threaders and stuff started popping up a lot more and when we started page one I was just trying to make like the thing that I wanted and it wasn't really available um there were definitely some people like lucky Trader was still around and they kind of they grew out of daily fantasy sports too um and so they're still around Tyler and Logan are awesome and but I was like What if I just wrote like a weekly recap I think I started off as like daily and it was like okay that's impossible but then eventually it evolved and then we picked up tols he started doing everything that wasn't uh just pictures I was the picture guy I'm not you know I don't think about defi protocols and stuff like that's that's his realm and then a couple months after that probably like March or April we picked up bofin and he's our esoteric essayist um but yeah that's kind of how page one started yeah I um I feel like I definitely agree with you that there's this been this popup of like Freds even like if you just look at airdrop Fring it wasn't this big and now it's like information asymmetry is getting so so small since everything is just out there all the time um talking about esoteric writings both and I read your I guess like your gaming essay criticism and I kind of wanted like we already talked about this in DMS but I want to ask you like where you see how you would divide um current games out there right now cuz like I think a fantasy dotop is a as a game not a social fight I feel like a lot of people claim it's social fight I don't think so and like then there's projects like pixels and then Prime like parallel TCG how do you spend your time looking into these things do you think it's like worth looking into everything or like what's your mental model behind that that's all good question I think starting with fantasy top I think it can be both it can be social F and the game at the same time because like gamification I think is kind of inbuilt into it where you have to tweet out and you have to collect cards and stuff I'm not personally on there um I think I I passed I'm very early on to be H it to be like oh it's just Twitter CT people how big can it get and that's kind of biit me in the ass right now but I think aside from that it's it's interesting because it creates a sort of connection between the person who is the card so to speak the Creator or the K if you want to call them that and then the fans subscribers collectors or whatever so there like an it's a positive enforcement Loop sort of going into it where hey you got to be active otherwise we get points so on and so forth and everything incentivized it's like a nice kind of loop going on there and that can be one type of game and it's like a social Community game but then like you said there's other games as well like there's pixels there's parallel and prime the bigger exles but I think there's also like a third set of games people don't talk about that's like more like um on chain games so you have I think Redstone is one of them and there's other stuff like you have Sky Strife you have uh there another one there's one reason today I think it's called like D D or D yr D E A which basically like you have to connect to a different kind of optimism chain and it's like an onchain gaming but it's very it's cheaper kind of to use and that's also interesting because onchain gaming isn't explored as much as people would like it to be if that makes sense but then the background the background or the alternative side of it is it's it's it's too simple in that regard or like it's too Niche for people to even know about these things and that's coming from just like a lot of noise everywhere and all sorts of things like I said like threading is huge now you have air drops air drop threaders you have like normal threaders you have at one point there was also wh threaders if we've seen that but the Divide between them is interesting because you you see things like you have web three gam which I say are not that good it's basically taking strategies which already work in gaming before and in the bad way and then putting them in web 3 which people already hate so you're combining the hatred of AAA gaming and how the companies already monetized and then adding them to a to a tech which people also don't like and that's just giving everything a bad example but then you have other stuff which kind of use blockchain stuff on the background and then power it in a way that kind of makes sense like parallel but because it's got that dirty blockchain word attached to it it's not going to do well in the social Norm so to speak so I mean it's interesting right like there's there's so much stuff going on but there's not enough attention on it and the attention that you do get you get like YouTubers like JN I think his name is where he will kind of talk about being a gamer and tring out actual crypto games and most videos are completely fair and valid where the games are not working they not online or like they need nfts to go into them and that is kind of the lens that people view crypto games from because a lot of people realize that games in crypto aren't isolated to just games in crypto they also have to compete with the actual big games like the the IND the Indie titles or the triaa games and if your product is not kind of lining up to that expectations of the norm they've established and it's just kind of really cumbersome to use and not that good and then you add in the blockchain and be like Oh but you need this nft as a battle pass or you need this nft as a land to kind of work people are going to do that and at the same time they used to cost so much anymore like it's all relatively dead right now but no I think it's it's it's yeah I mean that's that's my yapping about the entire topic yeah I mostly agree with you I um apart from the onchain gaming bit I tried out a couple of those games like I spent yesterday and like I I guess like all weekend to play sky strife and it's just too simple because I think it's like all meant to be on chain so it is too simple but I also don't want to midwit something at the very very beginning of like a narrative because it might just end up working out and they might be able to build like more complex stuff like you said they're like making it super cheap now Redstone has like I think it's cheaper than l2s um which is good like that's what you want but I'm still like I guess going to midwit it I don't know I I mean I don't know if TLS turbo you guys play any onchain games or if you're like interested in these like new fully onchain games at all but I just I can't seem to play them for longer than an hour max yeah I mean personally I'm not um I was never really the biggest the gamer growing up so um but I I I mean I keep eyes I try and keep eyes on the space I mean as far as as you know kind of like funding and development to mind share goes like the Mind share that that gaming has now you know obviously a lot of people throughout really the past three to four years have been really excited about just kind of the crypto gaming sector in general and we obviously had actually come out of that but really the past I'd say year year and a half two years I mean you have Prime which has I'd say a good amount of uh of Mind share but outside of that I mean it's been relatively quiet um but with I mean the axi example like if there is something that that sticks like that you see how quickly the momentum can grow so um it's something definitely to keep eyes on but um personally like right now there's nothing um really outside of parallel Prime that that has my attention unless I'm missing something buffing um no I mean you have like other games that people like this like um shrap was the other shooter that people talk about as mavia mavia I think how we pronounced that basically in in a nicer way of saying it's like a reskinned Clash of Clans but with tokens in it like you you have stuff like that but like there is no no not and pixels obviously have pixel as well isn't um Dead Drop is the one what's the guy's name bofin guy yes and that one's kind of interesting um it's I think the onchain games like that type of game just has a limited Market even in regular gaming you know it's like the most popular games are ones that are just fun to play easy to pick up because even with parallel it's like there are a lot of people who are actually very passionate about playing parallel and very much enjoy it who you know it's like I see them on Twitter sometimes and it's not like these people are you know onchain adeps like me and like like they're more focused on just parallel or just this that the other thing and I think that's where you'll get to see more development in onchain gaming is when there are just more options for people to play um but I think the comparison of fantasy top to a game versus social fi is very accurate just because like it's very much like daily fantasy sports in that like because you see like de and Andy and them talking about it and then you see people who are running like these spreadsheets and stuff and it's all the same type of thing as daily fantasy sports so in in many ways it's closer to that than it is social th but it's you know it kind of mixes it it's I'm really interested in seeing how it develops just because like there's a lot of there's so much power in the Creator's hands right now it's and like they're they've done a good job so far of managing Supply like that type of thing I think the mechanics that are in place it's not you know it's not like I've conducted a economic study of this game economy and that's kind of bof in steel more than is mine but I've been impressed with the so far lack of dilution but it's like as they continue to add more people in as they continue to develop more tournaments this that the other thing it'll be very interesting to see just how the economy develops in it because I don't there's there's so much power in them being able to tweak something and then it changes all these Dynamics but at the same time a lot of people so far aren't like like I said the people who have these fantasy sports like style spreadsheets and they're analyzing like oh the variance of this card and the inflation it's like I saw de talking about these things I was like dude I have no idea what this means but there's a level of complexity to it that gives it the opportunity for it to be somebody's main focus and I tweeted like the other day that the nft market is kind of at least you know like the nft market as we knew it in 201 21 2022 even into 2023 like when I was writing page one it's like you can go back and read these page 1 nft Recaps and there's probably 15 projects a week between updates new projects and upcoming launches and largely they're very similar you know it's like okay on somebody's doing this type of thing and somebody's got a different skin on it over here but at some point it was kind of boring and I so I tweeted that that volume and those participants have gone towards things that are more complex that are more interesting because they're more complex like fantasy top and friend Tech and also towards things that are more interesting because they're simpler like meme coins and it's like there's you know there's some level of complexity in nft markets because like if you're Cyrus and you know absolutely all of the board ape traits and it's like oh I see this one in nfx in the pool and I know that this is a rare trait and I can sell that it's like but that's almost as deep as like being an nft Pro goes whereas with fantasy top there's more things that you can look at there's more opportunity for somebody to remain interested in it over time time versus nfts where it's really just like you know Meme coins with pictures and there's only so much you can do there before you need to provide users with something more interesting yeah I agree I mean we'll talk about nfts a little bit I think later um but I kind of want to touch up on that thing you said about the dilution and how they made the card Dynamics work like they're basically running back FIFA Ultimate Team but as like fantasy football right cuz the pack opening system is exactly the same like the RAR Etc and I think like it's also I'm not sure if it's the right word to use but it's kind of like gotcha mechanics and both of them was talking about this um I think two days ago basically like verifying on chain about like Rarities and stuff and that's kind of what you were mentioning as well turbo where it's like you don't know they might tweak something and then it affects the whole balance and we saw that happen with crypto valleys where like it died out because they changed the sage mechanics and that's kind of like one issue with these I'd say like really like Fast dying out game five projects like I'm not sure how long fantasy. toop will last um like agreeing I agreed with you both and like initially I was like oh this is like very CT native I this probably doesn't do that well for that long um but like these quick I don't want to say quick but basically like def some form of Def elements wrapped up in pixels these types of games that like you expect to die down relatively quickly at least like maybe two months three months they have to like they need those dilution mechanics can really like kill them especially if something B like the dev tweaks one thing and people are like okay well this is not worth my time anymore but in terms of like is it more interesting than nfts 100% at least like you get to do something with it that's it yeah it's something new and and different so I mean that alone is is worth you know something I mean me and turf talk all the time like you know just some type of minor addition I forget exactly how you pH it phrase it iteration yeah some type of sufficiently iterative it's what we saw with nfts how they kind of you know they would iterate and then it got to a point where they can't and it's not to say that you know what fantasy top has done is like you know the the greatest thing ever but but it's an iteration and then something else can be built on top of that so I'm glad to see that that is at least you know it's it's a different game in a sense that we haven't really seen it and I agree there are certain you know dilution elements and mechanics that in I mean really like kind of similar to in-game economies like that stuff needs to be meticulously managed because one wrong tweak like you said Bach can kind of um I mean it can can tarnish the the whole ecosystem so um it is something different and and it's interesting um but yeah I mean as far as kind of like the defi elements in in the spreadsheet aspects go like it gets to the point where you can start modeling it out and then obviously the the blast rewards and gold and everything else in there add a lot of different elements that that people are figuring out so I think that's kind of why it's exciting as well is there's kind of you know three four five different mechanics and in fact that go into the equation and a lot of it is kind of a guessing game so that's what you know gets people excited when you can you know it's kind of your assumptions verse the other Market participants assumptions without a lot of known details so in that sense it's it's exciting and we'll see you know where it goes over the the next few weeks and and a blast eventual launch and how that'll you know impact stuff and the volume there but in the in the short term it's it's exciting and it's something different and I'm always for exploring that and um supporting that at least in the short term yeah yeah those guys also made they made 9 mil last week apparently like just based off these which is ridiculous like these social F whatever consumer social F game five products they they they've been making bank fch fch too yeah yeah well frch is another I mean it's it's interesting that I mean the token's been down over the past couple days but I mean it was kind of interesting how obviously the 100% air drop like I mean I love racer for that everything he he did was was awesome there but it was kind of like when I was anticipating the launch and then it's kind of like this is just a pull to token like I don't know how much you can go up because the market is so I feel like kind of the participants left in the market like they're so used to what that entails and generally you know that entails the the main token just going down only because it's essentially farmed so um it's a difficult balance that's for sure and I mean it's you know a lot of this stuff like we said have we've seen before yeah um like throughout the bear those pool to like whatever form of rapping they did on pool two mechanics it was like oh this is like actually not pool two anymore we're doing like V free fre farming or whatever it's just been down only we don't have that nobody believes in stuff at this point and it's just been pain for all of those types of coins I think on that point it's interesting that you mentioned crypto valleys and how it died very very quickly compared to everything else and I was having this conversation with a friend I think a while back and the idea or the the my well the main core of it basically came down to every single cycle or every single time there's this new tech which is novel and it's interesting to use and the next time someone tries it after hasone already tried it just doesn't work so you had the three3 with oh go super absurdly high because it was the first of its kind you had um DF defi kingdoms was the initial one that went really high you had I think Yen was I think the first kind of pool two type yield farming thing that went really high as well and every time you get a reskin of these things and like oh but rather than doing some X than burning something we're doing Revenue sh so on and so forth people are sort of used to the idea that it's not novel anymore and that's why I think it's almost like the the curtain has been lifted so to speak and every time someone does the same thing again it just doesn't work as much as it should because people already know why how it should work or how it already does work so like I said I think I mentioned it a couple days ago that there's a lack of innovation in cryptospace as a whole that makes things interesting and because there is nothing happening like there is nothing to kick start people kind of coming and showing off so defi kickstarted the entire like 2017 wave like could argue then you had nfts part of the entire thing we're like oh it's kind of it's pictures on the blockchain but hey we can do token gating we can do X we can do y we can do Zed we have like royalties or creators and all these different things and then you had open additions and all these different things and recently there's just been nothing like that it's always been just reskins of stuff that's existing it's like oh yeah like we have reaking and stuff like that but that's not interesting for most people right it's like it's interesting people who are Crypton native who get yield on the assets they already have but then for the person coming in why should they bother if that make sense the only thing that's happening right now well the collective was like me salana or base with pump. fun right you have all these different things happening so if there's something new that's kind of even somewhat interesting and it kind of gets mind share it's going to be much more interesting but right now because all these things have been tried and tested and by a test and I mean mostly gone down any new attempts of the same thing is not going to go as far as people would like it to yeah I I think that's a large portion why I like this entire kind of social fi like name started taking off is partially because it was something that kind of hadn't really been done before and obviously I mean forecaster stats and what they've built are are amazing and um frch like I mean it's there's some novelty like in the platform there and you know the benefit that goes to graders and then fantasy top too but I kind of feel like everybody wants to I don't know make the social five thing kind of happen because it hasn't really been done um but really when you kind of you know strip away some of the pieces a lot of it looks you know similar to some of the the Defi and you know kind of aspects that that we've seen before but um it's like I said it's still exciting and it's something different um and foraster I mean turve can speak on on foraster more than than any of us here but um what they're doing there I think is probably the most sustainable by far just because you know I mean obviously when you put off the token and there is no token that's you know tied to the name obviously people associate djen with it um but that gives it more more staying power and I mean some of the user metrics they have there I mean they speak for themselves so I think that's the the most exciting um social fi thing to me right now yeah and I think one of the one of the overarching themes that are kind that's rather new is all of this is kind of connected to creating an onchain reputation in a way that people didn't do as much in like 2021 or 2022 like you know there's what's his name the bread guy who was uh tracking people dumping their friend and that this that the other thing but farcaster is definitely one of the most interesting for that just because if you're in a channel and they're getting to the point where like you can gate channels based on nfts held or this that the other thing based on your FID your forecaster ID and then you look at friend Tech and it's like they have the snapshot of Key Club holders or key holders and all of those things are kind of building towards and then yeah for fantasy top does it as well where it's like you can go on the leaderboard and it's like I can see like my friends in the in the top 20 like Twitter accounts that I know and I think that is cool because it adds a level of transparency I guess and it's like obviously there are still ways where it's like if you want to be unknown on the blockchain you can but I think we're reaching a level of normalization of onchain reputation that provides another layer of opportunity for people to create and distribute things on chain to people who they have a reason to give it to you know it's like and dgen is dgen and other forecaster tipping tokens are very interesting in that regard because like with a traditional meme coin like somebody can go in and buy up the supply like I tweeted two or three days ago or something about how like Yes Meme coins are fully diluted but a lot of them are just like you know in Insider Fest at the beginning and it's like it's kind of it's kind of necessary almost in a way to break something out from amongst all the possibilities but now with d gen it's like you know I've gone on Plenty of rants on forecaster about the Tipping culture and like people you know you need to like speak with your tips for what is right because anytime you provide Human Social incentive for profit it's like it's just going to take out it's just going to bring out the worst in them yeah classic but the fact that dgen is distributed to people who are actually doing something is you know it's almost like a um like social Mining and I think Pac moon on blast does this as well where it's like depending on your content creation and I'm not I haven't been super into the blast scene um but depending on like your content creation you get you know distributions and that type of thing and the potential for like you know anom airdropping all his key holders keys to the club that he made and it's like those things provide opportunity for distribution that we were that it kind of started with like airdrops 2 nft collections you know and that's the same type of thing where it's like okay instead of picking your distribution based off like this are artificial like oh did you use this swap or whatever like were you farming Z K sync and blah blah it's like you can actually put more thought into how you're Distributing things and how you're rewarding People based on onchain reputation and I think that that's going to be something that we continue to see develop through all of these things forecaster fantasy top friend Tech Etc yeah I agree with the distribution mechanics I feel like the NFD airdrop wave that we had like a couple months ago was the first iteration of that and then now people are realizing like okay maybe Actually I don't even think people have realized that it might make more sense to do this to like because social F users especially those who are active are like people who are the most onchain and I feel like that's who you want to I mean we can talk I don't know if that's who you want to drop your tokens to I feel like every time I have people on the podcast were talking about air drops but um people love tokens yeah people love tokens yeah what do you guys think how do you think like the recent I guess like airdrop meta has been working out because that's like where I was going to be headed but I'd rather not say the same thing that I've said over the past on yeah I think me and tokes talked about this well a couple weeks ago as well Well we I'm like a hardcore my lady and Tok like a hardcore madlad so it's like different chains but then madlads has been one of the most on of air dropped collection and my ladies are sort of kind of gaining the Mind share of the sense that hey it's a my lady owned protocol we don't sell air drops and stuff like that and a lot of the people I think now or a lot of the um Developers for Protocols are sort of realizing well not realizing they're experimenting with the idea that if we can kind of Target these cult like pfp collections where people historically haven't sold their nfts or like they like the art or like they have a certain allocation to them or whatever that's going to gain more mind share because looking from 2021 to now it's like most of the collections are dead right like the they most of the nft have gone down like down only and there's been a very select few that have survived and have even gone up in value and all of us kind of have those nfts right now like you have puppet know your noddings were recently hot right now but like regardless like this it's got this vibe to them madlads has always been I think the premier salana nft and then you have kind of my lady which is kind of it's literally like an ethereum cult so to speak with like ramilia rilio you have rad Bros and all these different things so you have these entire incentives kind of working as a collection of okay these guys don't do a certain thing that expected of most people so they won't sell the airdrop so on and so forth and even pudy Penguins is the other one that has a lot of D5 Builders and have gotten other drops before so I think toes and out I think the rest of the stuff to that as well yeah I mean that's that's one of the first reasons that I was so bullish on madli is just CU I mean really the idea was that they're building the backpack exchange and eventually you could potentially get the backpack airdrop and then um there was a ton of other I mean the jto um Wormhole there's Dimension there's been plenty and that was kind of the entire thesis behind that and it goes back to what tur was talking about the onchain social and I mean aird drops they're never going to be perfect like you know you give people tokens like free money essentially out of thin air like it's going to be some of it's going to be sold but what I think a lot of people are realizing is that there's you know certain nft communities that I would say it's not even so much about the community but maybe like the standing in the broader like CT Community like they have more more reach you know they have more social capital and it it kind of becomes like a compounding effect to reward those type of people because of you know the the reach that they have and again like the social capital and it's just better for for the token overall so I think work generally in the earlier stage of kind of nfts being used as a distribution mechanism um and then going back to what Turf said again about you know forecaster and and fantasy top and all this you know the onchain identity like all of that stuff is still kind of in the earliest stages to me and obviously you know we want you certain levels of of privacy but you can have you know certain addresses that you have Assets in and that that's you know like a public wallet like like an ens and it's kind of like an iteration on top of that to me um and being used as as a distribution method like it just it makes all the sense in the world and it's way better in my opinion like orders of magnitude better than um you know farming some random you know some l2s some random decks like and rewarding the users who are on their cyal swapping over and over and over like yeah you can have multiple nfts but at least there was it it's a higher barrier to entry than you know like the industrial cyal farming yeah I think the I agree with you like anytime people are complaining about air drop Farmers on those like let's say on ZK sync or other like Bridges and stuff it's mainly I don't think people care that much about like the individual uh Cil Farmers those can get weeded up pretty easily it's like the industrial ones that have they've bought like 400 Mac Minis and they're like clicking um using selenium and stuff and like faking these transactions really well or paying yeah I mean even paying people like I I don't think you know I mean it's talked about here and there but I don't think people realize the level of I mean you saw it with the Stark net like you can just look at their transactions and user after the token launch like you know the the l2s and and the stuff like that like people don't realize that a lot of those metrics you know it's there's serious Capital behind the ability to to farm this stuff so yeah using some type of onchain identity and I think the purest form that we have of that right now is certain nft collections so it just makes all the sense in the world that they'll continue certain ones will continue to be rewarded through distribution because I mean at least if I was you know Distributing a token like there would be certain that that's the best way I can think of to you know distribute it and again like there's no perfect way to give out you know x amount of essentially free money like some of it's going to be sold like you know it's a marketing expense whatever but that there has to be a better way than than what we've seen yeah um both and you mentioned something interesting nfts have been down only I this is like when I asked about what should I ask turbo talks and both and this was like 30% of the questions is what you guys think of um e nfds what we think if they'll like and I guess like my main I also have an add-on question to this aside from the general crowd like Mal ladyes puppets these I don't want to say esoteric but slightly esoteric nfts have been doing really well um and like the traditional I don't know how to describe it but just like pfp nfts where it's like I don't know good example like the gods or UTS like these forms of of nfts they just haven't been doing particularly well what do you guys think about that like how do you see e nfts evolving over the or like in general all nfts evolving over the say six 12 months I think one of the so off that tweet about where nfts nft Market volume and participants move to things that are both more interesting more complex and simpler I think a lot of the projects like I was saying like if you go read through page one it's like you know mid 2022 a lot of these projects like wanted to be like a street wear brand or this that the other thing and it's like at the end of the day that's and so my follow-up tweet was that a lot of these a lot of nfts were simple ideas that are masquerading as complex ideas and it's like when you're building your community around like oh we want to be the next Disney like we're going to do this that the other thing we have this big road map and it's like those the road map nfts are really the ones that we've seen die out you know it's like we don't see that you don't see road maps anymore really and it's like the things that have been successful are the ones that never promised you anything and that you know had their own communities form around them regard L of how insane they are Pudgies is a different example because they actually executed very well on the complexities that they said they were going to do and they're kind of building out that environment but at the same time that's also about the fact that they had the real community and it's like what we really saw is this you know the ones that were selling you a vision are nobody's buying that anymore and so it's really just the ones that have people who are interested in them regardless of price because if you look at pudy it's like they were down bad um what's what's his name former founder Cole you know sold them and then on the rise back up it's like Luca bought them but when he bought them it's like even then there wasn't that many people who believed in them it was it was a group that was formed around these core Believers and with whether or not we're going to get we're ever going to get back to the point where like because when I got into crypto like I was sitting on icy tools I had the icy tools mint Page open like every single day just at work like just waiting to see what would pop up and it's like those that has transitioned that is now pumped out fun you know and so that's where that volume's kind of gone and the things that we see take off now I mean I don't even remember what was the last winning nft mint on eth like um Pandora I say would be the other one right yeah except it went down only after that exactly it's like um and it's like you know 404s are an interesting thing and I feel like we'll probably get back to playing around with that idea but the nfts that have been successful Salon nfts have been down only a lot of eth nfts have been down only and we've kind of made a transition towards ordinals being where you can store you know a just something that's just a profile picture and I think that that probably continues I do think there's a lot of opportunity like you can feel it on base and on blast like the opport for a mint season to happen in terms of like something just going crazy but those are both for different reasons as well it's like on base these a lot of the communities for the nfts that have been successful are formed on farcaster around actual communities like anchang gas like tiny base toads frogs like um far cats was one there's there's a bunch of other farcaster native nft Collections and then blast is kind of like you know just because blur is great at incentivization and these types of things and I'm very curious to see how that happen how that progresses once we get into past the first airdrop because I think it's you know I would be incredibly surprised if they didn't do a season two type uh points for program deal like they did with blur but I am skeptical that we will ever see a mint season C you know allaha 2021 2022 on eth M net I think a lot of that volume will either move towards it it moves towards things that are more interesting like social fi it moves towards things that are simpler like meme coins and then it moves towards ordinals where it debatably makes more sense to create a collection that you want to kind of stand the test of time and that's I think the Art Market is a different beast and we've yet to see a you know a huge amount of the Art Market move from eth to ordinals or to Soul or to l2s well besides Zora Zora L2 is very cool there's a lot lot of artists on there um but a lot of the art infrastructure is still on eth Main net yeah and I I think it'll probably just be more of the same more built around community and like actual Psychopathic cult like holders and who are just passionate about this thing for you know next to no reason it's not because there's a road map and I don't think I would be very surprised if we ever made it back to the point where road map nfts are popular yeah I I definitely agree with that and I mean to the Providence thing I'm more bullish on like ordinals and Ethan FS are kind of stuck in like between a rock and a hard place because like Turf said like you would think that the if it's you know a pfp for or some nft picture and you want the Providence like ideally I mean like you can make the case that I mean BTC is obviously the oldest chain it's more lendy so you would assume that stuff would move there if the argument is Providence and I do think that the Providence argument has a lot of weight because I think there's a reason that uh nfts on l2s never really ever took off despite the numerous attempts and you know people kind of waiting for certain aspects of eth to move to uh l2s and it's because the high value stuff there's no high value nfts on l2s because you trust the Providence of eth and you don't have to have trust assumptions that come with l2s so if that's the reasoning to why they haven't been on l2s then why would they not move to BTC because you would you know think you have higher trust assumptions there um so as far as eth nfts like pfp wise like I agree that I don't really ever see you know kind of the wave that we have come back because I do think um I mean coins have captured a lot of that um what I do see kind of expanding eth nft wise is going back to the programmability that BTC can't afford nfts and stuff that has been talked about forever about you know you see arcade doing some interesting stuff with like the tokenization and lending against you know Rolexes and luxury items and things like that like that stuff is very slowly making its way on chain and the volume's going up and then you know you have all the pie in the sky ideas of essentially like an nft is just you know it's it's a wrapper of a one-on-one item so you know whether that's like you know a car house deed whatever like I'm still kind of a I guess like again like pie in the sky like believer in that stuff and that's more where I think eth nfts are headed to where you bring higher value um I guess assets on chain and then you you know you have the The Lending and and borrowing and all of that built around it and that type of programmability is still yet to kind of be facilitated on BTC so that's kind of like the market to where I would see eth nfts going if that makes sense more of like the functionality and then the programmability around them verse the strict um you know pictures or or or gambling kind of those ends of the barbell Spectrum are you know move into mem coins and then I'd say BTC and then everything else in the middle around programmability and tokenization and rwa type stuff that is still really good on eth because it's you know flexibility and programmability yeah I um you know that take the Providence take that's also what suzu talked about like three episodes in a row on the ox St thing and I do agree with him it's like if you're gonna and I agree with you as well it's like if you're gonna hold a high value nftd you want to hold it on BTC or E like Solana's great but I don't want to hold it on Solana I don't know why um it just feels more patriotic if it's on you're not turo you brought up Zora and they also have like kind of a salana equivalent drip house and I was bringing up um I brought up nfts on a work call and people were like surprisingly excited for Zora and drip house and that's new wave of like I guess creators selling their I don't know if you call these open editions as well but like these Mass um identical FS on these new apps I don't really see the vision but I mean apparently like as far as I've seen zor is doing incredible volume they they're they're earning quite a like quite a lot in fees as well but I I don't know like I feel like I'm mid witting I just don't really see why it's that popular I think a lot of there's been kind of a shift in and like you can see it with eth I don't know which term I want to use for this like but like eth heads just do eths on foraster and there's kind of been a shift from like onchain scarcity to like onchain abundance and I think that that is kind of is what's powering a lot of like drip house and Zora is ease of access for both creators and collectors it's it is interesting and I think we will continue to kind of move towards this onchain abundance idea and because it kind of started in like early 2023 with the open Edition meta and just artists being more willing to do things like that where it's like okay maybe you're seeing this shift where it's like artists are not as um hesitant to Mint things because like I remember cuz I collect me and bofin both collect a bunch of stuff just as just for fun and it's like yesterday I minted something from Aman it was in the um art of the metaverse collection and it's just an open addition but I think you see more people who are just happy to collect things from people they enjoy and I think that that's a culture will kind of move towards or we're seeing movement towards where it's like it creates more connection between the creators and the collectors when it's more accessible and and again it goes back to onchain reputation stuff where it's like okay I can see that you on drip house I can see that you're on Zora and it gives creators another layer of distribution again and I think that the idea that things need to be scarce to have value is kind of being shifted in the nft world yeah anytime you can have fun when you're collecting stuff I guess that might be the reason that people like it um I I signed up for some drip out stuff I went on there it was mostly like Alec Monopoly type of art when I logged in maybe it's improved a bit um but I don't think I like spent enough time maybe to figure it out yeah I haven't either just dove in enough to fully understand drip house but it's like there's dgen poet who has basically like kind of made a career off his drip house stuff and it's cool to see people who again it's like with fantasy topic gives you something where you can buy into this and follow along with it it's like people log into drip house every day and like are just happy to collect a piece from the person that they enjoy and but yeah it's like moving towards onchain fun you know I think there's a lot of that yeah tols you brought up um putting I guess like assets on chain I know that like you guys wrote something on figal assets do you want to like kind of give your page one feces on this um I disclaimer the only like fital asset stuff that I looked into was what you mentioned which is like watches and stuff on chain that was for like real world assets just to see like how well they're doing they're not doing particularly well and Mina swap which is supposedly like meant to launch and it was like difficult to even acquire information on them yeah the the fidal piece is is bofin so I'll pass it to him in a minute because I'm um I'm generally like you Bach I'm not too much too deep into that um that Arena um but as far as like you know the asset tokenization stuff like again the volumes are they're relatively small but just the fact that you know you're using the programmability of of eth in like a in a global distributed fashion to wherever you are in the world to you know put a a Rolex or luxury item on chain and you can borrow against that with obviously you need the the liquidity on the other side and somebody to to provide the loan but the potential that that can be done in you know say two minutes three minutes verse what that would take to take that physical item somewhere and and get it appraised and and you know alone against um so that space I'm I have eyes on it like I said the volumes are they're they're relatively small but that's something that that I'm monitoring as you know as um as time goes on because I think that that space is only going to grow um but as far as yeah like the actual fidal aspect B and I'm sure you have some some thoughts on that yeah sure um I think digital assets are sort of interesting in in the light that there there's two ways you can go down and you can go down the the hyper luxury route which a lot of the web 3 startups are trying to go down in like you have like a merch you have um 9d Double C by G money and all the other things which are very vigital and interconnected I think is the entire point they're going for where each garment kind of lives in its own network and then he can talk to people who have the same thing and connect with them and then on the other side you have like putting ual assets on chain so like we have arcade by cash team where you have like your Rolexes you have your Pokemon Collections and then I think at one point they had like all of these um the Supreme T's and they had like an entire collection of them which they kind of they put on chain and then you have the other the the bigger opportunity which I think tradire is going to push for forwards with like assets like you have stocks you have like your Commodities like gold and other stuff on chain and this all sort of leans into the programmable nature of eth right which other platforms or other chains can't really compete with in the sense that the biggest developer Market which is also on eth and its l2s while also having the bigger sort of audience base in that regard and tokenization is interesting in that manner because you can also look into the stuff as okay so we have arcade you have all the other thing is that a meaningful volume for the idea because the first ones to do it at the same time they're doing it in a way that's very front end if someone was to kind of develop these Solutions like the let's say a Rolex second market like loan service right what I want to call that but if they did it in a way that made everything kind of on the back end and all you had to do was essentially authenticate or S send your Rolex and someone authenticates it and says Yep this is this Rolex and we can kind of get you this value and do you want a loan on this or not that's collateral and just do that without touching on blockchain stuff but on the back end it's all blockchain authenticated and back I think that's going to be a big opportunity in the in a very similar regard to how I just see blockchain in general where it's very good for the provence stuff but then the provence stuff needs to need Providence if that makes sense where I I why okay so like I've said in the FAL piece where like if I have a Nike shoe and I have like a rare Travis Scott Travis Scott um Nike I can't remember the names now say say have rare shoe unless I'm selling that shoe to someone else or unless I'm collecting It For the Love of the Game I don't really care if it's authenticated or not because I'm wearing it it doesn't matter if I am accessing it or from on the financial markets that's when I start caring about all the other stuff like that so if you're just doing stuff for the fun of it I don't think it really matters but there is a growing demand for a market that wants more assets and wants more liquidity in general and that's where I think tokenization really really shines through for all other stuff where you have like R comic books you have like your shoes you have watches you have paintings and all the other stuff and nfts have sort of proven this concept a lot with digital art and and like its physical counterparts so to speak so tokenization in that regard is very it's very new like it's not being experimented enough in like of course we can talk about oh we have like stock trading for 24/7 but done on the blockchain so it can't be fudged with but that's not inherently interesting if that makes sense like the stock markets just open up for a longer time that's how cryptos have always been but the programmable nature of it like we've talked before like you have the ERC 404s where you can have like a full token as an entire nft but then you can have the same token into hundreds of thousand different units which you can kind of split apart and give to other people and then kind of make an economy out of that that's going to be more interesting and that kind of goes into the more experimental nature of what eth always has been about yeah that makes sense um what do you think will like how do you think tokenization will I guess develop over the next I don't know if you have like a strong take on this but I agree with you I I'm not like a huge fan of tokenized stocks and like frankly I don't think anybody is if you look at the volume that they do it's very low like nobody at this currently let's say it might get better eventually but right now it's not really particularly popular but I like that like I remember when I first read about minus Swap and I don't know if this exactly fits into Figo tokenized assets um but I was like semi excited because it's I feel like we talked about this like all throughout the Pod but it was new and and it's like kind of exciting um but I'm not sure like where we go from here what do you think is like or like what do you think is like a valid attempt at tokenizing more and more collectible assets um I mean okay there there there's a really there's really PC take there really hot take right and also start with the with the with the more D digestible take right now I think after Co once you had like all the things shooting up in price like Pokémon cards and mag Gathering Cards and Comics and the stuff that sort of died down to preco levels because people didn't have anything to do right they didn't they knew of these things but they weren't forced to do them in that regard so kind of tokenizing hobbyist collections will always be very Niche and it won't hit mainstream because those things are mainstream as a whole which was the entire point of kind of nfts as social social status item in the metap I think that was the the go-to nft in 2021 to kind of have the entire things where like that hasn't worked out in the way it has because as we already know like the metaverse isn't huge or like there isn't anything that kind of gains Peak popularity You Can Count Roblox that's popular but that's kind of the metaverse without nfts and working fine for the Roblox company right the more cynical take or the more hot take for tokenization both Theses would essentially be that the traditional Finance system is very exploitative and it is very very um deceptive by its nature but because of how it works it's sort of like a if you keep it hush I keep it hush as well and then we can both profit from this if you were to add tokenization of assets and stocks like that it sort of creates a a medium that can be manipulated and it can't it can call people out on the [ __ ] right where you can be like you have stuff in Tradition F like dark pools which basically is semi Anonymous trading about like how we can like dump our stocks very quickly without notifying the people or other other participants so on and so forth and people are always trying to look stuff like that and then you have the now defunct London interbanking exchange rate or the liel as it was which was in massive scandals back back when they were like fudging the numbers up on how like Bank mortgage and stuff work like I said very boring stuff in that regard but then it sort of opened up an entire gauge way to the stuff that we don't even know how the systems work and they can be colluded with other participants to basically get the most money out if you were to put these things on chain right and then you were trading off of that the blockchain as a whole can't be manipulated and it would then act as a sort of trust verifier or like a transaction verifier that isn't controlled by anyone one and that's a lot more interesting to kind of work with and then you have companies like JP JP Morgan having like their entire blockchain n having entire blockchain areas which they are building like one of them is called um Onyx which basically is getting these assets on chain and then for these high high net worth individuals or businesses where they basically say hey put your stuff on the blockchain and then we will B basically do the kyc and all the other stuff for that and they're going to be getting more and more market share I know black rock is doing the exact same thing I know Fidelity was also kind of working on this on the on the back end where they basically want to put all of their assets on chain as a verification purpose tools rather than having to manage databases or collude with other parties so as a sort of no [ __ ] filter against other people who Al want who also want to make more money in that PVP setting tokenization makes a lot more sense than it would and this would never affect 99% of participants right it's only for the people back then on the more hobbyist side is still a very Niche thing which I mean we will gain traction don't get me wrong like once we have when we have periods of high net or high generation making of money like let's say we have the co stimul the co stim check as we call it was a thing where people made lots of money then you had like the ball Market before that things like you'll always have people spending money on hobby items and that's a fair enough like business model to have but it's it won't be as mainstream as people want it to be because those things inherently AR mainstream perfect um yeah you know that thing you mentioned about verifiability in the blockchain and like how black rock and fidelia are moving on chain I um actually like I was look there's quite a few countries issuing Bonds on CH now this isn't related to verifiability but it's more like the other uh tokenization like feces which is like liquidity which is something that you also mentioned um and there's it's just like have Singapore you have Italy moving their Bonds on Chia I read about that yeah I think it was like Philippines and maybe also Hong Kong um also a few companies as well before we move on to more questions let's have a quick word from radiant thanks to our fantastic sponsor layer zero all right guys for this week's layer zero segment uh we have Isaac the director of project management and Communications at radiant and Omni chain borrowing and lending protocol uh thank you so much for coming on Isaac hey excited to be here thanks for having us um just to kick us off what is radiant and how do you guys fit into the current money market landscape radiant is a leading uh landing and borrowing protocol with the aim to unite to unify the fragmented liquidity in defi so basically uh making it possible and seamless for any us user to deposit on one chain borrow on a different chain and repay on a third chain and we're getting there with our current B2 and B3 launches very good um how does layer zero fit into radiant well layer zero is at the backbone of radiant radiant was built on top of layer zero we started using for V1 Stargate stable router so basically uh any user could then deposit on arbitrum and Bridge uh The Borrowed funds they wanted to borrow over to any of the supported chains Avalanche polygon and so on now for v2 uh we went one step further and we integrated layer zero as part of the protocol in essence our own rd&t native token is now an ofd token which makes it super simless to move it around the three chains we're currently live on that's Arbitron BMB and mainnet and in the future we will integrate more assets as ofds uh in the money markets to be able to move them seamlessly so that users don't need to know what's happening under the hood they don't need to understand about l1s l2s bridges different wallets they just move the token seamlessly deposit on one chain borrow and repay on different chains yeah I think that's the ideal setup given that there's millions of chains now and you have to deal with a lot um I'd love to hear more about what you guys are planning on working on over the next six to 12 months do you have any exciting updates absolutely well yes I have some updates exciting updates for the six uh next month months coming down the road but I also have some Alpha for you you guys today uh basically we will be launching new assets on our core market so uh some lrts we're already launching rap e for example uh we will also be uh launching on new chains uh Bas will be the first one if I da approves uh uh an important Alpha is that we're thrilled to be working on nonm chains that's salana uh so uh well that will be uh probably end of this year beginning of of next year and the most important feature that we're launching for radiant B3 is RZ that's uh how we uh call our isolated markets that stands for radiant Innovation zones that basically uh think that will allow us to uh include to add to the protocol in an isolated risk fashion any tokens from lrts rwas memes any of the hot narratives in crypto and that's going to boost radiant and the last uh thing that we're going to add will be dual emissions so we will be able to stream rewards paid in any of the exciting tokens that are going to be air dropped soon so that's going to be added to radiant too perfect that all sounds really exciting thank you so much for hopping on Isaac okay we're thrilled to be here thanks for having us cheers all right we're back um guys before we like end it and wrap it up do you guys want to kind of talk a bit about what you guys are looking forward to over the next six to 12 months like narratives particularly the meme coin super cycle idea which is something that I disagree with but I want to hear your takes on it as well I think there's um there's been that graphic about pump out fun and just the number of tokens that have been created in the past two months it's like there's been more tokens created on eth and l2s in the past like month than there was in the past like three years and then salana is making like 20,000 new tokens a day or something and I just tweeted this morning about how it's incredibly difficult to differ iate between these tokens like it's it's even harder than it was like three months ago and it's like the probability of you finding the next whiff or the next Mei like is just going down down every day so I think we'll probably I'm curious to see whether or not we get some form of iteration with that and more there was a worm created uh rug. fun right yeah rug. fun is like the type of thing that I think has an opportunity s to succeed because so rug. fun it's like a competition between these tokens and the number one token in the pool and the number 10 token in the pool both get launched into a liquidity pool and the rest get rugged and so it kind of creates like a taste making sense to pump. fun or to yeah to pump. fun and it kind of gives people more opportunity like more selection more Focus because and I think there's opportunity for that to continue happening just because if there's 50,000 meme coins launched today it's impossible to have any Edge in picking which one of the animal pictures from Myspace in 2006 is is going to go up sounds like a skill issue yeah turbo they might put me in jail because you mentioned rug do fun on the podcast brother it's it's a good it's a good protocol run is very fun I think the first one had like over 200 coins and there was there was like $500,000 one for like the first and the last place like it's ridiculously good it's a like that's a that's a good idea for crypto native thing which is experimental and it kind of leans into the idea that oh hey if we are truly in the mem coin super cycle why not kind of fully go into it with like a meme of like what's the midw and what's like the the the left and the right right like it's it's it's a fantastic idea and the stuff like that and I think I'm just like yeah so what the Bish thing I'm on basically more experimental stuff happening where like you have onchain games doing stuff that is really like esoteric right like there was this one game and I forgot the name of but it's a onchain game where you are basically missing body parts right and then you have to basically type in commands to get your body parts to connect with other bionic stuff and it's this entire like law building thing and it's it's simple enough but then these kind of things don't get made in general so to return to a bit of a weird Niche thing where hey we're just experimenting with the medium is always more interesting to me so pump. fun very interesting you have rug. fun which is also great then have like onchain games and then you have I still believe 40 fours for eth will come back at a certain point because yeah I was going to say four course as well I think like it's they've got too much going on that people aren't experimenting with enough because all the attention right now is on Meme coins and the thing with 4 fours is they trade like a meme coin if you wanted to but then they are the individual tokens as well so you can basically trade your way up to having this one nft so to speak and then you can have an enre economy created around just this one token so you don't need something like oh you have an nft and then we're airdropping you this other erc20 token it's just like it works together and there's not enough experimentation going on with it I know a couple of people have already made some tokens around this SL asterisk was one um which I kind of had for a while and then you have all the the stuff but I think in general because there's so much attention on just meme coins 40 fours I think will probably bring bring back the NFD Market on eth more than anything I think because of because of their experimental programmable nature of them yeah I feel like we re I agree with you that 404s will come back and I I like this like it feels like every let's say six months we try to do some new NFD liquidity thing I know like four or four Fe is a bit different because it's like actually tokenized but we also had pseudo Swap and then before that we had like a bunch of increasing nft liquidity or like doing something interesting with uh trading nfts uh rizing them Etc so I am excited for that I but I mean the first iteration always dies out so like you said I'm I'm looking forward to what they're gonna be ending up building on it over let's say like a couple months talks um yeah I mean as far as I don't know the mean coin super cycle like that it's it just the context I don't know I think there's a lot of like a lot of things in life like the the gray is much better than just saying yes or no to that thesis um I don't think the volume and number of meme coins launched like I don't think that's going anywhere I would bet on it going um pretty much up only just because I don't I don't know like it's it seems like very clear product Market fit to me but what I will say is the dispersion of the number of meme coins that are being launched is just Insanity um so maybe the heights that they reach like you know people obviously see Doge and FY and you know like with Pepe going over four billion recently like that obviously the next targets become 10 billion and then faky and then Doge and then you have whiff like like the scale goes up so what I think will probably happen is there will be the heights to which they can reach are kind of capped because there's endless new ones coming online so the liquidity kind of shifts yeah um similar to what we've seen with like altcoins really I mean with the amount launches like people are kind of scratching their heads this cycle about where we are and whatnot because it hasn't played out to how they would think about how money flows from BTC to eth and then to altcoins and we kind of skipped over that and I think a large part of it is because of this the dispersion and the valuations like yeah and so I think those Dynamics will be very similar um in meme coins so I'm kind of in the middle ground on the super cycle thesis and I don't think they're going anywhere I think the volume is sticky and it'll be here for pretty much ever but I think the you know the heights that they can reach I don't think people have kind of come to the fact that as the number grows and as you know you have more between the 100 to say one billion range like that liquidity was all focused on to say three or four or five in previous cycles and once that dispersion is just I mean it's increased every day because the number of launches that are happening um so that's kind of how I'm generally thinking about it yeah that's also fair I um yeah I I'm not sure I I agree with you that like liquidity is fragmented but I feel like we're now having so much stuff kind of appear that could potentially support this like mcoin super cycle fees like you guys mentioned there's that new there's like actually people are trying to build stuff on top of meme coins there was like that world thing that launched a couple days ago that's kind of like a meme coin as why say even though yeah it's not necessarily um also like vanck launched a meme coin index I don't know if you guys saw that but are you calling top what are you calling top because of that no I'm never calling top especially on the podcast man they'll clip it and they'll R for weeks um but yeah overall guys I want to thank you very much for coming on this was the first time that we did something like this and it was an incredible time and I really appreciate you guys for hopping on always a pleasure yeah thank you for having us thanks for having us anytime by [Music]

========================================

--- Video 119 ---
Video ID: sHE12papqtw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sHE12papqtw
Title: Ethereum's Staking Debate: Decentralization vs. Security vs. Yield | Hasu & Vasiliy
Published: 2024-05-16 19:56:08 UTC
Description:
In this week's interview Hasu from Flashbots and Vasiliy from Lido DAO discuss the current state of Ethereum's issuance and staking dynamics post-merge. They explore the potential impact of institutional demand, solo staking, and restaking on the validator set and issuance policy. The conversation also touches on the evolving role of liquid staking derivatives like stETH and how Lido plans to adapt its strategy as more activity moves to Layer 2 rollups. Thanks for tuning in!
- -
Follow Vasiliy: https://twitter.com/_vshapovalov
Follow Hasu: https://twitter.com/hasufl
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Westie: https://twitter.com/WestieCapital
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.

Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://forms.clickup.com/45049775/f/1aytxf-16531/KJK3BCP3FQKVJLUAAX
- -
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.
Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
- -
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
- -
Marinade is the leading Solana staking service that spreads your stake across 100+ top validators, distributes MEV rewards, and provides automatic downside protection with new Protected Staking Rewards. 

Choose to liquid stake for mSOL for use in DeFi, or delegate your stake through Marinade Native, which gives you full custody of your SOL and no smart contract risk. Max performance for you, max performance for Solana.
https://blckwrks.co/Marinade
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:32 State of Eth Issuance
17:54 Wormhole Ad
18:33 Pear Ad
18:58 Marinade Ad
19:37 Avalanche Ad
20:19 Institutional Lido Demand
27:02 Changing ETH Issuance Curve
42:17 ETH Native  Liquidity
47:24 Impact of ETH Restaking 
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 120 ---
Video ID: aIAZ9qMCELE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aIAZ9qMCELE
Title: Consumer Crypto's Frictionless Speculation  | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-05-15 16:24:11 UTC
Description:
In this episode, the research crew dives into the recent launch of VanEck's meme coin index, the state of consumer crypto adoption, and the controversy surrounding key opinion leader (KOL) investment rounds. The conversation also touches on the challenges faced by AMMs in the form of loss versus rebalancing (LVR), and how this issue compares to impermanent loss. Thanks for tuning in!

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice.
- -
Special thanks to our sponsor LayerZero
Stay up-to-date with the LayerZero Ecosystem by following: https://twitter.com/LayerZero_Labs
- -
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Ryan: https://twitter.com/_RyanRConnor
Follow Magic: https://twitter.com/magicdhz
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:11 VanEck Meme Index
13:40 Consumer Crypto Adoption
21:11 Are Memes Onchain Fun?
27:18 Consumer Crypto Performance
33:25 LayerZero Segment: EtherFi
37:12 KOL Round Controversy
55:26 The State of LVR
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 121 ---
Video ID: ZqIbbUJmRI8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqIbbUJmRI8
Title: Reclaiming Your Online Identity with Intuition | Matt & Billy
Published: 2024-05-09 19:48:14 UTC
Description:
In this week's interview Matt and Billy from Intuition discuss their vision for a decentralized identity protocol that aims to revolutionize how data is managed and monetized on the internet. They delve into the importance of credible neutrality in knowledge graphs, the four pillars of incentives that drive user participation, and how Intuition's middleware layer refines data to create a more efficient and user-centric online experience. Thanks for tuning in!
- -
Follow Matt: https://twitter.com/h0xrus
Follow Billy: https://twitter.com/0xbilly
Follow Intuition System: https://twitter.com/0xIntuition 
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Spencer: https://twitter.com/0xpibblez
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.

Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://wormhole.com/0xresearch10-3334
- -
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.
Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
- -
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
- -
Marinade is the leading Solana staking service that spreads your stake across 100+ top validators, distributes MEV rewards, and provides automatic downside protection with new Protected Staking Rewards. 

Choose to liquid stake for mSOL for use in DeFi, or delegate your stake through Marinade Native, which gives you full custody of your SOL and no smart contract risk. Max performance for you, max performance for Solana.
https://blckwrks.co/Marinade
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:42 Intuition Origin Story
12:41 Incentives for Publishing
19:06 Wormhole Ad
19:45 Pear Ad
20:10 Marinade Ad
20:49 Avalanche Ad
21:31 3 Layers of Intuition
35:14 Future of Digital Communities 
42:14 Reputation & Educational Incentives
53:23 Economic Incentives on Networks
1:01:22 Intuition 5-Vision
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
we teed up with the Wormhole Foundation stewards of the Wormhole protocol the leading interoperability platform powering Crossing transfers for 200 plus multi-chain teams came your unique worm NFD just for zerox research listeners today pair is an Innovative pair trading exchange built on top of Simo users can trade trending narratives with one click from Blue Chip narratives such as long BTC short e right through the whiff versus Bonk the Hat stays on Sim's intense Centric architecture enables deep liquidity source offchain and Broad onchain and combined with pair has democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional Traders marinade is a staking protocol on salana and the only steak food that delivers Auto rebalancing me rewards and automatic downside protection with new protected staking rewards optimize your soul stake with marinade by hitting the link below Avalanche is a smart contract platform that has a novel consensus protocol subnet infrastructure and the hyper SDK toolkit which allows web free developers to easily launch custom powerful blockchain Solutions you can start building today by checking out the link below before we get into today's episode just a quick disclaimer the views expressed on this podcast by either myself or any guests are their personal views and do not represent the views of any Associated organization nothing in this episode should be construed or relied upon as Financial technical tax legal or other advice all right let's jump into the episode hey guys welcome back to another episode of zerox research today we have a great episode line L up with Matt and Billy from intuition a decentralized identity protocol today is Thursday April 23rd but this episode will likely go live on the 9th of May as a reminder be sure to use code Ox research10 at um blockworks research for 10% off your subscription on to the interview with Matt and Billy thanks for coming on guys how are you doing doing well thank you guys for having us really excited for this um before we get started do you guys want to introduce yourselves and then dive into what decentralized identity is and why we need it absolutely MK you want to kick us off yeah sure uh my name is Matt I uh head up operations and strategy at intuition I've uh been involved there I guess since late Q4 last year but actually was an investor in the initial uh Builders round over a year before that um I guess I found my way into crypto seriously late 2016 um I ran Blockhead capital from June of 2018 um up through the very end of last year um part of intern da and um along the way kind of had an opportunity to choose you know how I want to spend my time and and what I want to do most and a luxury that I think um I I was grateful for and and very mindful uh with making that decision and I decided that working with intuition uh full time on on the vision that Billy has set forward was was probably the single best use of my time um so I'm really excited to talk about uh what we've been cooking on heck yeah hey everyone uh I'm Billy I've been in crypto for a while um been involved with ethereum since 2014 helped start the blockchain Consulting practice at ernston Young back in the day um transitioned over to consensus after that I've been at consensus for seven years I'm still a special adviser to consensus uh did a bunch of T things over that time one of which was decentralized identity and so whenever I kind of architect systems I I think about them from like the lens of decentralized identity just because it's kind of this foundational pillar upon which to build things correctly I believe and so intuition kind of came about um height of the last cycle when I was doing a ton of Angel Investing and advisory work um and just a little bit of a backstory to frame where this came from because it also helps frame where it goes and helps frame what intuition is so uh in that Angel Investing advisory stuff I was my unique value prop to people is hey I've been in crypto for over 10 years let me connect the dots for you let me tell you who's come before who exists now best practices tooling things like that and and that works great but I was on a lot of calls all the time and I didn't I didn't really like the calls and so I was like oh how can I disintermediate myself here a little bit and so what I did was I exported like my mind map of web 3 into this visual knowledge graft that you could go and navigate yourself so instead of needing to come to me to ask me like hey do you like know know someone from this layer 2 team that you could make an intro to like you could just go to the knowledge graph and find that information for yourself um and that worked great and I started using this knowledge graph to keep track of all my own information because before this I had a thousand browser tabs open like a million bookmarks that I still have never gotone back to to this day although never use my bookmarks I use R research to take notes and I I tag things with things sometimes but it just doesn't like really work well for me for that purpose so I just started using this tool to keep track of my own stuff and in keeping track of it for me it by oxy kept track of it for everyone else it kept track of it for my poros and my clients and my friends on boarding to web 3 who didn't even know what wallet to use and so I thought this is very cool but you know it's just my knowledge in the knowledge graph so what if it wasn't that what if it was everyone's knowledge in the knowledge graph and what if people were incentivized to add good data to the knowledge graph that'd be pretty interesting um so I didn't really know how to do that at the time and I just kind of like got obsessed with the idea and started technically architecting it and what is sted to look like was this composition of all of these various decentralized identity and data and finance perimeters that have been really maturing and emerging over the past couple years and so while like decentralized identity is kind of like a Cornerstone of what we're doing and we kind of oftentimes get framed into that category it's just kind of like a dependency of the system that we want to build um so that's a little bit about me and and where intuition came from interesting um just thinking of that Knowledge Graph I I think one thing that I want to ask is how does um I while I was reading over your articles I you wrote about this quite a bit is credibly no neutrality in knowledge and adding new knowledge in so we'll get more into this later but I kind of like before like when you were thinking about this what was the first thing that you thought of like how you could kind of make this work that way yeah like the the credibly neutral piece is interesting because every thing that we interact with on the web is relatively opinionated whether we know it is or not or want it to be or not and so like if you're if you're building something as generalistic as we're doing which is kind of like this low-level protocol that's hopefully going to be leveraged by all appc applications across the web you can't really get opinionated you can't really censor you can't really say what's true or false or right or wrong otherwise you enter this very slippery slope of censorship and so the the really you just touched on like the hardest part of building something like this because it's like okay if anyone can add anything to the knowledge graph how do you distill the signal from the noise how do how do you determine like which data is true and which data is false and the answer is you don't and this is where people get hung up and I think that's why maybe this hasn't been built before is the protocol shouldn't the protocol and intuition will never say what is true or false or right or wrong all we do is let people say things about things in a more structured format and maybe provide like more incentives for people to express themselves in different ways but where the where the distillation of the data needs to happen is higher up the stack um it needs to come from like other things built on top that filter the data and so the most primitive example of something that could kind of be overlaid on top of the data is it's like I only want to listen to these 10 people like let's say I'm viewing a smart contract and there's been claims made about the smart contract I don't care what everyone else in the ecosystem has said maybe I only care what the 10 smart contract Auditors that I trust have said about the smart contract or you know like on Twitter anyone can say anything on Twitter about anyone pretty much um but you only listen to the voices that you trust and so while anyone can say anything that's the way you filter the data you don't you don't censor people you just kind of let people pick and choose whose voices they want to listen to and who or what they want to trust and you filter the data a little bit higher up the stack that way and so in that way like we remain credibly neutral as intuition maybe we develop some rudimentary kind of algorithms to help you filter the data and rudimentary Tools in middleware um but we don't want to be the only people distilling the data because you become The Gatekeepers of Truth and and then you are deciding what is true or false or right or wrong and I don't think that any centralized entity should do that it should be up to you and the wisdom of the crowds to kind of like come to social consensus around what is true or false using very good tools that are now available to you that make that process easier as opposed to being spoonfed a single side of what might be a controversial issue that's super interesting I guess a question I have to extrapolate on that further is so for example you would have like the 10 smart contract Auditors you care about a test for a contractor you're looking to interact with how do you get someone like that to contribute to intuition what does that contribution look like like is this like a front end on a website and since we're in crypto I'm assuming there would be some sort of incentive uh to bring all this data into the protocol yeah so let me let me try to tackle those one at a time so a reason an an auditor might want to do it is because maybe maybe they want the fact that they've audited a thing to be a little bit more public visible maybe it's because of clout maybe it's because of I don't know General discoverability maybe this is a good platform for publishing information once it exists maybe the the project has requested that they do publish it to intuition and the reason you might want to publish it to intuition is because it's this neutral data layer that any app can tap into um and so like at the point of interaction with a smart contract in metamask or Rabbi or something you can have the fact that the thing is audited right there at the point of interaction you don't have to to like go to the website and then click on the link to go to the GitHub to go to the PDF and then download the PDF and look at the audit report to know that it's audited you can have like a verifiable claim coming from the auditor saying yes we audited this so like that's maybe and maybe it's because they want to help secure the ecosystem there's there's many reasons people might want to do it but that's kind of a couple of them and then the way that they would do that couple different ways so again we're kind of like we're bu building at all layers of the stack the main meat of this is the protocol but uh I guess it's the protocol in the middle way but we're also building at the application layer to to make the ux easy and to exemplify what you can build on top of the middleware in the protocol now that it exists and so like the auditor could come to like our intuition systems portal and just like manually enter the information there or they could just like integrate with it in like whatever system they have and maybe they like I don't know how they publish Auto reports right now but maybe at the time of publication it also just like publishes an attestation to the intuition Knowledge Graph and it's kind of more programmatic than than manual entry so you kind of have both options um on the on the incentive piece it's like there's I think when people hear the word incentives their minds often go straight to economics but I think that's only like a piece of the puzzle and and economic incentives are very important and and we have those baked into our system as well and I'm happy to touch on on those later but it's like there's many different pillars of in there's like levers you can pull to get people to do different things and we've kind of boxed them into four categories and at least I have in my mind and it's like you've got reputational you've got educational you've got like functional utility and then you have economic and so for any one of those four reasons like each individually in their own Silo if like they are explained will probably make a little bit of sense and then there'll be gaps like oh what is this but when you view all four of those in their entirely entirety holistically then the then starts to be a really compelling picture of like why someone might want to do a thing um Matt anything that you want to add on that front yeah it's the incentive part that I think deserves a little bit of zooming in like the question is why will some actor who operates in the status quo do something outside of the status quo like why would an auditor decide to publish on intuition and I think think what we first have to do is more closely examine like the current Paradigm around data in that data is property of a handful of large tech companies um it's not accessible um you create it for them for free uh and all of the economic value that flows through that data or that belongs to that data is uh captured by the intermediary um so if you think about this in term terms of like economics like this is not a free and open like economic or capitalistic system it's like a very tightly controlled centrally controlled most likely very poor uh allocation of resources it's almost like each each large tech company is kind of like a command economy in its own right which is how it can get to the size that it got to as fast as possible but that's also why we have all these really weird unintended consequences where essentially our experience of the physical world and our interaction in the digital world have like diverged so drastically due to poor quality data um among other things um that the digital experience is like starting to like pull the the physical experience in in these all sorts of crazy directions that we're viewing all the time right um so what we have to do is we have to reimagine sort of like and and I hate to use this word because it's like such a big word but it's like you're almost having this this digital econom Revolution and we know that because we're in crypto and we know how powerful these crypto economic tokens are as coordination tools for human behavior and it's like well okay what happens if we can find a better flow of value as it relates to data what if value can get to the end points to the curators to the creators to the owners what does that look like and like that's what gets me really really excited because like why should somebody do something against the status quo why should they P intuition because like there there's there's a clear future and like in one way or one protocol uh like we will get there inevitably so I just think that like as far as I'm concerned like intuition is is probably one of the the further out there more in the lead groups to do so uh even though they've been sort of Under Wraps as long as they have been yeah I think that makes a lot of sense especially when you see like X and how they're moving towards like ization of accounts based on your impressions Etc it's like you port that to a decentralized system in crypto built on Intuition or something similar and then you see what the result is and what sort of economies of scale that can result from having so much data right there that's quality absolutely you're seeing confirmation of the thesis everywhere there was that twitch YouTube spat about how much money gets to the creators uh there's open AI using that like open methodology and Microsoft have depend that letter saying if we don't use some form of like uh open development like we're just going to fall behind like there is clearly a trend towards you need to be open source to iterate more quickly and you need to direct more economic value away from the the central company and towards those people doing the actual work so like while we might be the the extreme interpretation of that today like in my opinion that's probably the standard a decade from now I don't know if any of you heard um the the most recent interview uh with one of the telegram founders I think it was on um Tucker Carlson but they keep a they keep a small team small core team no HR department and four times a year they do a like open source come build on us and we give you prizes If You're great and like they have 900 million active users so like in my opinion it's very clear what the future holds and it's very clear that like there will be certain types of disruptions to the current Paradigm so I think like there will be sort of intangible forces um that are probably too many to enumerate that are like oh yeah like this needs be published on intuition like because like that's just like how things are working now yeah I agreed I think like it also clicked for a lot more people when Reddit had the um they had a similar issue where they were selling their data and then they weren't paying users obviously and I think like that's when it clicked for i' say like I don't want to say normies but for normies I think that was the moment was like this is that not great yeah it's it's it's it's it's always been the case in the history of the web where we are kind of willingly and unwittingly digital slaves to these platforms where we we we we are working for free to create data for them to then monetize and so like we really need to there there should be value extracted by the intermediaries like you you can't completely disintermediate because then you don't have the platforms to do the interacting so there is definite value in the platform but they're just extracting disproportion disproportionate amounts of value from the system right now it's just like in crypto where at the beginning of crypto or at Le at at the beginning of ethereum it was always like okay well if everything's open source how are any of these companies going to make any money or how are they going to be valuable because the money is just going to flow directly to the user and what ended up happening is like there's value in the user experience there's value in like the the services provided like there's there's so much in the middle that is valuable it's just that the value flows are incorrect right now and and it's just like entirely disproportionate in the favor of the intermediary and so just like everything else happening across crypto we have to do that for data and so that's that's what we're trying to do is like extrapolate that concept out to the concept of data which is our most valuable resource like it is it is the oil of the internet and so like I think it's kind of it it's kind of crazy that there's not more people thinking about this yet even though to your point like it's becoming more and more prevalent even for everyday people as like these things hit the headlines and people become aware of the fact that like their data is the thing that fuels these platforms even though they are the ones creating the data in the first place woro is the leading interoperability platform for multi-chain Bridges and applications with over 1 billion messages sent and 40 billion in value transferred wormo leads the industry in cross-chain message volume and total value transferred if you're a builder wormo has an extensive speed of twos and infrastructure to securely build multi-chain applications you can use worold to power D5 nfts govern and so much more and Wormhole supports over 30 blockchains and six different run times came unique Wormhole NFD just for zerox research listeners today fill out a form prove that you've listened to today's episode to receive a PO app and you'll get an email over the coming weeks to claim your limited edition NF pair is an Innovative pair trading exchange built on top of Simo users can trade trending narratives with one click from Blue Chip narratives such as long BTC short e right through the whiff versus Bonk the Hat stays on Sim InCentric architecture enables deep liquidity source offchain and Broad onchain and combined with pair has democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional Traders marinade is optimized salana staking Stak natively or liquid steak with marinade and get the same high performance delegation strategy that thousands are using today to stake your soul to over 100 of the best Salon of validators the delegation strategy is a first of its kind and only possible on salana it dedicates yourself to the Network's best value ators with no smart contract risk in addition marinade has just built a new and improved delegation strategy that delivers maximum performance with auto rebalancing me rewards and automatic downside protection with new protected staking rewards and this allows for maximum decentralization for salana 2 optimize your soul staking today with marinade by hitting the link below the age of interoperability is here with the launch of teleporter Avalanche becomes a seamlessly linked network of many sovereign blockchains that communicate so smoothly they feel like a single chain teleporter is an evm compatible cross chain communication protocol built on top of avalanche for me it allows any evm chain on Avalanche to send messages assets and data to one another in a simple fast affordable and secure way teleporter and Avalanche rep messaging provide a new foundation for how Avalanche blockchains can communicate and how developers can easily build cross chain applications out of the box build anything you want any way you want on the eco-friendly blockchain Des designed for web fre that's check it out by clicking the link below taking a step back uh Billy you kind of talked about the free layers of the protocol or like I guess it's the application layer the middleware and the protocol could you kind of dive into those a little bit deeper yeah absolutely so so at the protocol layer um what you basically have is is something it's it's a Knowledge Graph and you can think of the architecture akin to something like a neural network where you just you just have nodes and Ed that's all you have um each node and each Edge has an identity and each of those identities has properties so it's kind of like knowledge property graph um and so at the protocol layer what we try to do is we try to incentivize the expression of data into that Knowledge Graph um in a very neutral and unopinionated way and so at the protocol layer it's just the system of tools that like resolves to some some state that you can interpret in different ways and use for different purposes so that's kind of like the lowest level is just like this kind of hopefully as open source as possible thing like obviously contracts will be open source and there's things that like technologically are not feasible to open source right now when you're dealing with like very large data sets but we need to make them as decentralized as possible so that's what I think of as like the protocol layer is um this knowledge graph and and the way that that just a little bit going a little bit deeper there you can think of it like a composition of all of these verifiable data Registries and so it's not like we're creating the intuition database that all the data is stored on it's like or this semantic mapping on top of all of these databases it doesn't matter which database you want to use like we we prefer that it's a verifiable data registry like ipfs or R weave or ceramic or any blockchain is a verifiable data regy so you kind of have like all these databases down here and then where this semantic mapping on top that allows you to discover the data so that's that's kind of the protocol layer now the middleware layer is how you interpret that data and how you work with the data so as a developer and as an end user you probably don't want to deal with the raw Knowledge Graph which hopefully at some point has like billions of entries trillions I don't know like the goal is to consume the world's data so uh you don't want to look at the raw data like if I go to Matt's profile and he has 35 billion data points like I really don't want to just like look at that I want that distilled in some way and so we need to build tools for developers to build user experiences on top of the data where they don't have to build the tools themselves to work with the data so it's really the middleware I'd say is is really about make creating like a very good developer experience um at the application layer that's where I mean we hope that developers will contribute to all layers of the stack but that's really where we see the developers shining where we don't want to be the ones building things largely at the application layer the goal is to have intuition integrated everywhere and have people building stuff on top um and so our approach to the application layer is it's what I saw at the beginning of like ethereum and uport days it's like if you just build the protocol in the middleware people don't really KN know what to do with those tools until you show them what they can do and so our approach there is let's just build some example apps on top that show developers like hey this is what you might want to do with this tool now that it exists and we kind of we like we're we're we have a lot of product minded people and so I think we're we're hopefully building some really compelling user experiences at the application layer but over time our hope is to Trend away from being like this BTO C model and become like more more of a B2B model where we're just like serving the tools to developers to build amazing user experiences on top um Matt again anything to to add on that front uh always generally something to add um it it's that middle wear layer that and again I think I'm going to just probably continually take us from like these really grounded conversations and like into where the world is headed because I think that's probably like the most important conversation to have at least in my opinion so data has long been known as like the oil of of the internet and like I I don't disagree with it at all but like that's a crude that's a crude form of a commodity right like for oil to go to market like it needs to be refined um it needs to be turned into like consumable product and with the Advent of AI and with AI being now the largest consumer of data like the way we need to think about data needs to completely change especially because we've gotten to a point now where AI has consumed so much data that it's running out of data and like there's been some really interesting talks given about uh AI models creating artificial data sets to train itself on because it just needs more data which is like a whole crazy Rabbit Hole um so like in in AI there's a term like called inference and it's sort of like the statistical like mapping or like the the statistics of how the the data relates to each other and like these inferences are like way more valuable because you can do things with them so like if you sort of think about like this middle middleware layer of intuition like data is is potentially becoming worthless if not made like consumable so by sort of thinking through the ways in which like app developers would would would want to or should be able to um sort query filter this data like what you start doing is you create this entire new paradigm for for app development and like one of one of my personal measurements for success is that like the a developer 10 years from now who sits down to write an application like one of the first things they do is like install intuition because like why compete with large Tech monoliths where like Step One is hoard data and compete with your wal gardan actually step one should be like opt into this public data Lake which has this middleware which like makes this data extremely accessible and now no longer are we competing about like how much data can you extract from users we're competing like how many problems can you solve like what can your application do that uh users find valuable not like how locked in can you get and then how many like small companies can you acquire like it's an inherent the current system of app development iteration like is inherently like eating itself from the inside out like any form of innovation gets immediately acquired baked in and just like squeezed down to to to the the current uh Paradigm once again so like the only way to escape I think that like gravitational black hole is like to sort of sidestep it and start opting in into some new systems and like I'll even give a really good example of that because I think dog fooding is like probably one of the most important things any any organization working on applications uh should be doing so one of the ideas we had is that like like I just said like a decade from now developers will want to as step one just like import and and work natively on top of intuition uh you know application layer and middleware layer um and we we were similarly uh building some applications like around um let's say like trying to solve some of the fracturing of data and the fracturing of identities so that like all instead of having like eight profiles like you kind of have this one like you know Mosaic of a person um and in doing so we we immediately bump into all of these data permissioning issues we're like I can't go get data from Facebook I can't get data from Google I can't go get data from Twitter for like under $3 million a year or whatever it is so it's like oh okay these guys don't want to play just like Microsoft and its AI didn't want to play with open AI but open AI just kept doing its thing and Microsoft had to Pivot so instead we're playing really nicely with all of the uh like third- party sort of you know applications and platforms that have identity as part of them that give us access to their to their data and their social data and we're like a sweet like you're already opting into that open Paradigm our thesis that developers will continue to opt in and like wow holy holy like we are forced to opt in ourselves like no better proof that this works than like us being in that exact same position uh and making that exact same decision so I don't know where that rant really started but like I like where it went yeah going off of that so this might be a difficult question but I I'd like to see both a crypto a Crypton native example and a non- crypt native example of a data point about Billy for instance the middleware between it and then what application can you build with that data point on intuition yeah s super easy so like okay let's say I am transacting in web 3 let's say I don't know it's actually wild to me that we still use venmo and other things to like send money when we're all crypto native so let's just say we solve that it's like okay I want to send some money to Billy um like how do I know that this is actually me um or how do you know that it's actually me like you go to create your transaction in metamask and what you see is a bunch of non-human readable jargon that really tells you nothing and then you have to like look at the letters you're like all right I think that like I copy pasted this right and like the beginning letters are the are the same the end letters are the same so okay like we're good to go like that is wild that is not that can't be the user experience and so what we need to do is we need intuition in all of our interactions we need to see what our intuition is saying about the thing that we're interacting with so when you go to perform the transaction in metamask what if there was a tab that said here's what your intuition is saying about the thing that you're interacting with and then you're like oh like this thing has all these social connections I'm actually following them on Twitter like this is probably like based on the the reputation and the profile of this thing this is probably the thing that I'm trying to interact with and so like the The Hope again is like this should be integrated everywhere obviously we will have like user interfaces that we built ourselves that we hope that you come and use but like the point is go to the point of interaction that already exists go to go to the places where people are already doing stuff and just like insert your intuition there which is really just like decision-making technology just like providing better to data to people to inform their decisions a little bit more so hopefully that covers like the web 3 case I think the web two is like an example I like to give in web two world is and Amazon reviews so I think like reviews I don't want to box what we're doing into being a review thing but it's so ripe for disruption that I have to talk about it it's like okay I go to Amazon like the the review game has just been gamified to Hell to the point where like I don't even know what to trust anymore it's like who who is leaving reviews I've never written an Amazon review I've never written a Yelp review I've never done a LinkedIn endorsement I do five stars in Uber every time because I don't care and if you look at the data 97% of people are not contributing data to these platforms and then conversely all of us use that data every single day to make decisions in our everyday lives and so like the the problem is not that the data doesn't exist the problem is that the data exists in our heads because if you come to me and you ask me about a person I've met or a product I've bought on Amazon or a restaurant I've been to I can tell you about it but we have to have a conversation and so like our whole point is to like get that data out there and serve it to the user at the point of interaction so in the Yelp example or like the the Amazon example let's say I'm on Amazon I'm viewing a product um instead of seeing a thousand reviews from Anonymous accounts who I have no idea who they are in this new paradigm of portable data and portable reputation and portable identity and social graphs what if you could you I don't have an Amazon friends list I can't like import my Twitter following to Amazon to see if people I follow on Twitter are saying things about things in Amazon I want to go to the Amazon let's say I'm looking for supplements and I have I trust Dr huberman in the context of supplements so we have these things called trust circles you can like curate who you trust in different context so I'm on Amazon and I'm in the category of supplements my trust graph has like Dr huberman in it and I see oh Dr huberman has recommended this supplement that means more to me than 10,000 Anonymous reviews from people I don't know or Bots like it means nothing like even like I don't know people I don't really know that well if I meet them in real life and they recommend a restaurant to me that means more to me than all the reviews on Yelp like ch I'll check you up a little bit but I'll probably trust their opinion just because I know they're a real person with real opinions and so I think like that's that's the world that we're trying to build towards Matt do you have any other I actually want to like deconstruct like something that Billy touched on but I think he touched on it like through example and that is like in and this is kind of why I love the name intuition it's like really like we tried to Define it and then we're like wait it kind of defines itself um we all have friends or at least I hope we all have friends and like like we put in investment in our friends in the form of time uh in the form of energy in the form of emotion in the form of support and like that forms bonds and these bonds have like a certain scaling limit um and there's all sorts of ways in which we can discover the bonds of others in that like somebody might host a dinner party or a birthday party and you start to meet the other people that they have close bonds with um and you're in these trusted spaces and you're able to you know really sort of build a life essentially like you have all these really positive uh externalities and positive outcomes if you're surrounded by good people and they're surrounded by good people and like there there's this whole thing that nature just evolved for us and then we built social media and it was like oh like follow whatever gives you the like hardest dopamine and serotonin hit immediately and we like very UNM mindfully just started following and unfollowing like all over the place and like every for the most part every type of connection is the same and until maybe like three years ago you couldn't even like like now Twitter has like subscribed right uh and then like Instagram added like close circles to friends like they're starting to figure out that like there's more to just following and unfollowing but nobody and I say I mean nobody has figured out how to properly model the very natural connections that we have in the real world online um and this goes back to like why I said like that incentive or economic piece is so important because like if if you take a step back and you think about like what we hold true about like free and open markets and like the ability for cap to to to express an opinion um with with with a monetary you know device um and that leading to some form of like Optimal outcome well like if we start to think about social graphs and knowledge graphs um in the way that we think about the way that we connect with one another and instead of putting in like time and energy we use these like monetary devices to like show where connections are strongest uh and like in intuition right we have things called claim we have like identities we have claims you can stake on all these different things like and it doesn't need to be a person that does it like you can you can build Bots to do this as well um but like you get you for the first time really for the first time ever you get to sort of model out like real world natural bonds online right like and we call this the intuition graph right and that is the intersection of like a an economically driven social graph and an economically driven Knowledge Graph and like these two things combined for what we call like the intuition graph and um like that that's what's so exciting to me and like I'm sort of really disinterested in like what we what like our core primitive features will do to web 2 or web 3 I'm much more interested in like what the next generation of developers are going to do when they have social Bond data like what does interacting online what does community formation look like like at that time in the future and and honestly if you guys have I'll throw a question back to you guys like what do you guys think Community formation looks like in a paradigm like that yeah I think like Circles of friends would just be like completely different because like in inherent knowledge of like what someone said about someone else or what someone did to someone else um would just be integrated into intuition so it's like you know your your Association would go a lot less superficial um across your circles one thing semi- related to this is that like when I first joined crypto which is not as long as you guys I had kind of a difficult time I think because when you first join you kind of have like you go on the timeline there just so many people just talking and you don't know who you can trust and I feel like that's one of the big issues and you have to wait like you know how like the market has some form of a tuition you have to kind of pay your tuition you have to follow the horrible actors and then eventually someone's like oh like XY Z actually once did this so you shouldn't like take advice from him or you shouldn't listen to him or he dumped this he like shill this at the top or whatever so I definitely see that like if there is and according to you guys there is a way of fixing this trust issue where I don't have to fight for my life to figure out who I can trust and who I can't trust um that's like very attractive and I think it could like even at the like the nich's case of like onboarding people onto a new segment a new industry a new sector like there I can see like how that could be extremely useful 100% And I I'll provide an example there and that's that I I talk about this all the time but it's like like a new entrance to web 3 is entirely lost like how do they know what to do and they the answer is they don't and then they get trapped in something like cardano hell and then they never escape and then they think crypto is a scam and they don't come back for 10 years and so like that that can't be the user experience that people have when they come into the ecosystem and so I think like what would be very cool is to your point before you've curated your right now you have personal social graphs it's only you like you can't toggle to someone else's social graph but what if I come into crypto and I just know one data point the only data point that I know is like I trust this falic guy he seems like I I don't want to spend 247 trying to figure out the 3,000 people I need to follow I just like okay I've been monitoring vitalic for a little bit like seems trustworthy what if I could equip his lens through which to see the world and then like I just like automatically see my Twitter feed through his eyes and all the people that he follow like that would be really nice and then you wouldn't like fall into these pitfalls and so if we if we take the social graph and instead of making it like agent Centric and we abstract it away from the platform we abstract it away from the user and they become objects in and of themselves that you can just like over like you can equip and you can overlay any data with now it's like okay now I'm in Amazon I don't even have to curate my own supplement trust graph anymore like I'm not going to maybe there's like just like coin if you go to Unis swap there's like all the coin the official coin lists you got like coin gecko list and coin market cap list and there's like a couple different like lists of reputable coins that you can choose from to like filter the the coins that are automatically populated same thing here it's like oh here's like a couple good trust graphs to choose from if you're viewing supplements like here pick this one and so you don't really have to go through this like cumbersome you can if you want you can create your own trust pass you can customize the existing ones but I I just think that that to your point it like it's not just useful for crypto it's very useful for crypto because in crypto the stakes are high because if you interact with the wrong thing you lose all your money so that's not great um and so like in other ecosystems less scary so we should probably start with web3 first where this is a one it's it's native to us like this is where we have the most knowledge we have the network we have the connections and the paino is huge so we're starting with web 3 but this can be extrapolated out to literally anything it's like oh I find a new interest like now I'm interested in pickle ball and it's like okay I need to like buy some pickle ball equipment I need know where to play pickle ball like okay how do I do this I need to equip like pickle ball trust graft that has been curated by somebody somewhere to Overlay that data with yeah I agree I that makes like that's that makes sense um one thing that I feel like we've kind of brushed upon but we've never actually delv deep into and I feel like everybody's going to want to know is the incentive mechanism and like those four categories kind of like talking a bit more about those and how exactly they interact with the protocol yeah so I'll I'll touch on the economic piece last um because that's that's the most important and the most detailed but the other ones are kind of like Grog brain to Gro so I'll step sequentially through those in no particular order so on the the reputational front um and I I'll I'll keep using Amazon as an example to root things in some something that has a web two parallel so I don't leave reviews on Amazon one of the reasons is I don't care about my Amazon reputation like it doesn't get me anything I can buy whatever I want on Amazon without being like a good reviewer of products so I don't care about my Amazon reputation um but what if reputation was cross context and crossplatform what if I could use the fact that I'm a good reviewer on Amazon and like get an uncollateralized Loan in defi or like do something somewhere else like that might be interesting to me like now I might like go around all these different contexts and be a good actor in these different systems because my reputation within those systems means something outside of the context of those systems so now I might leave reviews because like I'm building up my reputation there's there's inherent economic there's like just inherent I don't even want to just say economic value but just like value in this reputation because if I if I ruin my reputation I've I've let's say I spent 10 years building up this fact that I'm a good reviewer on Amazon I'm not going to destroy that for like a thousand under collateralized loan like my time is worth so much more than that and so there's there's so much that you can do with portable reputation and it might get you to do things because you care about your reputation more now second is educational so another reason I don't leave reviews on Amazon is because it's just going to get lost in the sea of am I don't have a Amazon friends list my friends will or see the fact that I've left this review and those are the people that I care about the information getting to like I'll go in the group chat and be like yo you should definitely like buy this thing like this product sick or have a conversation with someone be like yo you should totally go to this restaurant like I don't leave the review on Yelp but I will tell people like oh this is a great restaurant in Puerto Rico go there um and so it's because it get it's get it gets lost because we're not filtering the data correctly we don't have these trust grafts so again it's like okay if I could overlay the stuff with my trust graph or my social graph it's like oh like okay I see that Billy has recommended this restaurant great maybe maybe I will be more inclined to disseminate the information at the point of interaction versus in these other platforms like the information is getting disseminated it's just getting disseminated in the wrong spots and via the wrong mediums so that's kind of like the educational piece the functional piece is maybe I just want to make a claim about something because uh it's useful to me so going back to my Angel Investing advisory example it's like I was tagged things with things and making claims about things because it helped me organize my own life and by proxy it organized it for everyone else but it was just like a useful tool to me so I think the ultimate I think this is one of the most this is the pillar that even if we just get this one right that solves everything else but it's like we have to solve real pain points for end users we have to give them the ability to do something that they couldn't do before and if we provide them the best user experience in doing that thing they're going to do it regardless of the you know the couple dollars they make for it or from the reput it's just like I'm just going to do this because it's useful to me for some way so that's a functional the economic is where like the the crypto Innovation comes in and this is what kind of like what sparked the idea of intuition but basically in intuition when because now we have verifiable attribution of who created the data you can do very interesting things with economic flows so now that we know who created the data we can flow any Revenue that the data creates back to the data creat Creator um and so what happens in intuition uh Matt mentioned we have like identities and claims I won't go into like the the technical nuances of what each of those things are I'll just keep it high level so that Matt doesn't yell at me but like basically when when you create data you get ownership in that data and then anytime anyone interacts with that data if they're paying money to do that interaction the the money flows back to you and so why this is so important is because let's take the Paradigm right now of of Google and Facebook and Twitter monetizing all this data they're able to do it because they have the workforce to aggregate cleanse and sell the data as like a big package but me as like an end user my my data is probably like not worth that much it's made I don't know a couple dollars and so I I can't go through the effort of like selling it to people you kind of have to create this like programmatic marketplace where I'm just automatically rewarded for having the created the data in the first place and so in this new model it's like any piece of data I create whenever that piece of data is interacted with in some way like I'm getting rewarded for doing it and it's not gam fiable because it's zero sum because someone's paying on the other side um and the reason why it like in the system the the the way that you combat cble attacks or dos attacks or just people flooding the network with bad data is there's some small inherent fee to creating the data in the first place so just taking all of the learnings from blockchain think of it just like a gas cost like to create data there's some inherent cost to storing the data it's not free so if we made it free then someone's paying it and then it's us and then we have to be these intermediaries that extract value from people to pay the data storage cost so the user pays small fee maybe it's a fraction of Penny whatever it's just like not something but there is some cost like a gas fee that you pay to create the data and the money that you pay to create the data purchases you ownership in the data um and so then like because now we have private keys that we can sign things with through the proliferation of pki as introduced through crypto it's like okay we all have private keys that we can sign stuff with lots of people are signing transactions on blockchains right now those private keys but you can sign anything with those private keys so we can sign data with those private keys and when we sign data with the private Keys then we know who created the data in the first place um and so that was a very longwinded rant I hope that made sense I'll pass it over to to Matt now us back in yeah I'm known for reeling us back in um so again where the current Paradigm has failed like objectively is that users are essentially bucketed into one of two categories right you're either a content creator or you're a Content consumer or I guess you can be both but like those those are the two large categories and the measurement of success right is like virality or interaction like it it would be like as if we tried to like if I wanted to solve world hunger and then like all I did was measure like how many calories I shipped to another country like and then they just took that food and threw it in the ocean like that's the current process of like trying to create good content it's like we're solving world hunger but we're not measuring hunger um and the the other issue is that like it's not just a world of content creators and content consumers you have content aggregators you have content uh curators you now have like the entire Advent of AI right so now you have task oriented agents they are completely disinterested in like human emotion like a as agents right so like they're not going to interact or respond because something makes them anxious or something you know makes them feel disgust or happiness right like they're not attuned to those types of triggers that would you know cause quote unquote like interaction um and then you have like algorithm designers right so like if you actually start thinking about like what incentive design needs to look like and it might sound like I'm really focused on social media I'm not I'm really focused on on the interactions of parties online right I'm much so inter uh interested in like so the intera the intersection of social graphs and knowledge grafts but that just so happens to be what social media really is right it's like a a pretty front end on on on the intersection of a social graph and a Knowledge Graph and we're thinking about incentives in terms of like what are these different types of identity categories right like we have a whole section for AI we have a whole section for human we have a whole section for other like objects right and like each of these things need to have some different way of interacting and some different way of being an economic participant um to create again like this highly consumable uh highly efficient form of data right like going back to this oil oil gets turned into natural gas natural gas can get burned for energy and like each form of refinement has some type of different like energy output and some different type of carbon footprint and similarly like every distillation or refinement of raw data like has some different uh potential for application uh can have some different form of impact can be more expensive or less expensive uh to access or use um and then of course there'll be people who probably want to foro the economic incentive uh outright perhaps because they're trying to grow following more quickly or or something of that nature um so like I I really can't like bold and underline enough how important it is to recog like how failed the current status quo is when it comes to social interaction uh identity fragmentation and like data discoverability like my biggest my biggest thing that and I just started doing this like literally a week ago we all point to Google and Google search all the time and like we even had a brainstorming meeting on some naming and like something came up like search engine and someone was like whoa whoa whoa like we don't want to compete with like being a search engine like that's like going into Google like how are you going to compete with being with Google and then I paused and I was like wait can we all agree that discoverability in Google search over the past 3 to five six years has gotten significantly worse right can we like does everybody feel like it's much more difficult to get your questions answered and to get the resources you want on Google than it used to be so like why are we scared to say that we're competing with discoverability and search when actually search and discoverability are degrading because the basic incentive systems behind them have like played out to their logical conclusions and their logical conclusions were like bad data bad outcom right whatever you measure for is what you get and they measured for the wrong things so I think like there's a massive multi- trillion dollar opportunity for like a protocol that is focused on like good data and data sovereignty to like really step in and like I hope to look back on this conversation like 10 years from now be like wow I can't believe we nailed it but I mean the odds of that are so low but um like that that's where I really think like at least for me the focus of the conversation like really is today yeah and I'd love to I'd love to piggy back on that on economic incentive piece because I think about it in terms of like things that we are doing as intuition and I I box things into that category but like zooming out like Matt did so the to elaborate on his point basically the games that we're playing online and I use the term game extremely Loosely but like our online experiences are they they have been crafted in a way in which they are not extracting like the best data and the best versions of ourselves from us and our best intuition like they have very perverse incentives and what they're optimizing for to Matt's point is not like the production of good useful data for society they're optimizing for anxiety like more clicks it's like whatever whatever gets the clicks whatever keeps people dopamine receptors firing like but not too much because if it's too much then they won't come back so it's just like you always get this feel you go on your phone you're on Tik Tok and you feel like kind of satiated and then you get off and you just like feel like [ __ ] and you're like oh what like what is going on here like why do I why do I feel worse when I was supposed to be doing something that like was supposed to make me feel better like what am I doing here and people have just been trapped in this mindset because these very powerful companies are using these very powerful tools to create these games that everyone's playing and they don't even know their trapped which is so sad and we have to like we kind of have to zoom out and we have to wake up and we have to be like hey the system's kind of broken it's kind of ruining ruining people's lives across the board like look at everyone's screen time on their phones like how much of that screen time is is creating like real world productive value and i' I'd probably argue not very much of it and so that's what we have to think about is this system that is fundamentally broken because the incentives are perverse because people are optimizing for the wrong thing and so what we have to optimize for in order to build a good system what you have to do is you have to align the the objectives of the system with the objectives of the people and if you can build a system where people are acting in their own best self-interest and by proxy are acting in the best interest of the system then you've built a good system so taking Bitcoin for instance that's the so beautiful that's why I got obsessed with Bitcoin so early because I thought this concept was so beautiful it's like if you just act individualistically and greedily and you act in your own best self-interest that is what's in the best interest of Bitcoin the system like if you if you if you come to consensus and you mine like the longest chain if you converge if you Converge on social consensus then you make money if you diverge and you act wrongly because like there's no economic incentive to diverge so why would you do it and that's what is worse for the system so so Bitcoin very beautifully aligned the incentives of the the of the network participants and the system itself and there's just this mismatch right now where like the companies have one thing people's incentives or like people's reason for interacting with them are something totally different and so we have to have drastic change soon because the world's starting to look like kind of weird like weird it's just like it's getting like weirder every day and so I really think we got to wake up and like have some sense of urgency about this before we're in like some weird backwards land where nothing makes sense anymore yeah um talking about perverse incentives I think this is like the most obvious when you go on those um popular tweets and under them it's just like maybe a dozen like maybe 2025 of these like videos of it's either cute dogs Etc which are like gonna gar reviews or it's like some horrific like crime video or something and because I think like that whole when the Elon Buck came online that like really really kind of exasperated the whole incentive I think a bit more than what it was like because before it was a bit sneaky it was like it wasn't as obvious but now it's like my 4 you pig absolutely horrendous all the time um I think one of the questions that I've had from the very beginning is the because Matt kept touching up on refining oil how do you the middleware the middleware layer refines the data from what I understand Could you um how does the are the incentive systems the same there or are you going to be building your own solution as well I know you talked a bit about like dev kit Dev tools and Etc but how are you guys planning on making that as easy as possible so that you get refined data out yeah that's a that's a really good question and so like programmatic rewards at the middleware layer a are a little bit harder to deal with um and we haven't kind of like really broached that topic yet but there's like indirect non- Inu rewards at the middleware layer that people are competing for so if you think of ethereum it's like okay you could look at Raw block data no one does that and so you've got like lots of players that make money from playing in the middle you've got infura and Alchemy and ether scan and dune and nanson and like literally most companies in blockchain are doing this in some way it's like the economic incentives are inherently there if the data is good and I would love to find some way to kind of pro programmatically reward the development of that stuff at the protocol layer but I don't think we need those incentives at the onset because they're just like intrinsic to the system um and what the what the middleware looks like it's just I mean what what we're building is just a set of extensible apis and sdks that just let you build on top of this stuff very easily so it's like okay you've got this composition of all these verifiable data Registries you've got data coming in from all these different places you've got it being stored in different formats um some things need to happen offchain some things need to happen onchain they're just like the flow is relatively complex and so the middleware that we're building kind of reduces that complexity down to like single API call so it's like create identity for a thing you don't have to worry about like all the other crazy things that are happening when you're creating an identity just like call create identity and it's nice and our goal is to kind of like make that as extensible and permissionless as possible so it's not just like us building those things it's it's everyone building them and then also like on the I guess this is a little bit this is probably a little bit too technical but it's just like on the on the indexing front so it's like okay data moving to lots of different places um are like index or infrastructure relatively centralized right now but the hope is like just like in the way that people are approaching decentralization right now across the board it's like you can replicate the state if you want to so we'll open source our indexers and like if you want to like replicate the state and verify that everything is like the way that we say it is you can you can very easily do that um but in this in in in the system we're trying to build it's very hard to build like a you know a decentralized version of a vector database or a decentralized version of a graph database and so we kind of have there's like centralization points at the middleware layer but the hope is like our middleware also makes it very easy for developers to replicate the state that we're working with in our like database that are kind of like a little bit more centralized because we don't really know how to make that layer of the stack decentralized yet cool yeah that makes sense and it it aligns like with the rest of crypto and like the the entire experience of distributed systems um looking forward so fast forward like five years what what sort of scale do you hope intuition achieves you know like what are some some practical applications you expect to see five or you hope to see five years from now and um like where does that position intuition as a protocol Matt I'll let you take that one oh man that's a dangerous one for me to answer um so what we haven't touched on is Network effects um specifically like Billy earlier outlined that like kind of in the beginning it's B Toc and then it's like more B2B but like it's it's I think more accurately portrayed as B to B Toc um which was like actually like a core flow um back back when like apple was innovating um and each additional application that builds on top of intuition becomes another node to feed data to like the the open permissionless Knowledge Graph and social graph right the intuition graph uh and also becomes a node to like disseminate that information um so if we Succeed In bootstrapping an ecosystem over the next 5 years like I think a very positive outcome would be like 1 billion users interacting with intuition not directly right like it's going to be an ecosystem of applications on top and I would I would hope that that aggregate is is at least one billion users um looking at how we continue to get steeper and steeper on adoption curves because of these Network effects like if you look at how quickly like Instagram acquired users versus Tik Tok versus open AI like these Network effects are getting like nastier and I mean that in a positive sense like they're getting more violent um and I think we're taking like one of the most hands off approaches meaning that like scale can go like we're not we're not the limiting factor right like it's it's not about our ability to like get products over it's just about our ability to build an ecosystem like over the next you know three to four years until it has some form of like organic traction um that that gives it that Hy hockey stick inflection I would also really like to see uh intuition supported as like a a widely supported um single form of like login like in at least like call it onethird of new applications where like I don't like I can kind of roll up a bunch of my identities into under intuition and then like use that intuition key like that master key to like do things um and like I'd even love to start permissioning data or like having preferences stored within intuition like how come when I go to a new platform I have to like start at zero like why do I need to rebuild my follow list why do I need why does it algorithms need to like pay attention to me for like a month to figure out that like I'm in the market for like a new pair of shoes or whatever like I can I just like pick up where I left off like let me just like hand over like you know the like Avatar Style like plug in to like this new application I'm using I don't think that's five years out I think that might be more like seven to 10 years out um but then again I have no idea because like AI is definitely a a sector that we're like very interested in supporting and like I think we're thinking about in a very Innovative way and I just don't think there's that many people thinking about or rather like building in the the world the cross-section between like verifiable data and like thinking about AI agents at the same time and I think people are drastically underestimating how quickly that's going to continue to grow which might mean that I'm also underestimating like potential for growth um but like I don't know the future is tough to predict yeah very tough to predict so wrapping up here I guess what we learned is that intuition is creating this this distributed framework for creating these these portable reputations and preferences packaging that and driving the monetization of that towards the suppliers of the data themselves versus the collectors um what can we where can we where can someone who's listening to this learn more about intuition keep up with intuition and when can we expect to actually start intuition to add on to that are there is there anything actionable at the moment that people can look into as well Matt with your like Cool com collected radio voice do you want to do a little do a little [ __ ] I I I definitely don't have a voice for radio um it's the microphone wonders yeah sounds um follow on Twitter uh go to the website um and I I think more than anything over the next few weeks like honestly put notifications on for the Twitter and like I know that kind of sounds like kind of cringe like oh yeah like put notifications on our Twitter like you we're really so important but like honestly like all I have to like over the next few weeks I think it would be like really beneficial to like be early to some of our content um so yeah to interact to to interact with intuition um that's coming um very soon um there's been years of work being done um that is ready for the public Spotlight uh and a really fun and engaging I should I say like rollout strategy like hopefully from this conversation like people have have understood that I think we're thinking a little bit differently uh and we also think about our go to market strategy differently and we think about like what rolling an application out in like 2024 in crypto looks like and it doesn't look like it did in in 2021 or 2020 or 2018 or 2016 like each cycle had its own viral way in which you discovered and interacted with new platforms and I don't I think very very few Builders right now are getting it right um I hope we get it right uh I don't know if we we'll we'll find out pretty soon but like obviously there's been a lot of frustration with a lot of like people who've been in this space for a while with like the bifurcation between attention going to like memes or like Bitcoin and everyone in the middle is like kind of scratching their head what to do and I think like that's probably a failure to innovate and a failure to adapt so like I look forward to like our iteration cycle getting this product out into the world getting people interacting and like everything else we got going for the rest of this year so yeah follow on Twitter uh turn on notifications go to our website there's a link to our Discord on the website I think those are all the most major platforms maybe DM Billy if you want to work with us like if this sounded interesting and you want to build on intuition like we are about to uh open up documentation for those apis and sdks so uh hit up Billy yeah that was perfect and I I guess like to add a little bit onto that Twitter is Ox intuition website is intuition. systems for those of you who are just listening to this and don't have a link to a thing for some reason um and then yeah to Matt's Point we've got what I think is a very creative roll out strategy where we are incrementally introducing people to the functionalities and Primitives of intuition over time in these bite-sized pieces so all you got to do is follow along and all you got to do is play the game that you're presented with at that moment in time and then over time those might coales to something that like was unexpectedly beautiful so we'll see how it plays out but that's that is our strategy great thanks so much for hopping on it was a pleasure thank you guys this is awesome thank you very much yeah you guys are great we have teed up with the wormo foundation stewards of the Wormhole protocol the leading interoperability platform powering Crossing transfers for over 200 plus multi-chain dabs Wormhole isn't just a bridge it's the leading interoperability platform for multi-chain applications so go and claim your unique wormo nfts just for zerox research leners today hit the link in the description to fill out a form and to prove that you've listened to today's episode and receive a PO app you get an email over the coming weeks to claim your limited edition nft [Music]

========================================

--- Video 122 ---
Video ID: eGYryOpogpE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eGYryOpogpE
Title: Fantasy Top & FriendTech: SocialFi or Speculation? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-05-08 19:30:30 UTC
Description:
In this episode, the analysts take a deep dive into Fantasy Top and FriendTech. They explore Fantasy Top's unique approach to speculating on crypto influencers' social media engagement and discuss the implications of separating the influencer from the token. The conversation then shifts to FriendTech's bumpy token launch and the challenges faced during the distribution process. The analysts also touch on the utility of FriendTech's token and whether it represents true value or pure speculation. To close out they touch on Layer Zero's novel approach to countering Sybil attacks, and the implications of BlackRock's BUIDL overtaking Franklin Templeton in tokenized treasuries. Enjoy!

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice.
- -
Special thanks to our sponsor LayerZero

Stay up-to-date with the LayerZero Ecosystem by following: https://twitter.com/LayerZero_Labs
- -
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Marc: https://twitter.com/marcarjoon
Follow Ryan: https://twitter.com/_RyanRConnor
Follow Magic: https://twitter.com/magicdhz
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 FriendTech Token Launch
20:39 Fantasy.Top Infleuncer Cards
26:30 Blast Chain Approach
29:24 SUI Token Unlocks 
42:17 LayerZero Counter Sybil
54:14 LayerZero Segment: Gas.Zip
59:02 BlackRock BUIDL Overtakes Frankling Templeton
1:12:25 Coinbase Earnings Reflection
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 123 ---
Video ID: fTjC3sXuSa8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fTjC3sXuSa8
Title: Inside M0: The Decentralized Bank of DeFi | Luca Prosperi
Published: 2024-05-02 19:06:02 UTC
Description:
In this week's interview we are joined by Luca, CEO & Co-Founder of M^0 Labs to discuss their new crypto dollar product called M. Luca shares insights into the M minting and redemption process, the unique two-token governance system employed by M0, and his long-term vision for the protocol. He also delves into the importance of governance in ensuring the longevity and stability of the M token, and how M0 aims to incentivize active participation in the decision-making process. Luca emphasizes M0's goal of becoming a decentralized bank for DeFi, providing a transparent and distributed collateral pool for a stable crypto dollar. Thanks for tuning in!

- -
Follow Luca: https://twitter.com/LucaProsperi
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/
- -
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.


Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://wormhole.com/0xresearch9-1887
- -
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.
Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
- -
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.


Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
- 
Marinade is the leading Solana staking service that spreads your stake across 100+ top validators, distributes MEV rewards, and provides automatic downside protection with new Protected Staking Rewards.


Choose to liquid stake for mSOL for use in DeFi, or delegate your stake through Marinade Native, which gives you full custody of your SOL and no smart contract risk. Max performance for you, max performance for Solana.

https://blckwrks.co/Marinade
- -
Timestamps

(0:00) Introduction
(3:23) M Minting & Redeeming
(13:17) Collateral & Gov Design
(30:43) Wormhole Ad
(31:21) Pear Ad
(31:46) Marinade Ad
(32:25) Avalanche Ad
(33:07) GTM for Onchain Utilization
(47:16) 2 Token Governance System
(1:01:55) 5 Year Vision

- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- -
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 124 ---
Video ID: pm8XZRb9U28
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pm8XZRb9U28
Title: VC Tokens vs. Memecoins: Which is Ruining Crypto? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-05-01 20:27:52 UTC
Description:
In this episode, the analyst team discusses the venture capital backed tokens and low float token models. They unpack the challenges posed by low float token models and the potential risks they present to investors. The team examines the drama surrounding Io.net's GPU count and the importance of transparent communication in the crypto space. Additionally, they explore the upcoming end of Hyperliquid's points program and its significance for the platform's future. The episode also touches on Stripe's integration of crypto payments using Solana and Avalanche, as well as the ezETH depeg incident. Thanks for tuning in!

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice.
- -
Special thanks to our sponsor LayerZero

Stay up-to-date with the LayerZero Ecosystem by following: https://twitter.com/LayerZero_Labs
- -
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Brick: https://twitter.com/0x___Brick
Follow Ryan: https://twitter.com/_RyanRConnor
Follow Carolina: https://twitter.com/GoldDefi
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Timestamps
0:00 Introduction
1:00 Stripe Integrates Crypto Payments
11:56 Brevin Howard Memecoin Investment
19:07 VC Backed Token Models
29:16 Echo Opening up Privates
33:58 Io.net Drama
41:08 LayerZero Segment: Clusters
45:55 ezETH Depegs
55:48 HyperLiquid Points Program
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
a very simple button mechanism for online websites to onboard PayPal payments to their um checkout flows was like um a large part of their success in PayPal's adoption this is essentially that PayPal moment or could be that PayPal moment could be that PayPal moment for um crypto payments before we get into today's episode just a quick disclaimer the views Express on this podcast either myself or any guests are their personal views and do not represent the views of any Associated organization nothing in this episode should be construed or relied upon as Financial technical tax legal or other advice all right let's jump into the episode hey guys welcome back to another episode of zerox research the research team is back to bring you another analyst round table today is Monday April 29th uh but this episode will go live Wednesday March first I'm joined by Brick Ryan and Carolina from the blockworks research team to talk about what's happening in the market so last week stripe brought back crypto payments and demoed it on Phantom Also earlier today they announced that they will be using Avalanche for crypto payments as well obviously stripe is mainly used by small businesses but I feel like this is a new um path in the US because strip's a US company that it's interesting to see like the diversion between regulation and what US businesses are doing in terms of crypto do you guys have any takes I mean maybe let me start by saying bucko it's an honor to be on your show uh been a longtime listener so great to be here uh but yeah I think this is a great Avenue for like crypto to maybe get integrated more into the business environment so to say because I feel like a lot of these smaller companies would be somewhat willing to maybe experiment with uh like crypto payments but without the like underlying infrastructure of course there's no way way for companies to like try out any of these new things like I'm in the EU and to my knowledge if you're a small business or even a mediumsized business there there's no way for you to even like begin trying out these new payment Styles um and yeah like stable coins have a great product Market fit so it makes sense to also add this type of stuff um for like businesses and yeah I feel like it's just natural development for the uh industry and hope this kind of grows adoption and then from there I don't know the normies the regular people whatever you want to call them are also more incentivized then to try out more stuff on chain if that makes sense yeah I think I'm also based out the EU so I agree with you on that is that like crypto is not used over here at all but like in the Middle East and in Asia as well I think I feel like they've had these this infrastructure for quite some time and I'm I don't think they use it through like regular I'd say like um traditional venues but it's mostly just through like wallet to wallet or OTC a lot of the time as well so it's interesting to see like more regulated and like I don't want to say like more developed but um let's say more developed countries try and actually start adopting crypto for small businesses and I guess like regular transactions yeah and I mean the thing is like I guess the stuff you talked about earlier is more because people are kind of forced to do that in a way because some entities don't have any kind of like underlying payments infrastructure in the first place uh who are in these more like developing countries meanwhile I feel like if the market takes off in for example the us then it has the like ability to kind of develop even further from there and then uh like you get even more power users on chain but I don't know if this is a stupid stake so I don't know what the stripe to power user on chain pipeline is like but it's I mean it's always just good to have people use the chain um it's good it's a good development it certainly eliminates friction the most interesting like web 2 or even web one comp that I can think of is is PayPal and the PayPal button uh PayPal creating a um a very simple button mechanism for online websites to onboard PayPal payments to their um checkout flows was like um a large part of their success in PayPal's adoption and one of these major payment providers like basically all the payment Pro providers do that now right they just make it easy for you at their payment flows to their to their checkouts um this is essentially that PayPal moment or could be that PayPal moment could be that payall moment for um crypto payments um as far as like value acral um you know obviously it's good for Circle uh being that they were the one showcased in the demo um and I think the biggest winner is actually the chain because probably most activity in the long run on these chains is just like simple payments if you look at what people do today um retail users by far their most common Financial trans transactions are simple payments so if you're thinking about value acral to an L1 token or just getting that L1 token in the hands of more businesses and individuals um the introduction of crypto payments is is that that has the most impact there I think I honestly thought this would have been with like Bas um I'm a bit surprised that they onboarded what it was risky with Solana um to do a live demo with Sol is risky um but Avalanche kind of surprised me I honestly assumed that it would be base or it would have been polygon because I feel like they have that like BD um and that they would have been able to get in on this one but um I mean I guess Avalanche has done a great job recently also with their kind of B BD department and apparently have onboarded quite a lot of especially Banks so kind of makes sense for the like project to go there as well but then what I'm thinking about is like I wonder how it works on the back end because I have no idea how this works because let's say salana for example is extremely congested and then you're trying to get your transactions through like what happens if you try it five to 10 times and it still doesn't work or there's some other problems they like how how would you solve for a situation like that and that's why I'm also kind of surprised that they went with a public blockchain because like if you really wanted to do this and make it I don't know as functional or maybe as safe as possible you would have just maybe created a private blockchain just for this stuff and then uh like basically make sure that you have the capacity to meet the demand or whatever is happening in the market yeah feels like this should have been an avalanche subnet thing um because isn't this like the exact reason why they develop these things is to make like easily Deployable private blockchains especially with Evergreen um but agreed I would be so upset like if my transactions just weren't going through while I was trying to pay and it's very important like because stripe is sell is for businesses to sell and there's like those statistics that's like um deter based on how people have to click and how little time you give them to make a decision on shopping um the higher like your Revenue goes because you basically want to limit the time that the Shopper has to think about their purchase I think it's like sub 15 seconds or something is ideal um but imagine like just trying to spam sometimes I'll be trying to buy something on salon and like the more you spam the more you're like ah I just shouldn't be buying this one I guess this is not it's not the interesting thing is it's it's actually milliseconds Google has a study where every 15 milliseconds is incremental like user disutility or something like that it makes them that much less or that's makes them that much more likely to churn on a website or in a payment flow um I think that like the important thing to remember here is like who's the first customer of this service like it's definitely not small businesses um it's definitely not Enterprises what it is is like crypto native businesses and people who are going to use usdc uh for ideological reasons so if you think about like whiff raising money to put you know dog whff hat on the sphere or like the Bonk store selling like Bonk branded coffee mugs like that's the first place where you're going to see this process flow implemented and like if we like call to action um if we want to see crypto payment succeed like we like whenever we can we should make them right because strip's going to see that and they want to see that compounding adoption yeah but so you're saying it's it's an optin thing like not every kind of wender who uses stripe won't have this option for them immediately I I would imagine it's a I would imagine it's an opt-in thing I I would imagine that there's a lot of flexibility there but not an expert okay well that that kind of sucks then or I mean it would make a lot of sense if it's just inbuild from the beginning because I'm not sure but I'd say it's never a like bad option to have more you know payment options out there as long as your money isn't like taken away so from a business business perspective it would be interesting to not just include him to everywhere but maybe some businesses don't want that in the first place and I think it's like rtic really cool um just normalizing crypto in in day-to-day life but in particular nonky non-custodial wallets and you really couldn't make a payment like an online payment in stripe uh without a bank account so I think that's um a really cool step and I mean what are we doing if we're not connecting crypto things to the actual real world right so I think more Integrations will also Kickstart more positive Cycles like more clear use cases more companies will want to build in crypto more Talent will come more capital and just build more useful applications I think it's a really cool step yeah it's it is a really awesome step um it's great to see I do remember however in it must have been April 21 when like PayPal and Visa like made big announcements that they were onboarding crypto payments and I was like this is the moment and like like it it wasn't right like these things take like a long time to play out uh is what we're realizing and you know I feel like every time I'm listening to an investor on a crypto pod that was around in like I don't know 2013 or 2016 like they've all said that yeah these things have taken longer to play out than we had previously thought so I'm always tempering my expectations all right um moving on there was kind of a click baity headline this week but I think it still touches on something that's quite important in the markets and that was that brevan Howard has made a tiny investment in meme coins now I don't know if they have um they may have but I think this kind of speaks more to where we are right now where we see these huge um fdv very low float tokens launching basically every week um and I assume we're going to have a few more launching over the next few weeks but and it's kind of like people I'd say like the retail participant has almost sort of given up on making an honest living trading cryptographic coins and more so have moved on to mem coins and we've also seen like Venture Capital funds like hedge funds adopt mem coins as an investment um writing these blog posts like multiple Pages saying oh actually memec coins are like egalitarian and they could change everything and on Twitter you see this constantly where the I I feel like this is like both very fair but also very obvious Stakes of like people saying oh mem coins are destroying the industry uh going back to kind of what kolina said about like how we actually want to get like actual use cases around crypto and then there's people saying oh actually like mem coins are the great um equalizer and and it's fantastic I kind of in between I like meme coins and I think they're fine for the industry I don't think I like they've been around I one thing I don't like is that I don't agree with the meme coin super cycle fees I think meme coins are just always mem coins and they've always done well like do has outperformed BTC over the last few Cycles so they've always done well um but I also don't think that they're like the worst thing to have ever happened they're fine um but I think what's not fine is that there's a lot of people launching like 0.1 float tokens and then complaining about mcoins are ruining the industry they're not you are kind of Ruin not ruining the industry but at least not doing good for it what do you guys think yeah I mean I guess it makes sense to kind of divide those two things like low float tokens and then meme coins and talk about them separately because like yeah especially with meme tokens if you take a position you never really or seldom can you have a real fundamental thesis on stuff like yeah you can uh look at how um popular the meme is on social media and like where it will end up at some point but still to a certain expent to a certain extent I'd say that's more like being in the casino and just trying to you know thanx your money and you should be pretty uh or have the expectation that you will lose everything and that's why I think it's interesting that these like professional funds are apparently trying to take on more positions because I can't imagine going to my lpce I'm being like okay guys we're trying out this new strategy I hope you don't mind it it's going to be like we P 10% of the fund into meme coins and then really the two outcomes there are either you're going to be the greatest or you're going to be seen as the greatest Trader ever even though that's I'd say more luck based or then you're going to lose 10% of your fund so I definitely want to see how like these fund managers go up to there I don't know uh like boards or then LPS and trying to you know justify this decision and saying like yeah this is skill based we know that this will like go up okay maybe I'll continue on that note uh going back to the like low float stuff um that's where I feel like retail has become much more you know cognizant of what's going on I think last cycle was more like oh this like kind of intrinsically valuable token that has governance rights is going up right now which is great and everybody uh or nobody really thought about like the underlying token structure and uh for long you've seen this opinion on the market or like a lot of people are saying that yeah like fdv is a meme it doesn't really matter and then suddenly uh a lot of participants are like surprised that it the token is down only when the float has gone from like 5% to 65% or whatever uh so like that's just basic you know I don't know what to call it basic mathematics maybe but I guess we saw a similar phenomen in the equity Market as well like a couple of decades ago maybe uh and then the market just started realizing that okay like a low float thing just doesn't work uh in the long run so we shouldn't even buy into these things so at on one hand I also feel like this is something that the market naturally kind of figures out in the longer run and then if you try to do this in the future you're going to be called out or your token won't do that well because everybody knows they're like okay we don't even want to touch this thing yeah um people were saying that FTV doesn't matter but I feel like above 70k BTC everyone's like oh FTV doesn't matter and now we're kind of realizing that FTV does matter I um I kind of agree with you on the take that people will eventually realize that FTB does matter and like people will stop buying in but I think like the best way to I mean it should just it's just a natural equilibrium still though because as a market like if you're a smart retail or Market participant you're just farming these tokens and you're getting it like out at the highest FTV you can um and it as a VC your incentive is to launch at as high an fdv as possible anyway so that you can exit as well I think why the face why not because I feel that yeah maybe if you're you're like a shortterm holder or your uh like view is shortterm then that is valid to say that like the VC should kind of get as high of a starting FTV as possible but if you're really a long-term holder and like aligned with the project I feel like you don't want a situation where the token launches with a high fdv or I don't know how to put it with an intrinsically High FDB because then that means that in the long run like the market expectations are kind of skewed and then everything starts going down at some point and as a long-term holder you're going to be damaged of that or you know get damaged from that yeah it's um a high fdv to begin on a project could actually destroy the project right like we've all seen Silicon Valley where the founder realizes that if he launched at a lower valuation things would have been much easier right like expectations would have been lower he would still have his company like to tokens go through that as well um and they risk alien alienating their communities if they start at that super high fdv and then proceed to dump I think you have to take it on a caseby casee basis I think some token structures depending on what they're trying to accomplish um will necessarily have these low float Dynamics and then the team has to manage it appropriately so one team that I think is doing a fantastic job with that is Hive mapper the way that the project works is that they give out honey tokens for people who map roads and contribute data to their system so that they can sell to Enterprises um they um issue tokens based on uh an individual's contribution to that map and small very very small amounts of tokens have hit the market over time um they had to manage those um lowf flow Dynamics and they did so by completely cutting off any um um chatter about speculation in their discords in their telegrams they they made it very plainly obvious obvious to the community that we're not about financial speculation or about building this map if you want to uh contribute and and and get rewarded honey do so but we're not here just to to focus on token price we're here to focus on building a Global and usable map um I think they really they handle that really well on their coms observing them from kind of day one and um other projects come to mind too like like worldcoin for example like you will necessarily have low float there because you're onboarding people one by one and you get x amount of like World coin tokens right like it's just a natural consequence of these systems and they have to manage expectations of their user bases yeah but I mean especially on the leather part I feel like it's a bit weird that the float is low and then I get that you have to kind of um manage the supply because you're going to be giving out tokens to your users but the same time it's a bit of a weird dynamic where then some investors unlock 20% of the supply suddenly you know what I mean like those are a bit two separate things uh and I of course understand that investors have to get out at some point as well but it's just weird or it maybe makes weird incentives in that sense I think what would be cool maybe as a um like a long-term structure would be that everybody who's kind of contributing to the project I don't know if investors could do this but especially for the team would be like okay you're going to get comped like this many tokens if we reach these kpis or if you're able to like grow the project in this way uh as long as like the incentives or the incentive structure would be made in a you know good way then I feel like it's easier for the market kind of to be on board with okay like everybody is still aligned with the project and not trying to you know just get out on the top or whatever totally yeah like the one thing that comes to mind when you say that is like valuation metrics provided by you know any kind of um like trading software service whether it be a coin gecko or whatever like there's no single agreed upon definition of circulating Supply so the um information that partic ipants um have at their fingertips to make educated decisions is like you have to put in a lot of effort like I can very easily type in like AAPL and get all like um standardized statistics on Apple's valuation across a number of different dimensions I cannot do that in crypto um you know if you're going to invest in these things professionally you probably want to forecast out those unlocks and treat them like um unlocked tokens right you want to treat treat them as circulating Supply but we know that every project doesn't do that right they don't treat a lot of projects don't treat investor unlocks as circulating Supply until they exit those wallets which like from first principles I think is incorrect so yeah standardization which like we're slowly getting there but like we're nowhere close standardization will go a long way yeah I feel like a lot of people have now started to do n plus one for um circulating Supply as well instead of what but I agree with you I mean even if you try and find some of these unlock schedules like now at least I think a good example and we'll talk more about these guys in a bit but I think a good example of this was Renzo and their pie chart like there's just these teams that kind of obfuscate how tokenomics look um and the worst is when they just release their like Supply schedule but it's just the like the chart and there's no dates there's no like it's just a percent and you can't like you have to like do with your mouse pointer you reach out to the team and they don't they don't respond in time so it's definitely a mine field and the reason that I decided to combine the low fdv and the mem coin talk was because I think and I think a lot of other people think this as well is that because it's been such a mindfield there's this I'm not a big fan of the like pessimism but I think a lot of people assume that retail has just shifted towards meme coins where they have the same equal chance as um VCS but I don't even think that's true anymore because now we're seeing more and more K rounds and like um raises for meme coins and I feel like they do this every time like the initial run up of Pepe towards the end of it you started seeing like VC not VC obviously but like fundraised um memes and now we're seeing more and more of it again so it's going to be interesting to see how much like juice is left in the tank for the I have I have interesting I have thoughts on kol rounds um I think at times they seem um maybe unfair um and they're often viewed with skepticism um I and I guess it's more of a question how much different is that from like Marketing in traditional markets right where you're outright paying someone to speak about your product um that they now have a financial interest in like we all watch commercials where celebrities are are literally Shilling Pro uh products to people um saying that it's better than the next thing when they probably don't use it themselves and they're just getting um you know um they're just getting a a check cut to them right like it's not that different I understand that like token Dynamics May muddy um the may may may cause it to seem more illegitimate than otherwise but I don't see a way around it I think um is what I'm trying to say I don't see a way around paying people to influence public perception on public crypto projects I think it's just a bit demoralizing for the general population because you see these guys get these rounds and they're getting them at a discount sometimes to like series B like whatever number they've raised like they're getting it a discount at that and then they get different terms as well so they'll get like this is probably an exaggerated example but they'll get 60% unlock at tge and then you're like okay well I think it's more like a I understand what you mean and another difference is that like in this scenario you could be losing thousands of dollars versus like obviously you can lose a lot of money if you buy something that a celebrity is talking about as well but it's I would say like lesser it's like 40 50 bucks maybe you buy a product that some celebrity has Shield versus like if you buy a token that your favorite influencer shield and they dump it on your head despite clicking that button that said I promise to sell carefully then you're you know you're hurt you're demoralized you're very upset and then you say how can I make it all back and that's the meme coin thing yeah I I guess the push back is that um I think it's the I think it's the user base or like the the group of people that you're selling to empirically really value openness and transparency and kol's are really the antithesis of that um yeah I I think that's I think that's a good way to frame it but like I guess the market doesn't like these K rounds that much either because if you look at recent performance of almost whatever K project it's down only so maybe not the best structure to get your token to perform well out of the gate not Financial advice by the way yeah I don't know a lot about K rounds like it can't be a large portion of the allocation um right like do you think the sell pressure for those projects is attributable to those key opinion leaders well I guess it kind of depends on the structure Case by case but as boo said like a lot of the times they get referable terms compared to other entities so then it becomes maybe a combination of low float and large KO unlock relative to others which might or might not lead to like cell pressure I'm just speculating here mhm one thing that is supposed to be fixing this or I guess is like a product that is going to try and fix this is Kobe's Echo um I wonder if you guys have any takes on this I kind of I completed the kyc thing um it was quite intense but I it makes sense uh he wants to make sure that nothing can be go wrong and I respect that um I feel like I saw another product that was similar to this as well it's called like bidness club or bidding club uh I'm not sure if you guys saw that but I fund like I fundamentally like that idea of creating groups to share allocation I think it makes sense I'm not I'm not sure if it'll be like the great equalizer but I think it's like a very valid effort um but I don't know if you guys have any more like interesting takes yeah I agree that it's a really valid effort um there is the question that you still have to kind of apply to be in a group right so the group leaders are the ones that choose the the project that they want to fund and then you kind of have to uh participate with them um in a round so it's not like it's going to be super 100% open to to everyone but I think it's a great step in in the right direction and and yeah it's it's a bit long the the the whole process and I think it also makes it a bit more serious and it is like you you are giving away all your protections or everything from like in my case the the European Union and you're saying I am certif not certified professional investor and so I'm aware that I will lose all my money and I'm happy to invest in this um so I think regulation wise they took a lot of care to to build a really good product that that you can trust I think Kobe has also been like very positive in in the space since forever um so I'm yeah I don't know how many deals were were already closed I don't know if it's like public knowledge um but I think it's a great product I'm really happy to see it yeah I mean I think it's a fair question to ask like should retail investors even be able to access these deals in the first place because they are quite risky and then you can make the argument like not everybody knows what like they should do maybe with their Capital but at the same time like I feel that at at certain point after like an investor whoever it is uh after they've given enough information and like the rules have been clearly laid out that okay like you are taking on a lot of risk uh there is a large chance that you won't get any of your money back like if they've got this information and still want to invest I don't see why it should be regulated like even if you want to make it super bare bone or a super bare bone comparison I would say you could say that it's just similar to gambling or whatever and even that's kind of legal in most places at least outside of the US and some places in Asia but uh I think it's fair to let everybody get into or get uh the same chances at least yeah I think the closest competitor to this in crypto like in terms of um giving access to early stage deals is used to be fured like um liquidity boost boot scrapping cuz I think originally that was designed to be something that was similar to this for people to raise not from VCS but from the General market but it's become like not that anymore I mean they do two rounds before they have a KR round and then they do a liquidity bootstrapping um thing as well I I mean if that's the best other competitor like this is I obviously like VC Investments are really risky longer term you can you might never get to exit it's very liquid but it's definitely like I think it's a depending on the project I think it's a fair shot than what like f has been recently I don't know if you guys have looked into any fi tokens or if any of our listeners have but I mean those have just been horrific horrific PA comparable to like just the entire they're having their own bare market now um yeah yeah let's um move on to I'd say like the biggest drama over the last few days I onet Ryan I called on you last time to give an IET briefing I'm calling on you again uh do you have any takes yeah so I guess just a little background first for those who haven't followed uh over the weekend uh Martin scy um otherwise known as Pharma bro uh hurled accusations uh at the IET team um two two broad accusations one that the um um one less consequential one one more consequential the less consequential is that the the project is flooded with Bots being promoted by Bots um in full of bots the other is that uh the GPU count uh on their Explorer and the gpus that they have available is incorrect uh or or or is misleading um so like just first like why this matters I think I I I personally believe that this space kind of like decentralized compute deepin space is one of the best shots on goal that we have in crypto to um convincing a lot of people in web 2 that like token incentives and crypto rails do solve a problem that a lot of people today have which is access to uh compute resources um and it would be a shame if you know that were to be taken off the rails by like a a scam project so super interested in what's going on here I think it's important to to take a close look at what Martin is saying and and talk about where he's right and where he's wrong first about like where he's right um undoubtedly the IET project um uh either by fault of their own or Consequences of just the General market and having a tge coming up um was inundated with Bots uh I believe that they hit the max people in a telegram group within the month and if you participate in telegram or Discord you know that a lot of the content is is bot generated content if you um have followed the project you know it's just been like a constant it's been a constant problem and it's a really hyped project so like understandably that's going to happen um I don't envy their position having to deal with that problem uh the other part where Martin is right is in the GPU count like undoubtedly it was wrong and if you participated in the project over the last month or two you've seen that GPU number go parabolic and undoubtedly if you're familiar with crypto you were like civil attack um now where Martin was wrong in all fairness to the IET team um they came out probably three days before saying that they were civil attacked and our GPU counts are wrong uh they came out plainly and stated that um the numbers the metadata the metadata on their website was corrupt um the amount of available gpus was misleading um could they have done more like sure like should there have been a banner on the website saying like please don't trust these numbers today we're working on it like sure like sometimes a Twitter post isn't enough um I think that like look the IET project um it is a very ambitious project they're trying to do things uh that are technically very challenging um I think in all fairness in in the spirit of moving fast and breaking things to point out that a tech project is not working as described um might not be best for that project it might be a little bit unfair um and I think like as like a more of a meta comment um comms like like like we said earlier like the the you have a lot of stakeholders as a web3 company because of the token just by definition you have more Staker stakeholders than a than a web2 company and those stakeholders are very sensitive um towards um or sorry they they value very highly openness and transparency and because of that comms are extraordinarily important um bot activity is offputting incorrect numbers on the Explorer are offputting and if you don't handle those things in the right way like you could lose your project right like it might not work out for you so um I think the meta lesson here is just that like comms are extraordinarily important you have to be on top of your data you have to fight bot activity and again it's not a position I am envious in I'm sure it's like super hard to to fight away uh the bots in this environment yeah and I'm sure that given how ambitious the project is they have a lot of stuff to do in addition to coms and like watching for S attacks and all of that stuff so it must be super hard to like trying to control everything that's going around and then it's also sometimes like hard to tell whether for example crypto Twitter is just being trying to be like you know I don't know haters if you want to put it in Zoomer speak but like you don't always know if the criticism is warranted or not and then you just I feel that sometimes the best thing to do is just wait for a while and see how the situation develops yeah totally I mean just poking around today um you know last night scy was convinced that they had no gpus IET showed him like how to actually get the right metadata to see the actual cluster um he said thank you like my bad and now he's claiming that they don't have the gpus again right so like it's a very fluid situation accusations are being hurled best bet is like you you you step back you like let the dust settle and then assess like it's really hard to know what's going on right now yeah and I guess kley is also trying to launch something within the space so maybe he's trying to advertise something like it's always good to remember that everybody usually has some incentive to do something yeah I but I do Wonder we to our listeners we talked about this this morning as well and one of the things that we kind of agreed on was that everybody slightly knew that those numbers were overinflated one thing that I didn't know was that schy was launching his own decentralized AI thing and like brick said I feel like that's kind of a I mean he was also talking about too a few weeks back and he was making the same claims that I think everybody makes about ta as well so it's like these very like obvious deficiencies in these projects such as like ta oh I don't know if it's like being I don't know if it's gameable and with ion oh I don't know if like it's fake uh these like as price goes down people really like bringing up a lot of these issues that I feel like a lot of people are already aware of all right this is a good place to move on to our next segment but before that a quick word from clusters thanks to our sponsor layer zero all right guys for this week's layer zero segment we have zerox Fubar founder of clusters a universal cross chain name service thank you so much for coming on FBA thanks for having me great to be here so just to kick us off what was the problem that spark the idea for clusters the main problem is that I got too many Wallets on too many chains and lost track of all of them I think this is a very common crypto power user problem if I I can't I came in the crypto with one metam Mas cot wallet one e in a dream one day and I I left back a year later and I had 17 different wallets across seven different chains and and nfts I must have bought well drunk so cluster cluster aim to fix this I think we we live in a world of deting complexity there's a new chain that launches every single week it seems there's a new wallet that comes out um and even within that the apps the the decks the decks you use on blast might be different than the decks you use on ethereum so clusters kind of aims to bring this all back together there's a famous quote there are only two two business models in the world bundling and bundling and crypto is definitely in its unbundling or modularity phase but clusters aims to I think build build the first Universal app that no matter what chain you're on it's a seamless experience that brows all your assets and familiar flows together yeah that's a very relatable problem so I'm pretty excited about what you're building over at clusters but how does layer zero fit into the protocol's design and how difficult are different Integrations to spin up like is that something that's on your guys's team on your end or is it uh more the people looking to integrate like is that on their end yeah the I mean the fundamental problem with with universal apps with cross chain apps is that the bridges are less reliable than boltimore you you've you've got it seems like a new bridge colapses every single month what was it um even even economical semi-in shrined ones look at Phantom adopted multi-chain as their economical bridge and then multi multi-chain devs have not been heard of Since since the recent Chinese government raid and all and all their assets were stolen and and dumped um you you've had similar similar hack issues on a wide number of bridges so it's very very hard to take on the risk the the addition or marginal risk of of bridge trust assumptions generally and so I think that the the bridge space has not been with sure enough to build reliable cross chain apps um for for quite some time the the why now is that for the first time I think layer Z V2 is both immutable enough but composable enough with the highest security bounty in the world to that we can really rely on it and build hyperstructures on top so yeah the there's kind of the the the meme was that everybody's building infrastructure and nobody's building apps but it's not really true the the infrastructure still quite brittle so with with respect to to what that means for us um it lets I mean being able to rely on kind of tested tested security structures from ler zero lets us be more more aggressive and fast moving in terms of expansion while still focusing on as decentralized protocols as possible nice that's great to hear why you guys chose Larry zero as a solution and how B2 V enabled Custer as an idea to be built one last question I wanted to ask is how has adoption been and has there been anything that has sort of like C any surprise even how people are using clusters an option has been off the charts we launched two months ago we've seen over 80,000 unique names registered already um surpassing even an SS steady state so the biggest excitement has been how many people truly are using clusters for its purpose you you scroll through the feed and people are configuring people have their wallets from what seems like 12 different chains all in one cluster Sal lot Bitcoin ethereum the l2s um other other edml ones and so that's that that's really fun to see awesome well that is unfortunately all the time we have left for today but we will be sure to link to uh cluster's uh Social account in the show notes but thanks so much for coming onar perfect thanks so much for trly all right we're back um one other piece of big news last week was the Easy E um dpeg um I think and this might be kind of a dumb dumb take um that this was due to people being upset about the airdrop um as well as the pie chart tweet I uh I don't I mean I saw some numbers that made it seem like it deps 70% like one e was uh one Easy E was worth Point free E I'm not sure if that how sustained that was um but I think it like kind of brings it back to this very obvious issue that lrts have and it's just duration um you don't know when you're going to be able to exit and a lot of them I think e fori is the only one that has withdrawals I don't think any of the other ones have withdrawals but I'm not sure if you guys have any other thoughts on this one this was just like I feel like it just happened for a day and then it caused like liquidation and Moro and gearbox and then the day after they were like oh we're going to increase the airdrop allocation which shows that bullying teams works it improves tokenomics drastically yeah I mean maybe worth going over the mechanisms a bit first like my understanding here is that basically people got mad about the airdrop structure which then made a lot of people dump the token and because you couldn't you couldn't withdraw it or you could maybe but anyway people I guess Market sold which then of course causes the peg to go down and then that probably gets even worse when people start getting liquidated on this uh like Loop strategies uh and that probably costed that but yeah in yeah I don't know how to like react to this news really because this just shows that as you said if you bully a theme then they'll change the structure so that kind of makes an incentive where maybe if the team I'm not saying this team isn't like super uh you know honest but maybe a team that isn't that honest knows that okay we can try this like shady structure at first and then if the market pushes back we just like change the structure to something more uh you know sensible so some teams will always know that okay we can like try and like get this and if if it doesn't work then we'll just revert back to something sensible but I think it will like I don't think it has ever fully well it kind of recovered but at least it was trading at always a bit like one point something e and now it's all always like 9899 um so I don't like I don't think it would be a good strategy in the sense that I think it will be kind of at least for the next few months tainted with with this image and I think it could um also tell us a bit about like these projects are all a bit Half Baked in the sense that you can deposit but you can't withdraw probably if withdrawals were Ena then this would have been much much smoother and um maybe it's a good take to like remind projects that they should kind of you know just launch the full project before having like so much money inside them I think the big takeaway for me is that this is just like a glimpse of what you will see in a world of reaking and rehypothecation like this was very benign right like it was a funny pie chart and it caused like 20 million in liquidations and smaller amount in bad debts throughout Defi and like the thing about rehypothecation is that it like necessarily adds fragility and systemic risk to a system that's fine we all know that but when you couple that with crypto's appetite for looping Loop strategies that contain leverage and um Auto liquidations when they unwind things can and smart contract risk things can get very dicey um I don't spend enough time um in like the E ecosystem to know how seriously um the potential impacts of rehypothecation are taken by like core teams and EF people um but I do see the tvl numbers for igen layer and there's clearly and and the surrounding protocols and there's clearly an appetite tight for rehypothecation to get like incremental additional yield and it's doesn't appear to be a lot which is which is worrisome um if things go like Cycle's not over right like things can get way um more out of hand um if if people don't manage their positions well yeah but maybe worth noting that this problem is probably made worse right now by the fact that you can your points as well so I feel that that's kind of exagerated the risk right now uh but there will of course be a risk uh as you like mentioned one thing I find kind of funny is that if you talk to anybody about like oh like what do you think are like the risks of ion lay reaking they'll bring it up they'll say like oh there's like obvious risk with like these liquid reaking tokens but like Ryan said I feel like not everybody's kind of digesting that the fact that they're looping everything um which is fine because you want to earn extra points obviously it go like you want to farm the protocol you want to do your like Loop your YT points as well but it just like I don't want to be a Doomer but I feel like eventually it might not end particularly well and imagine being the guy that got liquidated on like Easy E last week I would be so upset I would be like devastated I think that's one thing people don't think about they're like oh it's igon layer like the risk there's risk but it's not like risky and then boom it's like drops 70% and you're just staring at your wallet single tier shedding yeah all all leverage strategies end poorly like in every single Market in the history of financial markets I think when if I think about these systems I think a lot about traditional financial markets and I can't help but see like the guard else around rehypothecation are the reasons why the unwind in trafi are so less disastrous than here like we have the FDIC the FDIC has an emergency fund like we have the FED even the treasury stepped in in March of 2023 to help um there are um caps on the amount of lending that you that a bank can do and reserve requirements and there are withdrawal limits on individual accounts like the whole system has had like 200 years of like figuring out how to handle like rehypothecation Risk and it feels like we're just letting it rip like I understand there's like committees that are thinking about this and like um the E the I leer team is talking about guard rails um it is the guard rails in crypto and risk management practices around um rehypothecation strategies are orders of magnitude off from what is in trafi um and that's that's systemic risk yeah I mean you're also allowing potentially the people who have the highest risk appetite in the world who like put 100x Longs on random um meme coins totally there there's no reason why I can't rehypothecation there like I don't know it's um there's a lot of asymmetry let's put it that way I give that three months before somebody starts re hypothecating m coins because they've already started doing points and stuff now but uh we'll see but yeah I guess it's just a sign of uh maybe developing Market because yeah as you said even tread fi markets had problems with this stuff historically and then when something like terrible happens or that's usually I guess what's needed like at first everyone says that okay this is fine like ter Luna stuff yeah this is fine we have a great backup fund if anything happens okay that didn't go that well so now I guess we already have some regulation around like especially stable coins uh so yeah if anything happens I feel that at least after a catastrophic thing usually the market gets better than so if nothing else positive to take away there is that like if something was to happen uh the market will probably be safer afterwards we just need to develop our lore a bit more as your take we need to go through a little bit more struggle hey I'm not I'm not I'm not saying that you said that okay um talking about points farming uh I don't know how good of a segue it's going to be but another points program that is supposed to end uh this week or next week is hyper liquid um our very own Carolina has done a potentially the best like the longest and the most comprehensive Deep dive on hyper liquid um very recently exclusively for our subscribers um Carolina do you want to kind of give your thoughts on that a little bit um yeah so the the hyper liquids points program is finishing very soon it should end in about one or two weeks and I think it's an exciting time for the project it has been consistently for about three months now ranking in the top two top three dexes for dexes in terms of daily volume and now it's sort of a Moment of Truth where we find out just how much volume and all the other impressive metrics have been inflated by the points program um there's no question that users have been farming the air drop it's more of a question of how much and how many will stay and I may be an optimism but I I do think that even people who deposited in the platform just to get some points um probably enjoyed the trading experience and might actually make hyper liquid there go to perex it is pretty smooth and fast uh there are today 130 assets listed prelaunch token markets vaults for copy trading and Market making strategies trading is gasless and you can deposit USC from our bom very easily it has generated $140 billion involv volum and attracted 110k new user since the beginning of this year and daily volume has been consistently exceeding $1 billion and I think the deposit UI flow is so seamless that most people don't really realize it's actually a bridge which is is a great thing because they managed to build their own L1 and optimize it for high performance low latency while keeping the ux abstracted to this fact so I think this is the only way we can start actually Bridging the Gap between prexes and centralized exchanges by focusing on ux and performance and to get some more details um hyper liquid right now is not only a perex anymore um very recently the team has enveloped native spot trading and it had been in the works for a while in the test net and around two weeks ago there was an air drop of per tokens to points holders and that was the first token launched on the hyper liquid L1 so the launch of this native spot Trading uh came with two new native token standards the hip1 and hip2 and the first is a fungible token um standard that incorporates onchain spot order books between Pairs of tokens and the second one is designed for bootstrapping liquidity via an onchain Market making strategy and it is integrated directly um into the block transition logic of the chain itself in division here is for the spot and the per de is to be kind of the primary source of liquidity upon which all the other apps that eventually are added to the L1 then can Thrive so basically instead of building a chain and incentivizing teams to build on it and just incentivize users to bridge to it they did it the other way around focusing on making the chain very performant and a challenging product just building a very performant challenging product and and the user base to later on ADD other absolute so we'll have to wait and see uh to see if actually projects will come and on the this new L1 and how easy it will be to introduce new tokens and to bridge new assets but it seems like a more long-term uh plan now in any case it is however I think relevant to know this when trying to make sense of the value of the Native token that will launch now very soon probably the tokenomics haven't come out yet but we know the token will have a role in securing the network which is proof of stake so the documentation mentions that staking and slashing will be similar to to Cosmos chains the tokens influence may also extend to the asset listing process and it will definitely be used to pay for gas in the future on the L1 so it's interesting that although the project is very known for for the per deex the toen can actually have very clear utility at the infrastructure level and that will stop here I was just going to say that you know how you were like oh the bridging is very seamless it is very seamless because I didn't even know it was an L1 when I first bridged I was like just thought I deposited it to a vault but apparently I bridged over which is kind of insane um I'm kind of excited to see if people are going to stay on after the points program I know a lot of people are saying hyper liquid is a great perex um I'm sure it is I don't really trade that much on perps I feel like I'd get liquidated immediately but a lot of people are saying it's very very good I feel like a lot of people said that about vertex as well and they also said that about like a million other to I'm but I'm sure this one could be very very good I'm excited to see because they do have really good Avo and Hyper liquid have done very very good job doing pre-launch tokens and I think that was a really good way to capture the meta especially since we had a lot of these points programs and then like teased their drops for months and months so they did well there and I know their product is people are happy with it so I'm excited to see how it's all going to turn out is there any um public information on the like trade latency numbers for something like hyper liquid or an AO versus um centralized exchange um I only know that they um they are capable of managing 20K um orders per second and compared to binance that's like very little but it's a lot compared to like salana yeah um so it seems to be that that that is the hurdle right and why you see these per deex is kind of moving to constructing their own chains is just to optimize the hell out of it to get them at parody with those centralized exchanges um I think they'll be able to do it but it seems like it's a long road there or it's a long road ahead yeah what I'm most interested in seeing is it feels that a lot of burp Dees like the quality is getting better and better and then the like kind of competitive advantages on the ux side are getting smaller and smaller so yeah as boo said like I feel AO and then hyper liquid have probably done pretty well also like in addition to them running the incentive programs is them having the pre-launch markets which then gets kind of customers into the door and maybe integrated to the community and then they like continue trading over there meanwhile a lot of other burp dexes are just running like points programs or some other type of incentive programs so I don't know it will be interesting to see like where kind of a market equilibrium lies where suddenly you don't need to incentivize usage anymore in a similar way but I guess more like your market share kind of stabilizes uh which I feel that for example The Lending Market is kind of or has historically kind of went in that direction maybe until spark launched but uh you know now it seems that it's super volatile like suddenly a new perex can come out and suddenly take up like 15 or 20% of the market uh which is kind of an interesting phenomenon yeah I feel like they're always trying something new with perex as well I don't think they've iterated that much on lending and borrowing markets I'm sure there's some stuff out there that's like novel but feel like you don't want that much novelty in your lending and borrowing you want like your assets to be as safe as possible versus with perss you might take a few risks um I actually with Hyper liquid one Ryan this goes back to like what you said about the latency I know this isn't what you meant um when you comparing it to the Sexes but I feel like hyper liquid's main competition isn't a sex it's um dydx or whatever the most popular one is now besides for hyper liquid like the established player is the competition and not and like not like Market sharewise or whatever but I feel like that's the same the user who's on on dydx that's who they want to attract because funds can't trade on like I mean they can trade on dydx I guess to an extent maybe the larger assets but they can't really trade on hyper liquid at all there's just no they take up like 30% of the oi know yeah I I feel yeah I'm thinking about two things so what you said now um at the end um yeah like professional Traders it's really difficult although I have talked to um some people that were either building like vaults on top of hyper liquid or um professional traders that were actually like running some Market making strategies and uh what they said is that um the the apis and the sdks are really really easy to integrate with and I feel like that's something that doesn't really that we don't really know like as an end user but it's cool to know because it makes like everything um much more seamless to to integrate is just makes more uh more apps reliant on on hyper liquid so that could be a cool thing for them and um yeah regarding the ydx I think that's why also hyper liquid is uh kind of leaning into this kind of attention um focus they always have they're always listing the newest assets and with the pre-launched tokens and they also have those Bol not sure if the idx has something similar but um they basically we have copy trading vaults or U Market making strategy vaults so you can def you can just see the performance and put your money there and kind of not do anything while it's trading for you and all of those little things I think make the the ux maybe a bit more interesting or exciting at least yeah I feel like the vaults are a great marketing tool I see the vaults more than anything else on Twitter it's just people are like oh look X lost 30% on their vault this week ha and it's just like you're always reminded of hyper liquid yeah I mean that's going to be interesting because I just feel like there's really no large scale passive strategies you can deploy that's going to make money for you like consistently kind of in perpetuity or I'm just being reminded of AOS like OG options vaults which kind of performed in a quite stable way uh for a while but then suddenly when the market like turns against you your performance drops by like let's say 7% putting you like uh equal or close to 0% if you started from let's say the beginning of the year uh so that's just I guess a tough problem to solve and I don't know if that's going to be you know possible to solve because at least until now like if we don't count for maybe The Medallion fund which is like a tradify fund that's doing pretty well like everything else is either moving with the market or kind of worse than a passive strategy is moving in the market yeah the Vault strategy is just like vaults the hyper liquid vaults are interesting though because you basically get to put your money where your mouth is like if you're talking constantly on Twitter and saying oh I'm one of the best like Traders and then you can just launch a hyper liquid VA capture whatever fee they take I think it's 10% and then you can just let people uh invest in you um but that ribbon is like it was the ribbon vaults they just I don't even think they were doing like negative s% I think they were losing money overall and then they were advertising that this strategy has like a 47% return and then the historical API was like minus 28% or something like that so the vault is it's trying to sell vaults to a niche ecosystem of like people who overtrade and actively trade all the time for Passive U strategies I feel like it's always a difficult way to Market yourself no but I mean maybe I express myself badly there but of course it depends on like uh from where you start looking at the performance of the world but especially for ribbon Walts just because I don't want to dunor them uh or I want to make clear that like the performance was pretty stable and like positive but then you'd have that this like short two week periods where suddenly the market turns against you so like if you traded through these vaults you just had to be careful or you still had to know what you was doing you know okay I'm not going to invest in this week because like I think the performance or the market structure is such that the performance this week will be bad I'm just saying that it's hard to create a passive strategy that's really like outperforms uh constantly maybe Michael sailor has a really good take on this have heard him his passive strategy on outperforming consistently this is not Financial advice but I would recommend the one chair strategy is a fantastic one apparently allegedly NFA um feels like unless we have any other takes on guaranteed passive income strategies we can end it off over there thank you all very much for listening thank you Ryan kolina and brick for joining um have a nice day thanks for having us a [Music]

========================================

--- Video 125 ---
Video ID: ETtrKChHsRw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ETtrKChHsRw
Title: Is Ethena's Yield Sustainable? Protocol Risks & Scaling Strategy w/ Founder Guy Young
Published: 2024-04-25 17:20:45 UTC
Description:
In this week's interview we have an in-depth discussion with Guy, the founder of Ethena Protocol. Guy discusses the challenges of scaling Ethena to billions in USD supply, the important role of Bitcoin and Ethereum derivatives as collateral, and how Ethena is able to generate the highest yielding USD-denominated asset in crypto. Additionally, we touch on risk management, governance, and the critical role centralized exchanges could play in Ethena's future. Hope you enjoy!
- -
Follow Guy: https://twitter.com/leptokurtic_
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.

Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://wormhole.com/0xresearch8-4099
- -
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
- -
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.
Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
- -
Marinade is the leading Solana staking service that spreads your stake across 100+ top validators, distributes MEV rewards, and provides automatic downside protection with new Protected Staking Rewards. 

Choose to liquid stake for mSOL for use in DeFi, or delegate your stake through Marinade Native, which gives you full custody of your SOL and no smart contract risk. Max performance for you, max performance for Solana.
https://blckwrks.co/Marinade
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction 
6:03 Open Interest Constraint
11:25 Negative Funding vs CEX Risks
22:40 Wormhole Ad 
23:18 Pear Protocol Ad
23:43 Marinade Ad
24:22 Avalanche Ad 
25:04 Ethena BD & Partnerships 
29:05 ENA Incentives
37:52 BTC Collateral & Real Yield 
42:54 sUSDe and USDe Usecases
49:28 Protocol Owned Liquidity
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 126 ---
Video ID: GTiMiyaCQog
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GTiMiyaCQog
Title: Runes: BRC-20s Replacement or Just More Hype?
Published: 2024-04-24 18:56:08 UTC
Description:
In this episode the analysts kick things off by examining the Runes phenomenon on Bitcoin, debating whether it represents real innovation or just another trend. The conversation then shifts to the DePIN space, with a focus on Ionet's partnership to onboard 3000 high-performance GPUs. The hosts then turn their attention to Avalanche's rapid progress, including the Vryx breakthrough enabling 100K TPS. Stick around for all of this and much more!

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. 
- -
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Dan: https://twitter.com/smyyguy
Follow Ryan: https://twitter.com/_RyanRConnor
Follow EffortCapital: https://twitter.com/EffortCapital
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:12 Inside Runes Hype
13:42 Ionet and Aether Partnership 
23:59 Scroll Sessions & L2 Incentives
30:48 Layer Zero Segment: Tapioca DAO
36:27 ZKasino Rug
43:34 Wayfinder AI Agents
59:18 Bull & Bear Case of Onchain AI
1:01:31 Avalanche VRYX Parallel TX Pathing
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 127 ---
Video ID: MDqf5Ljwzlo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MDqf5Ljwzlo
Title: Navigating DeFi's Evolving Yield Landscape with Pendle | TN, Co-founder
Published: 2024-04-18 18:12:03 UTC
Description:
In this interview, TN, the Co-founder and CEO of Pendle, discusses the protocol's journey from inception to its current state. He explains how Pendle enables users to tokenize and trade yield, focusing on the use cases of obtaining fixed rates and speculating on yield. TN shares insights on the protocol's growth, partnerships, and the impact of various narratives such as LRT and points trading. He also touches on user behavior changes, the decision to deploy on Arbitrum, and the roadmap for the future, including the development of Pendle V3 and the expansion of yield trading across different ecosystems.
- -
Follow TN: https://twitter.com/tn_pendle
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.

Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://wormhole.com/0xresearch7-2025 
- -
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
- -
Avalanche is a smart contracts platform that scales infinitely and regularly finalizes transactions in less than one second. Its novel consensus protocol, Subnet infrastructure, and HyperSDK toolkit enable Web3 developers to easily launch powerful, custom blockchain solutions.

Build anything you want, any way you want, on the eco-friendly blockchain designed for Web3 devs.
Start building today at https://www.avax.network/
- -
Marinade is the leading Solana staking service that spreads your stake across 100+ top validators, distributes MEV rewards, and provides automatic downside protection with new Protected Staking Rewards. 

Choose to liquid stake for mSOL for use in DeFi, or delegate your stake through Marinade Native, which gives you full custody of your SOL and no smart contract risk. Max performance for you, max performance for Solana.
https://blckwrks.co/Marinade
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:43 Pendle Overview & Journey
9:23 Bullish or Bearish Eth Staking Yield
19:39 Wormhole Ad
20:17 Pear Ad 
20:42 Marinade Ad
21:21 Avalanche Ad
22:03 Revenue Generation
29:02 Change of User Behaviors
35:24 Why Arbitrum?
40:42 Roadmap & 10 Year Vision
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 128 ---
Video ID: SjfzbOgXaew
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SjfzbOgXaew
Title: Uniswap's Dilemma: Prioritizing Equity Holders or Token Holders? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-04-17 19:07:33 UTC
Description:
In this episode Dan, Ren, and Boccaccio dive deep into this week's biggest news. They discuss the launch of spot Bitcoin and Ethereum ETFs in Hong Kong, the upcoming tradability of the Parcel token, and the partnership between Aptos and Ionet. The team also discusses Monad's $225 million raise, Sui's gaming device, and the SEC's Wells notice to Uniswap Labs. To close out they cover the Tensor airdrop woes and the launch of EigenDA.

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. 
- -
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Dan: https://twitter.com/smyyguy
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:11 Parcel Token Launch
5:14 Aptos & Ionet Partnership
15:37 $225m Monad Raise & SUI Gaming Device
28:05 Binance Lists TAO Spot
31:10 dYdX Segment: Wintermute
36:36 MarginFi's Meltdown
47:25 SEC Uniswap Labs Wells Notice
1:07:14 Tensor Airdrop Woes
1:15:49 EigenDA Live
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
kio's debut are you nervous oh I'm very there you go we just clipped we've just clipped the intro there thanks Joseph not do this one again Joseph don't do it don't do it he did it before we get into today's episode just a quick disclaimer the views expressed on this podcast by either myself or any guests are their personal views and do not represent the views of any Associated organization nothing in this episode should be construed or relied upon as Financial technical tax legal or other advice all right let's jump into the episode all right guys welcome back to another episode of zerox research the block Works research team is back to bring you another analyst round table today is Monday April 15th I'm joined by long time no see Dan and bachio from the blockworks research team jam on the latest Market happenings before we dive into it I do have some exciting exciting news for you all bacho is going to be the new co-host of zerox research so expect to hear a lot more from him going forward let's go hype super hype anyways diving straight into it for some news and governance updates I think it's been quite a busy week to be honest starting us off we have the Hong Kong ETFs that were just announced spot Bitcoin and ethereum ETFs are going to be tradeable very very soon I think obviously the US ETFs was like a sort of a larger unlock for the crypto markets but just having Asia have like easy access to these ETFs is just good I don't know how much money there is in China that's gonna bid the BTC and E ETF through like Hong Kong but that's still like a nice narrative to have you know like I think people forget that Asia has a lot a lot of money at the end of the day to V crypto uh some other thing on the news and governance update parel token will become tradable at tomorrow 1 pm UTC or when you're listening to is going to be Wednesday so actually it's going to become tradeable yesterday um on April 16th 1 pm UTC so for those that are unfamiliar parcel sort of like a via State perpetrating protocol but more than that they also have a via State Oracle they sort of pioneered this data collection SL evaluation method for like V State prices and bring those onchain and they're not just used for parcel's own Pro trating product they're also used relatively frequently and quoted in sort of like more tradire articles when it comes to VI estate pricing so that's pretty exciting to hear I'll take a pause and any thoughts on like the Hong Kong ETFs or Parcels token I can chat a bit about parcel um I like I read a bunch about the other uh real estate real world asset protocol parcel isn't one but it's like the alternative and the other I think one of them is called realy and these are like so complicated and just like very difficult to work with I think one of them's on nosis and it like you can only swap it on a sushi swap Fork deck so I'm I'm not sure how useful like the pro like the that you can short or long real estate is like realistically but I I do think it's like the best um product out there if somebody was interested in doing that that would like they would do it through parcel yeah it's interesting that I don't know that seems kind of like a goofy thing like in general but I it's it's an interesting Suare into what real estate and blockchain what the overlap between the two will look like I'm not sure if we've really cracked the nut on that um because yeah I don't know how valuable it is to like long Miami short the Midwest but we'll see what's uh did you mention the pre-market Futures valuation Ren I didn't but if I'm not wrong on AA was trading around 1.6 billion I mean we we're seeing some pretty hot valuations these days so I guess that's yeah a fair on a relative basis at at the minimum I mean that's really what matters like the looking at the the nominal number doesn't get you very far but on a relative basis I think that's what most people in this industry are looking at and that's probably the best thing to do I don't I don't know if there's really any good comps for parcel that are trading today um um yeah I don't think so I'm not hyped about anything like real State related on chain until I can pay for my mortgage with like I can layer ABS yield I think that's the ultimate end game to be honest but I mean Pro I think it won't be like a crazy air drop just considering they're air dropping 7.5% of the supply at a 1.6 billion FDB to like 240,000 wallets with like some ridiculous numbers if you just like do the ma that's like 500 on average so but still like it's it's an interesting protocol I think they've like done growth like pretty correctly they did like season one and then they had like a sped up season two and like a even more sped up like season three and they have this sort of like Perpetual points program so all right a few other things on the news and governance side of things um abos sort of announced that they are working with IET I'm not sure specifically what they are actually doing on abos but if I had to guess um this was sort of like a move that they had to do just because of salana congestion there's a lot of protocols where the core functionality just doesn't work and because it takes like way too many tries to get your transactions through so it'll be interesting to see like what aching components they're actually sort of like doing on atas now and whether you can split that workload between two different chains because I mean if your core like infa is on one chain you would need some form of like bridge to bridge like the messages from like abas back to salana to register that some event has taken place so yeah would love to hear like any thoughts on like whether that was the correct business move but another thing on the new s is Black Rock has allowed black Rock's USD institutional digital liquidity fund also known as build um holders to exchange their shares for usdc with circle I've always felt like if there was a stable coin that was going to become a cbdc it would probably be usdc and I think like we're just like slowly but surely like inch towards that future with like everything black Rock's doing with uh usdc and cirle especially because black rock is often known as like sort of the fourth arm of the government yeah on on the on the first piece um the Aptos and IET overlap there that's really interesting to see uh we had greguri from aosh Network who's also building a GPU Marketplace um on the podcast a couple months ago and he had an interesting takeaway saying something to the and I'm paraphrasing here but something to the effect of you know there's trade-offs to be had with building your own app chain because they are built uh in the Cosmos on the cosmos SDK and you have to incentivize a validator set to secure your chain and that can be costly in the form of inflation uh to the protocol and so he was saying you know back when we made that decision to build on the cosmos SDK Solana just wasn't capable for us uh and this conversation occurred in the pre uh congestion era for salana you know Sal the ux on Sal is quite poor right now um because of trans trans action overload effectively and he was basically making the point that you know if there was an L1 that could handle the throughput reliably that we need you know that could be a better choice for us um and I bet you he's feeling quite Vindicated that he's not on salana right now and they did invest the time and effort into building their own app chain to kind of have their own State uh that they can you know not have to this Noisy Neighbor problem where other activity on the chain is is now impacting you I can't speak directly to the IET and overlap um but yeah I have to imagine BR to your point you know it's hard to land a transaction on right now on salana and that's becoming a problem they're rolling out some fixes we can talk about later but um that's the current state today and so if your business building on top of that chain you need to continue your the operating your business at the most maximum level uh getting onto some of these gen 3 chains that are optimized for performance similar to how salana was but using newer uh research and Technology to power your chain and that don't have a lot of usage today you knowu and Aptos are kind of the two Market leaders in this like gen 3 chain if you will uh era where they're kind of came a the the chains that came after salana in terms of when they hit the market uh mostly in the 2023 time frame and they have Great Tech and not a lot of adoption so honestly I'm very fascinated to kind of see the the two of them make their plays at what segment for the market that what market segments they're going to go after um I think deep in makes a ton of sense right that's deep really only exists on salana today because it did have that initial higher throughput um capability that other chains did not uh and now that that's kind of coming under crunch I think salana on an average day does anywhere between like 500 and 1,000 sustained TPS um which is the most of any chain today and so once we see some of these larger deepen project projects that kind of get uh get the ball rolling in terms of their usage and their adoption move on to some of these newer chain I'm really really intrigued to see how they handle uh this new wave of adoption because the problems for salana are there's like it's kind of twofold at the networking layer and the the economic side of things at the the fee mechanism side we didn't really know this was going to happen until we hit this scale right again it's the most used in terms of transaction count chain today um and so yeah I'm just super fascinated to kind of have this mentality of what's the fastest thing we got today let's push it to the limits Until It Breaks fix it and then just like keep rallying around whatever ends up being the best thing and like sort of some like natural selection Evolution playing playing through here in terms of uh what tech what tech Stacks we continue to build I think you're seeing some really good development on on of course salana but also on the op stack with what Bas is doing and then again if we can get some adoption to S an aptose I'm I'm super intrigued to see how those chains handle like a wave of higher throughput do you think I'm not sure how it works but do you think this makes the case for like salana LS then I have no clue how I know too on like salana works when it comes to like data posting sequencer and like whether like transactions like data posting transactions would still need to go through like the whole networking layer congestion but I mean you've already seen a few protocols launches like or announced l2s on salana notably like grass I think they're doing in L2 and there was one more that I'm banking on um but yeah do you think salana L2 season is coming I mean it's definitely an interesting question um I mean functionally it would look a lot just like ethereum right like you're posting batches of of transactions down to the L1 um you could do something maybe potentially more interesting with Bas sequencing because the L1 has shorter uh shorter block times um and so like the hassle of going in between two l2s using the L1 maybe isn't the burden isn't that High um you could also do other things where you can look at the shortcomings of ethereum l2s which is hands down the fragmentation of liquidity like yes and no like there's def frag liquidity is fragmented across these uh different l2s but quite quite honestly they they all have so much liquidity at this point it's not a huge issue uh it's really just that the apps themselves are fragmented across these l2s right so if me as a user I don't want to have to pick which L2 I go play on I want to like use the app on that L2 um and when you know there's three apps that I want to use across three different l2s that's three extra bridging transactions I have to deal with uh and so you could kind of try to make the play where you as the Bas layer make a little bit more opinionated a decision so you're not as credibly neutral that's very much a stance ethereum has taken um and you look at like something like the polygon aggregator or the aggregation layer the AG layer as they like to call it you say like hey this is the salano foundation who's going to build this thing we're all going to use it you can go build your own thing that's fine but like this is going to kind of going to be the one we kind of coales around um and then try try to build out that way I think that that'd be a great way to kind of learn from some of the shortcomings of ethereum I think it's be really hard for polygon to kind of bootstrap their Network around the their specific AG layer I think they're doing the right things I just think the incentives are for everyone to have their own AG layer right now right ZK sync's GNA want their own one scroll's gonna want their own one polygon's GNA want their own one of course um and ZK Tech is really hard and really expensive I think polygon said they've invested over a billion dollars over the their life time into ZK Tech um we had uh the polygon team on on the light speeed podcast and I believe that's what uh Mark the CEO said um and if it's not quite a billion it's it's probably a ballpark that number and so that's why the incentives are for everyone to be right right if you invested a billion dollars then everyone just ends up using someone else's solution you know at least push this space forward but like you know that's that's kind of the pull there so I guess that was kind of a really roundabout answer to say I don't know uh I don't think you're going to see general purpose l2s on top of salana but you might see some app specific stuff I mean uh vibu the founder of drip has been kind of vocal about the shortcomings of the Bas layer for his product you know they're building an app they're building a business on top of salana and this congestion is negatively impacting their business and the fees were negatively impacting their business and like it's a fair point of like do I need my own dedicated block space so I think like app specific space makes sense um the way we need to figure out is like how we do that in the in a way that has the least amount of friction right you need to do this in it like the most seamless way possible I don't know and there's like a lot of chatter starting to turn up around uh a lot of avss on igen layer are building using the cosmos SDK which is of course natively interoperable with IBC um and so that gets pretty interesting you basically have like something that looks sort of like an L2 right like an ABS and they're all kind of they have this pretty reli pretty solid Communication channel in IBC um if you wanted to know like what the ux of IBC looks like I would recommend ibcf fun uh skip team's building that super fun way to not really fun but super easy way to uh interact with IBC and and move from chain to chain uh with the launch of circles cctp they've also integrated salana directly into their UI so you can move from salana to any usdc on salana to basically any Cosmos chain it's actually quite cool um but yeah long longwinded answer to say I don't think we're going to see general purpose l2s but that said I do think we will see maybe some app specific stuff I don't know TBD you'll see general purpose svm l2s though I mean we already know we're going to see eclipse and I wouldn't I'd be surprised if Eclipse was the only L2 that says hey we're gonna you know build on Celestia da and maybe settle down to salana instead of settling down to ethereum so I don't know you you'll see some exciting use cases with the svm but I don't know about directly a general purpose salana L2 that'll be interesting yeah I appreciate the insight there and yeah fully agree I don't think we're going to see general purpose uh salana l2s if there will be definitely be like app specific but I will shoot it over to bachio now who also has some news updates for us yes um so monad raised 225 mil led by Paradigm to bring 10,000 TPS to the evm um I think it's reportedly at a$3 billion doll valuation but I'm not sure uh previously they raised 19 mil uh back in February 2023 um I don't really have like a take on this one I just think it's we talked about this last time I was on um Ox research about like how valuations are kind of creeping up and I think this is like if it is free bill which I think it might even be a little bit higher I think it's like a good Showcase of like how valuations are setting to creep up a bit and like VC saying we don't really find the returns that we want in the private markets anymore like I think that makes sense um apart from that sui launched their handheld gaming console sui ox1 um which will allow for users to play both crypto and non- crypto games um this is like the third attempt that Hardware uh by l1's uh The Saga phone did well and then apos did Jambo phone I don't know if you guys looked into that one um I'm not sure how good a handheld gaming console will do for um crypto gaming especially since crypto gaming is not doing particularly well so like investing in Hardware seems like a bit much but um I guess it's a bit better than like incentive programs um because in this way you're actually just developing hardware and one last thing I feel like they should have just gone into Mobile gaming instead of I can see Dan kind of getting ready to hop in this one but I feel like they should have gone into Mobile gaming instead of like developing this like but I don't know what do you I mean it's an interesting question right like if you're gonna make a device what device do you make so the you mentioned the Saga phone from salana and that's really interesting it it like didn't do well out of the gates and then people the Bonk price ran up and people realized all the phones had an airdrop of Bonk that became worth more than the phone at one point uh then they sold sold out and then they made the the 2.0 and uh I will say I I feel a little bit Vindicated here because my uh prediction I think I made it on this podcast as well was it's sort of like a Tesla when you're making this like new blockchain enabled phone you don't want to own the first Tesla right those were the ones that like randomly combusted and the pedals would fall off on the new Cyber trucks I don't know if you guys saw that clip where the the gas P the accelerator pedal like broke off and slid and got wedged in the fully down position um fortunately the driver was okay but like you know there's just like [ __ ] that breaks on the Gen one of things and that's kind of how I thought the the saop phone would play out and it's sort of how it did right like I got got the privilege to play with one and it's quite cool um but like there's like a real app store and then like a a defi crypto App Store and it's it's just empty um basically there's a couple apps but uh you can see how it'll get somewhere really cool but it's just not there yet but you basically have two options right like what device do I build do I want to go the mobile phone and if I win the mobile phone Wars uh I will have the device that everybody uses to access the internet in you know my device is in everybody's hands that's very very powerful uh it's so powerful that Google and apple have like armies building the best phone possible so it's like very hard to displace you know it'd be a huge burden for me to like take anything that like swapped out my iPhone I'm just not I'm like probably not going to do it even if it's better the iPhone is so ingrained in my life all my friends have iPhones I don't want to be the guy with green messages it's just this is not going to happen uh but you know my gaming I like gaming so I would consider buying this device and I haven't touched my Nintendo switch in probably a full year so there you go they have a very low bar to hit for this to be a better game to be like my go-to uh my go-to device for gaming so but you know if you win this war of being the go-to gaming device you have a narrower scope um so it's kind of just like a different trade-off is how I think about building a phone versus some other form of Hardware is your chance of winning so and the size of the market right it's sort of like a venture play right what's the Tam and what percent of that do I need to be successful um yeah I don't know it'll be interesting and it looks cool looks slick looks like a PSP I'm definitely excited to to get my hands on one I will Cav that I've been a PC Gamer for like most of my life but you know like that I used to have a PSP 2000 and like those are definitely good times but I haven't bought like any of these like new sort of like handheld gaming consoles after like the PSV I don't know I think when it comes to crypto gaming I would definitely say mobile gaming is probably the sector to Target uh like the mobile gaming is just like insanely huge in Asia like however big you think like Mobile gaming degeneracy and addiction is like just 10x that like honestly like the the amount that like Asian and especially like Chinese spend on their phone and just play like these like games is just crazy I'm not sure if like knowing that fact and knowing that like Mobile gaming is huge in like China and like especially like emerging markets in the Asia Vision I don't think trying to like create your own Hardware phone is The Right Move given that like this purchasing class already has like established Brands they sort of like middle tier like phones that like provide like in insane bang for your buck um and both and these sort of like middle tier bands also have like high tier phones that are able to compete with like say like apple and like Google pixel so I think at this stage like just trying to create like quote unquote like Crypt native Hardware doesn't make a lot of sense to me to be honest especially for gaming I'm not sure like how hard it is is it is to like Port over like gaming libraries or whatever but if I'm living in like a Emer market right like I'm not spending like $300 or whatever to buy like a handheld giving console to play um like whatever like crypto game and if I'm living in like a developed Market I'm just gonna buy like a a steam deck or whatever it's called or like a Nintendo switch I'm not gonna like buy this new like handheld gaming console so I think the right move actually is to build games that in or off of with like existing gaming systems since these are such like large and existing ecosystems already I'm not sure if Hardware is a right move I can like kind of see like the point of like salana Saga um since like he's trying to like dis like the app store or an toally trying to disrupt the as too awfully but gaming I'm not sure to be honest I feel a lot less comfortable with gaming a gaming Hardware push yeah I I definitely don't think this is for developed markets though and honestly I don't think likeu is the blockchain for developed markets there's only 100 validators it's not really scalable uh it's all to all communication between the nodes not scalable sense of like adding you know getting to 10,000 nodes I don't think that's on the near term road map or anything um and so their play just feels like to try to be a little different and I mean block like onchain gaming is such a strange thing right it's like we've been talking about it for four years now and it's still not even anywhere near having any fun game to play um it feels I mean I can see picachio being like there's card games brother but um I don't know I just I I I I like that they're doing this because it's a different route and I you know to the Mt always talks about this on light speeds now I feel like I'm just a broken record uh of of saying things mer says and that's a very dangerous game to play but you know we got to try all the paths and this is a new one so I'm I'm excited I just feel like it's kind of like a somebody was like oh like we need to do something in gaming what do we do oh there's like my kid loves the Nintendo switch let's just build something like that and then they partner was the one to get it out I I I know it's like A New Path and I do think that it's like it's better than the Jambo phone because I don't know what that is like do you know what I mean I feel like that was a straight copy base of the SAG but go I I'll chime in here I actually think that Jamon is a lot more interesting to me than both The salana Saga and the S like handheld gaming console for a few reasons first of all it's priced at $99 which is like insanely cheap and they are like laser focus on if I'm not wrong sort of like the Africa southeast Asia that in America region and for a lot of these like phone users the brand doesn't really matter like they just want like a cheap functional phone and like $99 is as cheap as it gets and I talked to one of the persons working at abos working on the Jambo phone and basically the strategy is like there's going to be like 16 crypto apps like preloaded from day one and then there's going to be like task and like you do these tasks there's gonna be like daily rewards and there's this like ridiculous like token like Drop flywheel and it's like salana Saga is like for rich people and then like Jambo is like the slightly less like developing economy version of that where people are going to get probably like a stupid amount of money that will like offset the $99 cost of the phone in like I don't know like two weeks so I think like fundamentally that phone is a lot more interesting to me than like a handheld gaming console and maybe even salana Saga there I say to be honest salana Saga isn't great though that was just like like Dan said it's the Bonk air drop at some point you recovering tox and then people were like the same thing that they did with Tia where they were like oh this is infinite airdrops and then everybody bought like I know people who bought 2.5k um sagas so and now I don't think they've had an air drop in a while so I don't know um I just looked up one stat real quick picachio uh I was curious how many units of a Nintendo switch have been sold and this is off of 30 seconds of Googling so take it with a grain of salt here but apparently according to Wikipedia the world's most trusted Source 139 million units were sold as of December 2023 so let's say you get 10% of that you get a gaming a blockchain enabled gaming device in the hands of roughly 40 14 million people I don't know that's kind of cool I'm I'm intrigued I'm intrigued of the people who created Super Mario and everything you think that you're giving it that like oh yeah I just the thing is I feel like at this point if you're SOI like even Solana didn't have like a lot of apps until the start of the year not this year but like let's say last year like a lot of apps that you could use true and they started air dropping money and then like to incen and SOI also did this very well as well they had last October or maybe 2022 October they had an incentive program uh I think like $150 mil and so it got a lot of tvl and activity on so I feel like that's what they should be focusing on like for gaming as well not like an incentive program where you give apps money or like game developers money but like directly to people so that like that's how I feel like you should boost it as opposed to this but I mean it's I think it's okay like I don't think it'll be 10% of I don't also don't think you think that but I'm going to make it seem like you think that I disagree with you Daniel I don't think they'll get 10% of Nintendo's sales okay that was aggressive I'll give it to you that was I'm glad you called me out that's fair that is that is far too aggressive if they sold 14 million units that would be the most successful blockchain related product in history I don't think they could produce like 10% of that there's no way that they're making 14 Mill of these things they they'd have to like double down and order a new batch um last piece of news is binance listed bit tenser tow uh for spot trading um this is relatively big because one of the big issues with to is that um you can't custody it very well so funds and institutions can't buy it um because it doesn't work with ledgers and it's not on it wasn't on any like Trust exchanges it'll be exciting to see how it turns out I don't know I know Daniel doesn't really believe in to that much but um I think to's the narrative leader so I think it'll be cool to see how this goes over the next few months I mean it's I'm just yeah I'm a little sus but that's fair I think I don't think that's a crazy position is it the narrative leader 100% agree um I'm just very sus of like 99.9% of the AI plays and I want AI agents specifically to be more real than anybody else I can promise you of that but anybody promising AI agents before chat GPT gets right access over your computer is is not true that it's not happening they'll be first and then everything will come after um I don't know wayfinder posted a screenshot of AI agents so it's it's very close it's coming I know I I just think that that's my that's my mental barometer I think that's this summer so you know a couple months from now so I do think we're close um and then then I think AI once like why I think that's my barometer is right now you ask okay so I recently bought a house and the realtor asked what I did at one point and right when I told her it was like I'm I'm very I do not say crypto right out of the gates to be clear you start with like tech company then like research and then kind of like Whittle down um the second I said Tech she asked me about AI so like normal normal ass people are like AI aware but they think you like high schoolers use it to cheat on their their homework right and they do but it's obviously much more than that once you can start using it to like do tasks that you tell it to do uh that's when [ __ ] gets real for the average person and like if you're really into the AI space or like software engineering or any of that you probably heard of the the Devon release uh Devon's like this software engineer based AI that you can just say hey build me a website that does X Y and Z and it just does it like it's it really is like an agent um instead of like the current chat GPT which says you know here's the instructions to go do something that's the difference is is doing it versus being told how to do it and once the average person can be like send an email to my boss that I have the flu and won't be in today and you just press go and then you like go back to bed and your boss gets notified from this AI agent that's the [ __ ] that's going to like start this this next wave of AI discussion so um yeah I'm definitely paying attention I think ta is a little bit sus and I don't think that's a crazy stance to be in um but but yeah it's not it's a completely Fair s to be in um yeah all right I think that's a good spot to move on from our news and governance sections but now moving on to our dydx segment with a quick word from Winter mute all right guys for this week's dydx segment we have Kalen head of governance from wintermutes thank you so much for coming on no worries thanks for having me right and it's uh great to be here yeah so for starters what role does winter MW play Within the dydx ecosystem sure so uh winter mut's been pretty involved in dox for quite a long time um firstly we're investors but we integrated into the V1 product back in the day and have ramped up our liquidity provision ever since we were one of the largest market makers um on V3 and integrated into V4 shortly after its launch um we've also been very active um in governance since Inception most notably proposing changes uh towards the lp Rewards program where we introduced Mega volume um and also shifted rewards to more active LPS um we also had the V4 Vanguard which was a myriad of proposals um targeting some areas we thought could have been improved before the launch of V4 most notably a 45% reduction in trading rewards um and then other than that personally have been a part of the DX operation subow and we also hold a seat on the dox grant subow that's great to hear and I think it's a really unique opportunity for like a market maker on winter M to have such an active role within dydx I think that's something that you may not always be able to see for example when when a mute Market makes on like a centralized exchange like you guys have zero say on like maker rebates or whatever so that's super cool to see the next question I wanted to ask was what type of D5 protocols does winter interface with and have there been any challenges SL learnings throughout the years yeah I mean it's pretty obvious to be honest like we mostly deal with def applications that are like relevant to us on the trading side right so we interact a lot with a amm and limit aut book dexes rfqs aggregators all that sort of stuff um in terms of learnings I would say like it's pretty much ongoing you know there's always our main challenge is really like counterparty risk and smart contract risk and so we're always ensuring that we're minimizing this risk um according to you know how much funds we have connected to I guess you know these D5 platforms i' would say um we also occasionally touch lending platforms but other than that that's yeah really the most of it just a quick question what do you guys do on lending platforms just out of curiosity um sometimes you know there's like we have looked into liquidations but if we do need to borrow certain assets um that is definitely a Avenue that we do look at okay super interesting and sort of the last question I had was how has winter me's involvement within various defi protocols evolved over the years for example I noticed if feel like in 2023 you guys became a lot more active in governance perhaps than before and would love to hear sort of like how that has evolved yeah of course um I mean I guess you know as amm and perss or some of the larger sectors of defi were constantly integrating with new protocols so that's kind of like our horizontal expansion in that sense but yeah I mean one of our main goals at win mute is like to really Empower decentralization and push that world forward so you know at the beginning of 2023 we launched our delegate platforms um and that was like a super important Initiative for us which in some cases wasn't even strategic it was Lally that we want to empower decentralization so yeah we're um a big delegate across like Unis swap optimism compound dydx RV and arbitrum um and yeah it's been really great you know we've managed to get quite a lot of voting power across these platforms and uh we've had a really good time participating there as a quick followup to that obviously I can see sort of the synergies between like you guys being a delegate for something like unisoft a dydx what about arbitrum and optimism you know those are like L2 ecosystems how are you thinking about your dedicate position there and like what is your maybe like end goal if there is one yeah of course I mean firstly like we are investors in some of these projects so that's something that we do offer as we really want to help out our portfolio companies on that side and ensure there's like great governance efficiency so that's the main point why we do it is ensuring great governance efficiency um but I guess like in terms of like arbitr and optimism we also really only put our hand up when we know we can like truly add value to certain initiatives um we've had a lot of experience with designing like intensive programs um dealing with grants dealing with operations so when things like the arbitrum you know long-term incentive program came up we put our hand up to join as a council which we were successful in um because yeah these are the areas in which you know we think we can actually provide value to the Dow and the community um yeah all right that's super super interesting here and really love how involved you guys are governance given that you know there's a lot of stuff that can be fixed and it's great to see you guys taking active but thank you so much for coming on Ken no worries thanks for having me now moving on to our hot seat coup Throne segment I'm gonna throw it over to bachu first for this week's hot seat who's own um I am putting margin fi on the hot seat this week they um last Thursday Soul Blaze Solana liquid staking protocol tweeted out that margin F sto distrib um Blaze rewards to users and instead that margin F had been selling millions of Blaze per day under the excuse of Treasury management um I thought this kind of made sense for margins well you should obviously be Distributing the wordss if that's your like mandate but it made sense because you you don't want to hold that in your treasury but um eventually they ended up solving the situation and soul BL stated that like it was all fixed and that emissions would be turned back on one kind of wonky thing here was that margin fight claimed that they weren't Distributing emissions because of um Solana congestion but then users were like we haven't been receiving it for months now or like weeks now so that was a bit sus um but I think like one of the bigger parts of this was that basically all of CT took the time to like pile on to margin VI which I think shows that a lot of people harbor not bad feelings but kind of like they're kind of upset with the team um and I think this made sense especially like we've had this twice now I think starkware was also a little bit too negative to users and they were like oh you guys are ebeggar and I feel like margi they haven't called anybody ebeggar but they're kind of like on that line of being a little bit rude to users and so I my like I think quite obvious take is that there's like these are like mutualistic uh organisms like the protocol and the user and like there's like a agreement the user pumps the fees and the volume and the transaction counts for the protocol so the protocol can raise more and that's like the protocol rewards the user with the airdrop but I think if you take it this far um I think like you start getting like a lot of hate on Twitter and I think margin f is kind of like reaching that point where it's like a bit they're they're kind of they're draw they're dragging it along a bit much but um I don't know a lot of other people are saying that this is the biggest fumble of the year I don't think that's the case I just think like one of the founders quit it's like they were talking about a lot of explicit stuff on the timeline um I don't know what's going to end up with them but I assume they're gonna at least like release some more explicit stuff about the token relatively soon yeah it's interesting they so they started their farming program in July of 2023 so we're going on like n and a half months at this point um they points farming specifically so the users I I don't I don't know for sure but I'm I'm I would guess that that's the longest running points program that we've seen in this industry um so users are kind of fed up now this gets into the baate of like should like is that just being entitled or and you know like give me my token or you know I've been helping your using your protocol for the last nine months I deserve a reward and it's like it's I see both sides on this one like at the end of the day like just withdraw your Capital like you don't have to you don't have to be there you're trying to get a free reward uh from this team that's building a protocol and for one reason or another you know they haven't released the token um I don't envy the position of being a US resident uh and having the burden of of you know people wanting me to launch a token that said I think Mac like openly said he was rage baiting the community about the token um and like wow gee you pissed off all your people using your product and now they're mad at you you can't go crying about it like that H so it's hard for me to like really take their side as well um and to be fair like he said that's how he acts on Twitter and not in person and like that's that is very much so how you get engagement on Twitter is like by getting arguments with people so there's a bit of playing the game there uh and there's also a bit of being a dick so it's hard to kind of like like I get why the community is pissed but like I don't know it just feels like a a push and pull there and to be very clear again like I do not envy the position they're in that's that's stressful um so I see really I really see both sides on this one I thought that there was like no such thing as bad PR but I think this Marion I was like genuinely bad PR if I'm not wrong maybe like 25 to 30% of the protocols TBL has withdrawn ever since that whole like PR Fasco took place and I wouldn't be surprised to see like more sustained withdrawals from the protocol but at some point like the it's going to be like enough outstanding BS that like people can't withdraw anymore and I think that's where it might get like potentially interesting as far as Mac I I do agree that you do need to be a little bit like contentious or like strongly opinionated to get views on Twitter but I'm not sure you need to go to the extent of posting a half naked of yourself repeating the word like when token for two minutes I think that's a bit pushing it a little as far as like the the entitlement point I do think crypto users are pretty entitled to be honest like if if you are using a product you should be using it because it provides value to you know and sure okay I can that like everyone wants free money like the incentives are structured that way but for example like uh using a web to analogy like uber in the early days right even accounting for the fact that like uber gave you like sort of this like ridiculous like $5 $10 like off your Uber R you were still using it because Uber provided like valuable service relative to you standing on the street and like waiting like five minutes to flag like a taxi or a cab and I think the same should apply for crypto you know like you should be using something because like it genuinely provides like a valuable service or product to you and maybe that's just the S of the industry today you know like 99% of these things do not provide a valuable product or service and they would have no users if they did not sort of like promise any incentives and I think that's just like half a symptom of like the state of the industry today and half like the way like just like incentives and sort of like the human desire for free money I mean you would be kind of like stupid to not want free money to be honest as a human yeah but that's like also fine you just have to take the mental stance that you're gambling and you know you have a cost of capital here exactly yeah I thinky though that's the thing like you're taking on risk and also like it's quite a lot of well not on Solana salana there's very limited fees but you're still losing money like Ren I'll let you finish in sorry no I was going to say like uh I think tarun put out a paper one year ago about like sort of modeling uh air drop farming as like call options um it's like a really like quany like nerdy I'm not gonna dive into it and I think that's fair you know like when you are like farming you are explicitly using this protocol for the sake of farming and not just because like you're using it because it provides a valuable product or service for you like you should be like quote unquote like doing the math like you can't really put numbers to but should be doing the MTH as like what's your cost of capital what's the potential like smart contract risk what's the type of like return you want to be getting and there's like generally two types of farming right one is like the type where you like just like execute transactions uh through like a DEX like amm and so like those are cases where you for example like Farm like ecosystems or like per Dees or whatever like where you don't need to quote unquote lock up Capital you just like run these transactions and you get your collateral back inantly and there's like the other type of farming like parcel or like Camino or margin fight where you have to like lock up your capital for an extended period of time and there is a definitely like a cost of capital to that right and I think like you do need to take into account these Dynamics if you are like actively I'm not going to say like maliciously but like actively farming these protocols for the sake of like farming and sure I I definitely agree that it's like a SYM symbiotic relationship at the end of the day you know like the protocol gets like a higher engagement retention tvl whatever choose your metric and then on the other side like the user expects something in return but it's not like there's a legal contract saying like you have to get something back it's not a legal contract the only issue that I have is that I feel like a lot of people read that not the T the tum one but the other one um like the cost of the Unis swap air drop or something and they were like oh like it was actually quite expensive and it's not actually for protocols to do this well the cost of not doing an aird drop is like or doing a bad airdrop is like ending up like Paras swap where you have no users nothing and like people can one of the things is like you can pull out your capital and go to another protocol but I think like because a crypto has such a like small Niche Community um still and like they're power users so if you like piss people off they will probably avoid using you and I think like if you're a protocol yeah okay you can tease people and you can be like mac where you're like haha like am I going to drop the token am I not going to drop the token but at the end of the day like there's maybe like 10,000 people on chain so you really don't want to like take it too far um yeah I think that's it I mean I I'm sure they're gonna have to air drop and I I'm kind of surprised that Mac had to go on Twitter and be like oh guys I was always like putting on a um face or something I thought that was obvious so it was kind of like and I I also don't understand why a lot of people hate like the product is fine um it's not I revolutionary um it's borrowing and lending on the blockchain but I mean the way that they were acting is like there's I feel like there's a very fine line I think they kind of overstepped it a bit this past month yeah yeah that's fair and honestly my hot seat cool Throne kind of parlays into this and I I still don't know if it's a hot seat or a cool Throne uh but we'll make it we'll do it in a non-c contentious way and put the SEC on the hot seat uh so the SEC has put out a Wells notice to Unis swap labs to uh regarding uh the creation of their protocol and so a quick one two on the wells notice so a Wells notice from the SEC is a formal communication notifying the recipient that the SEC staff intends to recommend enforcement action against them so basically it's a letter that says hey we're coming and here's why but basically it's an opportunity for the recipient to respond to the allegations and kind of get your case ready and make it to the SEC before they they bring that enforcement action to you you know these generally end up in following into like a court hearing uh so they they basically turn into a lawsuit uh as the recipient will likely sue the SEC back uh Hayden put out a tweet on this Hayden Adams DC uh founder of of Unis Swap and said I'm confident but that the products we offer are legal and that our work is on the right side of history but it's been clear for a while that rather than working to create a clear informed rule set the SEC has decided to focus on attacking longtime good actors like Unis Swap and coinbase all while letting Bad actors like FTX slipped by the industry rallied around them um when this news came out and rightfully so there's there's plenty of Bad actors in this industry so it's a little bit frustrating to see um there's plenty of malicious actors when I say Bad actors right like people that are genuinely just straight up scamming you uh and so you know people that have been around and have been built a very useful product for a lot of people it's it's kind of upsetting to see so there's a couple questions here around what exactly the SEC is going to go after uh you know whether or not the web app or the the wallet that they have are are brokers in in in terms of like being the interface that users buy and sell Securities through um whe whether or not the uni token itself is a security and whether or not again the protocol so like the actual amm contracts are unregistered security exchanges there's a couple different angles here don't really know uh how this is all going to play out I am very much so not a lawyer and have no desire to be so I I will have no indication uh on whether or not these are going which direction these will lean um but the uni token as a security one is kind of interesting because there was an airdrop to users so that there was like no investment of money on behalf of the users uh but there were they Unis swap Labs did raise for the protocol using a token sale to U investors um so there is still this like push and pull here between Unis swap Labs like the private centralized company and Unis swap protocol again really just the the Dow that controls and owns the uh amm contracts themselves so it's interesting to see this push and pull because uni swap Labs uh has there's been like a long push there's been like token holders are very upset because they're not getting a portion of protocol Revenue uh we'll definitely get into that and Labs is like you know again this like the centralized entity that's like a business a company in the traditional World um and they have a team and they built a product and they built you know ancillary products around the protocol and they have to continue funding themselves but there's the the token holders feel like they're playing second fiddle to the equity holders right so Labs will create a new product instead of like giving this and doing this on behalf of the Dow they're doing it on behalf of themselves and that revenue is you know retained within the decentralized entity so recently there was another development for this um I discovered this on Saturday the what was that the 13th um Unis swap actually Unis swap Labs uh has a fee for anything that goes through their the uis that they've created whether that be the the web app I think it's like app.is swap. org I want to say don't quote me on that just the the traditional Unis swap web app or whether it be like through the wallet that they have formerly that was a 0.15% fee uh from the like tokens you would receive uh and that was only on a subset of swaps so it was on like basically the largest pair was like e swapping between like a sa coin and eth but it wouldn't be anything like related to like a meme coin it was a very small subset of assets um and they also excluded uh unwrapping and wrapping we and stable coin to stable coin swaps so they were just trying to take a cut of fees and generated a new source of Revenue they were annualized at about 20 million or so uh over the last couple of months of this fee existing but after the announcement from Hayden was a couple hours later they quietly raised the the the fee from 0.15% to 0.25% and they actually included all swaps as eligible with the only exception still remaining to be stable coin to stable coin swaps and wrapping and unwrapping wrapped ether so uh uh it was a little interesting they didn't announce this I think that's kind of two reasons for that is one I don't know if you want to go screaming this from the hilltops after you just received a wellness notice that you're taking a fee from your front ends I don't know like it was still going to be become news so it does feel weird they didn't announce it um and this rubbed people the wrong way while the first wave of of when they received the wells notice everyone kind of unanimous unanimously was hey we got uni swaps back um then this fee hike gets prop back up uh which reminds everybody that there's a front-end fee and that does not go to the Dow and the sentiment very quickly changed and it feels like everyone is now again like hating on Unis swap labs when they first announced this feed maybe six or so months ago it was chaos like people were so upset um and this kind of gets back to the the entitlement or like what do token holders deserve question of you know you raised four Labs using the token and sold the token yet the token is not getting any cut of revenue generated by um these ancillary products from that Unis swap Labs creates uh and this is like a very interesting discussion because there's also the the protocol call level fee switch which would take a portion of the fees that go to LPS today and give that to the Dow and that has been long long debated uh it's been made the most progress It's ever made in the last couple of months I believe the foundation recently posted in the forums that they kind of wanted to push this forward this was all pre Wells notice and I believe that contracts are going through audits right now uh so timeline was like you know a couple months Max uh for this to to start it sort of Hit the forums to really start moving uh I don't know what's going to happen now like it would be kind of crazy if you were to push the the fee switch through while you're in a lawsuit with the SEC in some regard but it's also a power move of like uni Labs is the one being sued here or the one uh under investigation here and you know no one from uni laabs is pushing this fee switch through it's like this is a decentralized protocol and it is you know there's this is two the distinction here is quite important where there's the lab's entity the one has created and launched the protocol uh the one that is being investigated by the SEC and then there's the onchain contracts controlled by the Dow and the token holders and that would be the one that would push the protocol LEL Fe switch through so I know I said a lot there so I'll pause but it's pretty interesting development I think Dan might get caught as a witness during the SEC court hearing just given how comprehensive that was to be honest um but on a more serious note I think this feeh hike is like the biggest fu that unisoft could do to the SEC after they announced like the after they send the wells notice I mean I mean like without rehashing the entire debate too much there's always going to be fundamentally like a clashing force between labs and the token it is very much so like a zero some game however I do think with the Advent of like unisoft V4 and other existing or like sort of like up and cominging lvr mitigation solutions that will probably deliver a lot more like yield SL returns to LPS that debate becomes a lot less of a concern just because like if you still have lvr and you manage to like capture a lot of the lvr value that's being captured by such just today and that is the bulk of like sort of like the il/ lvr loss that's seen by LP today then you're gonna like basically there there's going to be a lot more money flowing around and people are going to be a lot less like stingy and thinking zero some and think like a bit more positive something you know like my LP returns just went from 5% to 15% I'm totally chill with giving out like 15% of the lp fees to UNI token holders now having say that if I bought the uni token before like the protocol fees s like Announcement by unisoft Foundation like one month ago I don't think I would ever have had the expectation of there being a fe switch like ever to be honest may there's probably like a lot of Jers out there who like put on a position thinking of like a prodal fe but I would have like expressed that pH just slowly in the hopes that like unisa continues to maintain or even like increase its deck market share like dominance in terms of volume and over time like increase its market share or like expand into new verticals such as like unisoft X or like sort of like cross bridging um but yeah it's it's an interesting position and I think you will probably see that tension appear in many more D5 protocols to be honest just because there's a lot of sort of like these like crashing Dynamics between like the equity side of things and the token side of things however I'm not familiar with VC and like when like safs became a common thing where like the equity is converted into the token and so there's not so much of like a equity token like divide maybe that divide is a lot bigger for unisoft where there's like a lot of investors in the equity side of things and there's a lot of investors in the token side of things but I would guess if I had guess like in sort of the more recent years that Dynamic has shifted like a lot more to the Token side of things rather than investors like still holding equity and like even thinking about that to be honest and so that Dynamic probably is like less of a problem going forward yeah and I would hope for that problem to be less of a problem going forward it's definitely not ideal um so it's the the protocol level Fe switch is an interesting one I'm glad you mentioned V4 though Ren and like what that could potentially do uh because you know maybe in a world where there's actually Pro like Okay so let's I guess let's back up Unis swap the protocol is a Marketplace that matches Traders with liquidity and the trader pays a fee on for the the execution uh and so Unis swap the protocol has the ability to take a portion of net fee uh and you know retain that as their Topline Revenue so let's say there was like you know thousand trade that went through uh the trader paid a $1 fee to the liquidity provider Unis swap could take you know 10 cents of that $1 fee uh and like that would be their revenue and as the Dow doesn't really have a large amount of costs today you you could basically pass that back that that 10 cents back to the Token holders to me that doesn't make any sense your product is really good people use it people love it and on an lvr basis as Ren mentioned like your LPS are getting smoked on average there's sharp LPS that are like very actively trading uh or moving around their LP positions to stay profitable but on the whole you know it is not profitable to deposit into an amm and leave it there um and so now you want to LPS are essential to make the whole protocol run if if lping was like egregiously unprofitable there's probably a break point where um you know LPS leave liquidity weakens and goes elsewhere and less people trade there there is probably a breakpoint there um or if you wanted to just like increase the total fee and then the the Dow takes a cut of the the higher total fee where LPS still end up making the sense uh the same amount of money but Traders pay more your volume will decrease Gauntlet done some pretty interesting work on like what that trade-off would look like and there probably is a happy medium here but like just zooming out a bit you're basically saying let's make our product worse for LPS who are essential to to making this protocol run or our product work for Traders by charging more just to like return Revenue to the Token holder like to me that just doesn't that does not add up there and the the the ideal result would say we need to build more products to make that actually generate profits right like the even the notion of returning Revenue to token holders doesn't make sense you would return profits to token holders right after all of these costs have been subtracted so I don't know I I think there's just a mismatch in like the reality and let's say you did turn this fuse switch on like you're looking at like like one one and a half percent yield like that's not like guys like half the half the people demanding it don't get out of bed for anything less than triple digit yield and when they go farm these things right so it just doesn't it seems like there's it just became this huge narrative that most people just are not thinking through um but like and to put a a bow on this I think you can really hate the practices of you know prioritizing the equity holder and not the token holder and think that Unis swap Labs as terrible people and think that they've had some shady malpractice or are pretentious people that's all fine you can think that and be like yeah but at the end of the day the protocol is still pretty immature doesn't doesn't generate a dollar Revenue today and turning the fee switch on kind of like negatively impacts the quality of our product like you can both of those things um and I don't know people kind of you like turn them into camps and and I don't know it's strange I agree with you on the lp like adding a fee on the lp side of it and then for to distribute to token holders I don't think that makes any sense I think if you were going to do it you should have done the front end but that's owned by Unis swap Labs not the protocol so you can which does get into this really weird thing of like if you're going to a Labs team and you're going to raise using the token what do you have to give to the Dow like to control because I agree like there is the there's very clearly a weird push and pull um but we like they're not the only people that do this uh if you look at salana for example jeto is very beloved and jto Labs owns the block engine and they take a 5% fee of every tip that runs through and nobody seems to have a problem with that the one thing I will say about not abouto about Unis swap is you know know you were like why are why do people care I feel like people care about like Unis swap specifically because I think their Unis swaps kind of like the the decision that Unis swap has will likely affect the rest do you know what I mean like it'll just create this create this new like Paradigm of returning 1.5% to token holders no but that's like I think a lot of Protocols are first I don't know if you're a protocol this is one thing I UND like when MCB Brennon was tweeting about it on the margin F side I was like okay that's fair that they were like we're an American based team that's why we're not dropping a token that makes sense but I feel like a lot of those teams first of all I don't know why you're in America if you're do you know what I mean the great United States great country but also like it's very difficult to drop a token there because of the whole regulatory stuff but um I got I got distracted talking about the us again basically what I wanted to say ripping the gator ripping the gator s Pop um basically what I wanted to say was I think a lot of these teams are waiting for UNIS swap to kind of make a decision and like for there to be a decision made for there to be a decision made about Unis swap to drop tokens so I think that's why everyone's kind of interested in that not because of the one and a half yeah yeah I mean I I agree with that and like that's that was the original sentiment around the wells noticed was like you guys are fighting a good fight you know where if you're like really trying to win this you kind of want them to go after the Unis swap in some way like they're well-funded they're you know they're they're kind of our bet D's best shot at winning this and people may disagree with that but um and just to be clear I wasn't trying to like throw jeto under the bus here at all either I love what they're doing I love that team uh it's just an interesting comparison where Labs is taking a cut of something the protocol is doing um and in my mind like these Protocols are like very much VC stage stage bets and they you got to fund the people building the thing and yes there's a token and like we still don't really know what the incentive trade-off there is but I don't know I I I don't think it's crazy that the lab's team is making money like I just don't think that's crazy I think that's something not a lot of people think about is that Unis swap is still like a venture stage team because in crypto it feels like every month is a year they're like oh like Unis swap is already an established protocol like it's it's there now it's like Costco Etc but it's not it's just like it's new realistically I think where crypto is today like everything is still in like the growth Venture stage like nothing not maybe not even like ethereum dude has reached like the proper like stable like long-term stage a few random points in terms of like the yield on like a uni token fee switch sure like it's not ridiculous and that is definitely a sympto a symptom of crypto having these like completely ridiculous yield expectations uh from the user side but if you look at it like the S&P has an average dividend yield of 1.35% and at current prices the uni token yield would probably be I don't know maybe like two to three% maybe a bit lower than that and so it's doesn't look too crazy I'm like a mature company like should a company be returning like paying out a dividend yield at this stage like definitely no yeah I know it's crazy it's just it's crazy reinvesting you're in the one of the most high growth industries at the far edge of the risk Spectrum returning profits at this point makes literally no sense I cannot wrap my head around it reinvesting growth every time and maybe that's part of the problem here is you know Labs is taking a cut of this the the or is creating this front-end Revenue stream and we have no idea where it's going you know today maybe it's a little bit more obvious it's probably going to to lawyer fees but prior to that it was a little less clear but yet they created this wallet which again plugs directly into the Unis swap protocol and they're building ancillary products around it that drives more volume to the protocol making it you know increasing the utility of the protocol so that that to me that is reinvesting in growth so I don't know I I but again I I also see the other side where the incentives are pretty misaligned yeah I think that's a good point to move on to my hot seat kones I try to keep it short I have tenzer in the hot seat this week so tenzer did their urge off I want to say last Monday um they Ed up 12.5% of their token Supply at its peak the token reached roughly like two billion fdv is now trading pretty down um at 913 million as a point of comparison brur is currently trading at a 1.2 billion FDB so it's not that different um to be honest I think still a relatively okay or J for most people however I do think that there were some it's mostly whales that were relatively unhappy with the amount they got and as a result tenser announced a few days ago that they will be Distributing an additional 2.3% of the supply to top up the top 2,900 wallets to make their distribution entirely linear I'm not sure if that was the right move to be honest that seems like a wild move to do like post tge even if like your wheels are really pissy about like Notting it and I think that shows in the numbers right like even with that herob allocation magic Eden has gone from like a really really small percentage of salana volume to like dominating salana volume at like 90 plus percent if you look at like 24hour um trading volume and similarly on another F like torans the nft collection of tenzor has gone from 10 a peak of 138 so to the current 18 so like so obviously there were a lot of expectations of people buying it for solely for the air job then nothing more um I don't know I feel like I don't think T are like did this air J perfectly I feel like there was a lot more they could have done for example like Perpetual incentive programs giving out like less of the surprise so that they save more as like future incentives because like it's not hard to see that like magic Eden has something else on the road map you know and that you will be competing with them post your tge and like nothing ever exists in like a siloed environment you're always going to have compared in crypto especially given like how many copycats there are and how fast it is to the Golden Market a lot of the time and yeah I I just feel like there's a lot left to be desired to be honest from this air job I mean it was it was a good air job don't get me wrong like I think a lot of people did really well in terms of like just the amount of money they got but from a sort of like a business like strategy point of view I feel like they probably could have done better I feel like a lot of people who weren't expecting to get air dropped got air dropped on this one like I think a lot of people were expecting directly like linear um like entirely linear and then not like the ones that I don't know what they're called the ones that reward sies where you just do like one nft transaction and you get like 800 tens or something but this one like I think actually rewarded them so it's interesting I don't have like a big take on how they did the airdrop I think it is I agree with you R I think it's a bit weird to distribute like more after you do it but I I mean you don't you never want to make the people who have the most money angry um or at least like that like Angry enough to yeah but yeah like you say that but I think like these people still left regardless even if the Edition no 2.2% so like it's obviously like really hard to know it's not like you're a Founder you can go ask like your will like hey like if I give you like an additional 2.3% and make your urge of L will you not go and for magic Eden please like it doesn't really work like that so you just have to use your best Judgment of the competitive landscape but yeah you know one thing is I was talking to a friend and they were like I actually prefer magic Eden to tens and I was like do you prefer open seat to blur and they they prefer open seat to blur and to me it seems like so crazy but because I feel like blur is the superior product there obviously like magic Eden is dominating volume because of the air drop but I'm just saying like there are actually people who are like oh I'd rather use Magic over uh over T I've uh I've pulled up this dashboard from Maru he's a he's a beast we'll put a link to his Twitter um in the in the description here but for the the listeners there this chart in the top right here uh is or for the viewers there's chart in the top right and for the listeners it's a chart on organic trade count so just looking at the number of Trades by Marketplace on Solana uh so this specific dashboard filters out wash trading versus organic trading uh there's a couple cool filters that they've created to do so uh but you'll actually see this huge sharp drop off in tensor this this uh tensor Swap this greenish yellowish color um post air drop right uh you've seen a huge material decrease in the number of of Trades even these are organic trades so this is getting past the the wash trading filter um so take that as you will but it's interesting to see the huge drop off and the question is okay well where are those users going uh and later on this dashboard we can see the wash trade count so basically the other side of of the organic trade uh and you can see there was never really a ton of like previously there was like a in February there was a lot of wash trading being picked up on tensor swap but these filters didn't catch a ton going into the airdrop uh but you will see a pretty steep in increase in the number of wash trades occurring on Magic Eden uh which like magic Eden I think had 98% of of total nft volume on salana quickly I think today actually um and so it's it's just kind of interesting to see how that has quickly shifted where you know we just talked about Farmers with with with margin fi and if you airdrop to Farmers and they just go somewhere else and sell your token like that is not an effective distribution of your token um sure you made them rich and maybe they'll come back later but like if they literally just pick up and leave and go somewhere else and sell your token like that's kind of a miss you know you want to incentivize people to use your product uh they use it and then they're like oh [ __ ] this is like a really great product for X Y and Z that I do um and then continue to use it like that's really the goal uh so I don't know it's I don't have too many thoughts on the specifics of of these stats and as it pertains to the quality of the tensor airdrop but it is kind of interesting to see that you know with magic Eden running its diamonds points program um it's already picked up some of some of the active trading activity by the way the magic Eden team has done a great job with the ordinal stuff like there's nowhere else um this is not related to tensor at all but I just wanted to bring that up in case they're listening you guys did a like I'm very happy with that what they're doing and I wish blur had done that instead of launch and L2 like I wish they had gone into ordinals no I agree I feel like six months ago everyone was calling or maybe a little more than six months ago everyone was like oh my God it's like the craziest thing like 10 just run up from uh like nothing into like dominating like 80 90% of salana NFD volume and now you're seeing like obviously there's incentives involved but magic e like completely dominating uh ordinal and I think they would dominate even without sort of like any incentive program but now they're also like dominating uh the salana side of things so I think just like looking at like the ordinal side of things like not considering the salana side of things I think like at the end of the day that was a fantastic pivot from Magic Eden and like a really really good move and it's interesting you know like they launch on like salana and ethereum is their like home bases early on and I think that just shows like how Nimbo you have to be on your feet in crypto right and sometimes like the opportunity may not be where you think it lies yeah I think ordinals is like a natural place for um like openc classic um and Magic Eden because it's like bitcoin's slow so and you can't really trade stuff that like cuz blur even now like blur you can't really trade that much because gas fees are so high and like um but like Solana and tensor just make perfect sense because you're like actively trading a lot but on like the ordinals be Bitcoin you don't really have to so I feel like magic he SS it really well it's you just need like something trusted and that works and they they provide that yeah strong agree there all right I got one last super quick Cru Throne Ian and Ian da main launch uh it was on April 9th I feel like a lot of people have been waiting for that one for quite some time to be honest with this launch rakers can dedicate their entire stake to an operator of choice operators can register with IG lay and opt into running abss abss can register with the protocol starting with Ian da which is sort of like the first ABS there are two things that this launch doesn't include which I do think is like kind of important number one in protocol payments from abss to operators and number two slashing and I do think there's an interesting question to be asked here like you know if there's no slashing and there's no in protocol payments like what is being transferred you know like Risk is being not being transferred like Economic Security is not being transferred there's no payment for the economic security so is it just like a database of like this person has on paper like half a billion an e in like sort of like restake commitments whatever that means uh I do think it kind of looks like that at least to me right now I do I do feel like it's a bit of like a silly season especially with alternative reaking platforms that have launch for example carck was like a pretty big thing last week where everyone was sharing around invite and carck is basically I lers but with a bunch of like other assets and with carck you can restake these lrts that are restak in I can there and you know very very good there at some point it starts looking a little city you know like I take Eve i s it for like an LST I res it for like an LRT I put my LRT in like pendo and then like I buy like the yield token on pendo and I take the yield token and then like put that in car like I'm not really sure what we're doing right now to be honest we're having fun it's nice you know we're taking some risks it'll be good it'll all end up very well and very good no nothing bad could happen from this one yeah I mean at the end of the day we got to get the apps that all of this [ __ ] secures figured out um the ever the ever growing problem but yeah r i mean you bring up a good point with the the launch I mean a lot of things launch like you got to get it out there launch it with the training wheels and then you know let's let's grow the question is how long do it take to take those training wheels off you know if we look at l2s launched optimistic rollups with no fraud proofs many of them still have no fraud proofs though they're on like the P stack has them on testnet in their permission list which is still an upgrade on on something like arbitrum which has permissioned fraud proofs um yeah like they all still have multisig they're all still going to have multi sigs well into the future the question becomes how long can we can we survive with the training wheels on and I personally have no ETA on what that expectation should be um but that's definitely something that's a question I'm I'm looking to ask when I think about Igan Lair I do think like yes like maybe the security of l2s or like Ro UPS is like questionable given the fact that like they don't have fraud proof but it still provides the the value that like it was meant to do you know like scaling sort of like a the execution by moving it off chain uh and having like a slightly more performing like blockchain whereas for IG layer like you are the value and like service it provides right is that you're providing like this recent capital and you're sharing your security with an ABS in expectation for some economic return And the fact I would disagree though I think the value you're providing is a cheaper way to go to market to launch my product like if I'm an AVS like for example a lot of the avss are building using the cosmos SDK and they could just launch an app chain spit up a validator set and create the same thing um but this should be a better way to do that um and so yeah sure I can't pay you that's good for the user uh and sure you're not really giving me Economic Security because there's no slashing it's basically just like this reputation based system that hey you're going to run this the thing I need you to run in in your your own Hardware um kind of gets me to Market and I have way worse trust assumptions now because I'm doing this uh but that's the same thing as like an L2 right the blast hack that happened not too long ago everyone was talking about rolling back the chain was an interesting example because sure you could potentially roll back the chain and but if you nobody's ever done that before so you're the first person doing it Paving the way for other people to follow into your footsteps if this were to happen again uh and what that means is if you upgrade the bridge contract and end up bricking it then you just locked and just burned all the billion dollars of of value in that contract so nobody wants to be the person to do that so I don't know like my point there being like there's there's just different trust assumptions with l2s that get introduced and like it kind of feels like the same thing with these abss right no slashing no in protocol payments you're just kind of saying hey go run this thing for me how how dissimilar is that really than a single centralized sequence or no fraud proofs in and a multi Bridge that's fair I think that's a very fair take and like f if I was I L and I knew it would take me like six months more to like fully develop in protocol payments and stashing like I would have made that hardly say move to be honest just a faster go to market right you don't want like wait until like the entire cycle is over to launch these two products and by then you know like maybe alternative Solutions have captured the entire mind sh and I'm sure like other reaking Solutions are also just trying to ship as fast as they can even if it comes at the cost of like some of these like functionality what are that's slashing and yeah I guess so you could argue that at the end of the day like the thing that's the most important is that like Capital commitment however you want to like think of that and that is like the true enabler of like all of these abss and decreasing the cost of like permissionless Innovation yeah D do you want to talk a bit about your Ion token thesis or no I mean I don't know if it's a thesis I just don't if your end goal is to be ingrained or enshrined into the ethereum protocol I don't see how you can do that with a token or maybe not don't see the hurdle to doing so is much higher with with a Tok token right if there's an igen layer itself token yeah how do you get enshrined and like my understanding is that's kind of like the end goal long-term end goal um you know we actually had shiram and uh subid I think it was on the podcast Ren and I interviewed them and we asked the question this is all fine and dandy you guys are building really cool [ __ ] but how are you gon to make money you know you raise Capital you're you know the labs team is a business you you got to make money um and their answer was we're going to build the best AVS is you know we've been around this technology for longer than anyone uh and I'm paraphrasing here uh but we've been around this technology we know some really really good ideas and we're going to send our guys to go build them like that was kind of their pitch was we're not going to make money on igen layer we're going to make money on the avss around it um that said like a token could be very useful here right Ian layer will have really important governance uh processes around like how the slashing parameters are created and and what those what those look like how they change throughout time you know I mentioned the training wheels earlier how do we take those off when do we take those off like a a governance token would actually serve a purpose here so I do see why there can be one but I just think it sort of conflates with the end goal of being enshrined maybe that's not the end goal maybe like sitting on top of ethereum is perfectly fine um I don't know I just think if end goal in shined in ethereum then token doesn't make sense um but like there's a points program you know this team also just saw what happened with margin fry margin f um that'd be disastrous for ethereum if you know all of these depositors are now furious with igen layer I don't think that would go over very well no I also don't think so especially since it's like because Solana's now had a couple of liquidity injections and I feel like ethereum people are expecting one as well but one thing about the in shinan thing is that I like this is an old this is going to be my first attempt at presenting something but I want to try it out but basically on the can you see it yeah okay so basically this is like on the E Research Forum and it's very clearly that like shiram both shiram and vitalic are like we don't think that it makes sense to enshrine so I'm not sure because I've been hearing quite a bit is that they're going to enshrine and I'm just kind of unclear I thought that was a goal and I can I'm very happy to be be wrong about that I don't I'm not that's not a hill I'm trying to die on um so that's that's good to know but and the other reason I think it that is new to when we originally talked about this was you know kak is launching and there's another one launching shortly after that I'm blinking on the name I'm sure more of these will come to be uh you'll probably see like some launch on other chains as well and so let's say there's multiple that launch around ethereum okay now you're not being incredibly neutral because you're picking one and like ethereum very much though has built itself around being incredibly neutral and not picking winners uh so that kind of like when we originally talked about this I didn't think there would actually be multiple reaking protocols yeah I don't know I don't know what they're I like also kind of does feel like something there should maybe only be one of I know we talk about like we all love competition free markets are are Elite but if we all try all these paths you know sometimes cesing around a few ideas might be more efficient I don't know yeah I agree it feels like IG should be its own thing and like it should just be that well Pacho just defined the market for us thank you Picacho can you tell me what of my bags is going to be its own thing oh I meant like it should be its own thing not own thing I'm messing with you but I think that's a good point to close it off uh thank you so much Dan for coming back on ZX hope you come back more often and good job we cat you on your first episode the new host baby let's go [Music]

========================================

--- Video 129 ---
Video ID: UBxaRpZITdI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UBxaRpZITdI
Title: How AI and Crypto Intersect on Ritual's Sovereign Execution Layer | Saneel, Founding Member
Published: 2024-04-11 18:42:59 UTC
Description:
In this interview, Saneel Sreeni, the founding member of Ritual, dives deep into the intersection of AI and crypto. He explains the concept of AI co-processors and how Ritual aims to be a sovereign execution layer for AI, enabling applications to access AI models in a decentralized manner through stateful precompiles. Saneel unveils the benefits of on-chain AI and addresses the current landscape of crypto AI projects. The conversation touches on Ritual's partnership with Celestia for data availability and their collaboration with Eigenlayer for restaking AI. Lastly, Sunil shares details about Ritual's recent partnership with MyShell and their plans for the Infernet SDK and the upcoming Ritual Superchain. Thanks for tuning in!
- -
Follow Saneel: https://twitter.com/sanlsrni
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.

Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://wormhole.com/0xresearch5-5563
- -
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
- -
Marinade is the leading Solana staking service that spreads your stake across 100+ top validators, distributes MEV rewards, and provides automatic downside protection with new Protected Staking Rewards. 

Choose to liquid stake for mSOL for use in DeFi, or delegate your stake through Marinade Native, which gives you full custody of your SOL and no smart contract risk. Max performance for you, max performance for Solana.
https://blckwrks.co/Marinade
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
2:21 What are Co-processors?
7:34 Benefits of Onchain AI Stack 
11:52 What is Ritual?
18:36 Wormhole Ad
19:14 Pear Ad
19:40 Marinade Ad  
20:18 Role of DA
24:54 AI Inference
27:30 Infernet SDK 
33:17 Interoperability Approach
35:45 Crypto AI Landscape
43:26 Actual Crypto & AI Usecases
49:11 Restaking AI on EigenLayer
58:17 Ritual Roadmap
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 130 ---
Video ID: 1fmSYsp7BPE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1fmSYsp7BPE
Title: The MakerDAO-Aave Debacle: Risks and Rewards of Collateralizing DAI | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-04-10 19:34:54 UTC
Description:
In this episode, the Blockworks research team examines Solana's transaction failures and the network's ongoing struggles to handle high transaction volumes. The conversation then turns to the MakerDAO and Aave debacle, debating the risks and merits of MakerDAO's decision to collateralize DAI with Ethena's stablecoin. They also touch on the recent default on Goldfinch and the broader challenges facing on-chain private credit markets. Finally, they explore the rise of Pump.Fun and the resurgence of meme coins.

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. 
- -
Follow Brick: https://twitter.com/0x___Brick
Follow Matt: https://twitter.com/MattFiebach
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
https://x.com/_nishil_/status/1777048334664081548
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:08 Enabling Arbitrum Stylus 
5:08 Velodrome DEX on Bitcoin 
7:40 Solana & SUI Airdrops   
13:39 dYdX Permissionless Smart Contracts
18:15 dYdX Segment: Axelar
22:53 Solana Transaction Failures
31:57 Aave & MakerDAO Debacle
43:37 Goldfinch Default
51:43 Pump.Fun Meme Infrastructure   
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 131 ---
Video ID: r8nl8jzAzn0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r8nl8jzAzn0
Title: Unlocking Bitcoin's Economy with L2s | Orkun, Citrea Co-founder
Published: 2024-04-05 14:10:34 UTC
Description:
In today's interview, Orkun, the Co-founder of Citrea, dives deep into the world of Bitcoin L2s and Citrea. He explains the differences between L2s, sidechains, and sovereign rollups, and discusses the trust assumptions and bridging mechanisms in the Bitcoin ecosystem. Orkun also shares insights on the design tradeoffs in the Bitcoin L2 space, the Citra VM, proof generation, and the bottlenecks and challenges faced by Bitcoin L2s. The conversation touches on the potential for Bitcoin to enable a real economy and the role of Citrea in empowering Bitcoin finance.
- -
Follow Orkun: https://twitter.com/0x_orkun
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.

Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://wormhole.com/0xresearch4-4991
- -
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Bitcoin L2 Overview
7:55 Trustless VS Trust Minimized
12:01 Wormhole Ad
12:40 Pear Ad
13:05 Citrea Bridging 
17:54 Design Tradeoffs in Bitcoin L2 Space
23:37 Block Production & Centralization Risk
34:40 L2 Execution Fee & DA Economics
38:56 Proof Generation
43:07 Static UTXO Sizes
46:42 ZK Architecture & Bottlenecks 
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Ren, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 132 ---
Video ID: EvPENLZyE3g
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EvPENLZyE3g
Title: MEV Wars: The Rise of Vertically Integrated Relays | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-04-03 15:34:13 UTC
Description:
In this week's analyst round table, the Blockworks research team dives into Arbitrum's phase 3 grant program. They also examine the centralization risks emerging in MEV with vertically integrated relays like Titan, and debate the true impact of ETH staking yields on validating costs for rollups. The discussion also covers the huge upcoming token airdrops from Wormhole and Ethena, and whether they could provide a major stimulus to ecosystems. Finally, the team scrutinizes the recent Munchables exploit on Blast, the incentive flaws in BitTensor's decentralized AI model, and the AI potential of projects like HiveMapper that utilize reinforcement learning.

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. 
- -
Follow Westie: https://twitter.com/westiecapital
Follow Effort: https://twitter.com/EffortCapital
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X10 to get 10% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
See you there! 

Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:13 Arbitrum Phase 3 Grant Program
6:08 Partial Set Security & ICS 2.0
16:28 Echo & Seed Round Investing
21:37 Titans Integrated Relay Launch
30:20 MEV Blocker Fee Switch 
33:20 Ethena & Wormhole Token Airdrops
41:27 Blast Munchables Exploit 
49:42 Bittensor Token Dynamics & Demand
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 133 ---
Video ID: EIctD1oU7KM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EIctD1oU7KM
Title: Elixir's Trustless & Permissionless Liquidity Vision for Order Book Exchanges | Philip, Founder
Published: 2024-03-28 16:25:06 UTC
Description:
In today's interview, Philip, the founder of Elixir, discusses how his project aims to democratize access to liquidity provisioning on order book exchanges. He explains Elixir's unique architecture as a modular DPOS blockchain that uses a market making algorithm to allow anyone to supply liquidity to order books in a trustless fashion. Philip dives into the technical details of how Elixir pulls order book data from exchanges, comes to consensus, and posts orders back to the exchanges. The conversation also touches on the Apothecary liquidity provisioning program and Philip's conviction that on-chain order books will prevail over AMMs long-term for serious traders. 
- -
Follow Philip: https://twitter.com/0xphilip
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.

Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://wormhole.com/0xresearch2-6532
- -
Pear is an innovative pair-trading exchange built on top of SYMMIO. Users can trade trending narratives with one click, from bluechip narratives such as long BTC, short ETH, right through to WIF vs BONK. SYMMIO’s intent-centric architecture enables deep liquidity, sourced off-chain and brought on-chain, and combined with Pear, have democratized access to complex trading strategies typically reserved for institutional traders.

Start trading today at: https://www.pear.garden/
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 What is Elixir?
8:23 Elixir Architecture
24:38 Wormhole Ad
25:16 Pear Ad
25:41 Universal Order Book Cold Start Solver
34:38 Integration Strategy & Permissionless Onboarding 
49:09 Validator MEV & Malicious Behavior
53:45 Onchain DEX Architecture Endgame
- -
Resources
https://www.elixir.xyz/
https://twitter.com/elixir
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 134 ---
Video ID: FSo2KVc8Nyo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FSo2KVc8Nyo
Title: How do Protocols Retain Users After Airdrops? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-03-27 19:17:58 UTC
Description:
In this week's analyst round table, we dive into the latest market happenings, including Polygon's recent downtime due to L1 reorgs, the increasing trend of protocols offering larger second-round airdrops to retain users, and the potential staying power of meme coins. The discussion also covers the current state of private market valuations, the challenges faced by debt markets in crypto, and the regulatory landscape surrounding tokenized equities. Looking to the future, the analysts explore the potential impact of AI agents in blockchain gaming and the scalability challenges faced by Ethereum layer 2 solutions like Base. Thanks for tuning in

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. 
- -
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio
Follow Brick: https://twitter.com/0x___Brick
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:33 How do Ecosystems Retain Users?
5:04 Frax Fee Switch Proposal & LRT Wars
14:20 dYdX Segment: Squid 
21:11 DAS Roundup
36:45 Memecoin Froth & Macro Rate Cuts
43:58 Ondo Finance Tokenizes Stocks & Equities
52:31 AI Agents & Blockchain Games
59:54 Base Fee Spikes
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
I just realized Pacho has like really nice eyebrows like really thick welldefined eyebrows boss boss man before we get into today's episode just a quick disclaimer the views Express on this podcast by either myself or any guests are their personal views and do not represent the views of any Associated organization nothing in this episode should be construed or relied upon as Financial technical tax legal or other advice all right let's jump into the episode all right guys welcome back to another episode of ZX reseearch the Brock research team is back to bring you another analyst round table today is Monday March 25th this episode will be going out on Wednesday March 27th and we are joined by Brick and picachio fresh back from our digital asset Summit to jam on the latest Market happenings kicking it off to myself for a news and governance update first things first polygon zkm mayet went down due to L1 vogs I think this is something that we've seen happen a little more recently especially with blobs coming online I think basically the thesis is that blobs basically increase the sort of validator like requirements just because they basically do make the blocks bigger and with that comes a few more extra vrs and one of those vorks resulted in the ZK ebm minute going down for I think it was quite an extended period of time actually roughly 10 hours or so and then just a few other things on sort of like the air drop point side of things edifi announced points season two and it's quite a hefty amount of the entire token Supply it's 5% of the total token Supply and I feel like this is a trend that you're going to see more and more as protocols sort of struggle with how do I keep my users around after the first air drop and I guess the natural conclusion is to make the second round of air drops bigger than the first round and similarly Blast has distributed brass gold but they basically distributed this not to users but to Big Bang witness which was sort of their ecosystem incubation SL haathon competition and to various main ad deps and I think that's just something that you're going to see more and more you know at the end of the day you need both users and dabs it doesn't make sense that you just completely forget about dabs in your whole like air drop process so yeah any thoughts on any of those guys I think the blast one is super interesting like I wouldn't say I'm the heaviest on chain user ever or whatever but um like the way blast did it has kind of incentivized me to just go on the chain and like try new things and I think it was super cool that like uh yeah protocols like got some incentives but then what they decided to do or if I've understood correctly is that they just like redistribute them to like their users so then you get like your kind of per protocol incentives and like people are incentivized then to use kind of everything that's gotten like points or whatever you want to call them because like once one project runs out then people just go to the next one and like try those out so it's like a great way to introduce the whole ecosystem and yeah been super interesting to like try everything out yeah in the same vein I saw for the first time uh hearing uh Rumblings I guess of this L2 called mode which is built on the op stack and it's kind of like a little bit similar to Bass and they're doing a 5% airdrop of the the total Supply to to early users and there's different kpi Milestones so I think they just hit 200 mil of tvl DCF God was actually the one who put this one on my radar but I find that super interesting too just because optimism defi is like mids at best no offense like there's just not a ton to do over there like I I either go to base or I'm not really using the op stack much at all um so kind of keeping my eyes out for blast like uh I guess narratives in the op stack ecosystem all right we got a few other news and governance updates the first is more on the new side of things it's ethos which is sort of a hybrid between uh ethereum and Cosmos is sort of like a security coordination there um for CS powered by E security but they've secured $4.7 billion dollars in stake commitments and that's broken down as I think2 billion dollar from EDI $1.2 billion from Renzo protocol one billion from puffer 400 million from kelpin 100 million from swell and I think you just just going to see more and more news like these uh come out over the next few weeks or months for example I think the gr is another code un C ABS that got State commitments to and I'm sure there's like a huge amount of BD games happening behind the scenes as all of these abses go to all of these different lrts or reaking protocols and basically say hey can you like commit your stake to us because you know at the end of the day it's a nice sexy number to see that your abs is secured by like billions and billions of like assets um something else on the governance side of things fax is proposing a fee switch um this goes pretty contrary to what they were doing in the past especially with sort of their whole real world asset shift if I'm not wrong their entire goal was to not turn on a fe so that they would approve sort of protocal Revenue and bring FRS so that it's fully backed again but this goes completely against that point and you know they have the FRS of rollups they want to reach some insane amount of TBL by the end of the year and have like also an insane amount of like rollups for like layer threes but basically there's a lot happening and I think many would argue probably too much happening there um so that's what's happening on fractor fund and lastly on the dydx fund uh the proposal went to to stake 20 million dydx tokens from the treasury with stride which I think is a pretty big win for stride notably I think though dydx will not be Auto compounding the sort of dydx or the usdc rewards from staking liquid staking this right uh um instead they'll just be keeping sort of like the acov rewards in the treasury whereas for normal liquid dyx stakers they would continuously compound the usdc rewards but yeah any thoughts on FX atos or dydx guys I mean for FR I'm not that familiar with the whole ecosystem or the like uh application itself but yeah it seems that they're really announcing a lot of changes all the time and uh like trying to make things happen but uh yeah I guess the market really isn't I don't know how to put it believing day anymore maybe because like they introduce all of this stuff and then no reaction ever comes uh which maybe is a good indication of like maybe they're focusing on too much or spreading like too thinly uh because I think near had a similar problem at one point where like they were implementing a lot of stuff and announcing new things but then uh a lot of things never materialized or got changed around a lot and then it's hard to like create a clear picture of what your project or blockchain does uh so yeah I think it's interesting that they're like introducing all of these cool things but at the same times you need to like execute at some point as well to you know make things happen yeah I don't think anybody's really that familiar with FX since they keep launching something new every like three days um but I agree with brick I mean it's just they're launching way too much stuff even though like I really like the FX team and I love like I've I would read up a lot on them over like the past year but now I'm kind of getting tired of it to the point that I feel like they're constantly launching something new and I I don't even think it's necessarily like narrative chasing I think it's more so just that they don't necessarily know exactly where they want the product to go and like brick said the market doesn't seem to like where they're planning on going so I hope that they can somehow simplify it and I mean like to be honest I just I maybe like focus on the L2 instead of the l3s first and then move from there yeah but I think that's also a good like uh like a indication of a lot of players may be staking Capital through layer but not really knowing what's happening or like what the narratives will be and I think for a lot of people like now it's just a default that like uh ENT layer will drop some kind of token or through some like ABS that being IGN da like drop a token and then it will do quite well but my thesis is that like this stuff let's say in the next 12 months will be like so much bigger than anybody could imagine like it will just be engraved into pretty much everything uh regarding ethereum yeah I agree with Victor I think you're going to see like similar to like TBL Wars like every ABS is just going to flex this like vanity metric of how much State commitment they have behind their abs and it's just going to be sort of this measuring like a competition and I think yeah like most users have no idea what they are sort of depositing or weaking into I bet you if I asked like every single ion your depositor out there 80% of them probably wouldn't know what the Acron AVS stands for whether that's a problem probably but I also know aan is like really aware of the situation and sort of like the risk that LTS present to both like I and theum as a whole as you know sort of like the quote unquote like Leverage that being introduced through some of these like Loop trades and so yeah uh I think we will continue to have no idea what is happening I do think that there'll be a lot more increased education in the space um either from M themselves are sort of like external third party contributors but yeah I I expect it to keep gr though yeah but also got to say that I feel that a lot of these lrts are maybe a good addition to the game because many of them will be like trying to optimize how they allocate capital and a lot of them are like adapting these like optimization models where they're trying to optimize for the best best risk reward ratio which probably is a better way to allocate Capital than just having people like randomly throw in stuff into like different operators and abss so uh yeah I mean I think those are pretty good for the industry overall let me follow up there then like you say like sort of developing this portfolio based on risk reward ratio what do you think the risk is and what do you think the reward is because for half of these abss they haven't even thought to like the slashing mechanism you really have no clue what the token rewards are going to look like so what do you think like actually being discussed other than like is your project legit Tech during the BD cars yeah I mean it's gonna gaunlet has at least one good like blog post about this and they go through like their kind of risk reward model and it's going to be based on stuff like perceive the risk and I guess historical performance of the avss so to answer your question like right now I don't think it's possible because you don't as you said like if you don't know the slashing conditions you can't like optimize the model in the way you should and it's impossible to say so I think yeah that's actually a good point like a lot of people maybe don't realize that the first I don't know a few weeks will be the riskiest for when a new like ABS launches because you simply don't have any historical data uh to go off and also like one maybe big factor that people don't really think about is that like it's impossible to really Define the risk or like you kind of have to you know estimate something and like to be able to I guess put it into a model so uh yeah you can't be perfect with it but I'd still argue that it's much better than just like randomly picking out a V s's are like securing as many as you can with your Capital I've got a dumb question for you guys too so if if you went to withdraw what you deposited in enan Lair let's say you deposited St and they unwrap it when you go to withdraw that can you just withdraw it in eth or are you withdrawing it in Ste like I'm just trying to think through because I've been saying since the beginning I just see the main risk here being the the peg of these lrts to the underlying eth given how many layers of of Leverage you kind of have on top and I could see that being a problem where they dpeg 20 30 40 cents off the dollar so what does that process look like like are you actually withdrawing Ste no matter what or do you get out eth like yeah you you withdraw the um the liquid token the liquid steak token so if you do steak de you withdraw steak de but it takes seven days it's not like a oh can I just have it now it's like block to block so I don't know how many blocks exactly but when I withdra with seven days okay I I think there's some differences between how like projects implement this but at least a few I've looked at this like you deposit Ste into the LRT project and then the project itself like goes and un Stakes the Ste like you would normally do so then you just have you're holding basically eat and then you first stake that natively and then restake it uh through layer and then the LRT project just like uh gives you back their LRT derivative yeah if we have different answers on that question then I'm pretty sure retail has no clue what they're going to get back when they eventually withdraw to you but all right we're going to move on to a quick word from squid thanks to our fantastic sponsor dydx all right guys for this week's dydx segment we have big co-founder from squid bgo thanks for coming on big hey thanks for having me guys all right I'm going to dive right into it I feel like I'm seeing squid rouer more and more lately when interacting with various stab front ends can you explain what squid rer is and how AAR fits in perhaps as a starting point yeah sure so squid is a crush chain swap critical we let you get any asset on one chain to any another in under 20 seconds and this all starts with axo which is a think of it like an internet for blockchains it's a network which connects every blockchain uh has really nice D simplied way of doing it it has 75 validators and they verify messages between chains once you have Axel's Network you can build applications on top of it we thought the most useful application would be to allow you to have any asset in your wallet on any chain and interact with any application in one click because we think the the super of crypto is that you can have really strong ownership like DX perfect example of this they build a an exchange that instead of a centralized exchange where say FTX ears your money or or doesn't earn your money as it t out um you own your money and you can verify it so people are really focusing on this ownership side of crypto but the other superpower of crypto is interoperability where you have an application and value that's associated with that application and you can use it in you can plug it into any other application like seamlessly um and this is a big lift up from the traditional Finance World say where you have maybe some value in atino where I am right now and would be able to use that in Australia um so we want to have all value across the world like instantly be able to um uh exchange or communicate with other products and like byproducts we can transact AI agents can transact this this the future we want and so what we thought we needed was a oneclick way of using this value in any application with then let's swap value into something that the application might recognize and then also um in DX's case for example we deposit that value into into an account and you can start trading and yeah we've we've done about 1.2 billion dollar of spot volume in the last year partnered with a few hundred protocols right now connecting 65 chains I think yeah that's super helpful context so how specifically is squid router related to dydx I've seen squid Integrations across a lot of different purpose dexes so i' would also be interested to hear like what is your expansion strategy like how do you decide which daps you want to plug into with Squid rer yeah dydx is the perfect example of the of our use case because they built an entire app chain just for their use but um it was difficult for users say on ethereum to get the E onto the exchange to now start trading a vdx um and we're helping them by we swap on say Unis swap bridge fire axela swap on osmosis bridge fire ABC all these things the user would have had to previously do themselves to get onto idx uh we do it for them in one click and that problem happens to be basically there for every application in crypto um because we have all these different rollups and chains around the place um any application is usually limited to having users just on the chain that they exist on like users of ethereum or users of arbitrum users of the cosmos and where really easy sell because we come to basically any applicational protocol and we can say uh you can increase your total addressable Market to basically everyone in crypto so the the people our expansion strategy is really with everyone I mean we've we focused on defi to start with like we focused on dexes and we're partnered with most dexes around crypto in on the chain that we support and then derivatives dexes with the next one use case there is depositing margin into your account from any chain um we're also working in nfts so you can buy an nft on any chain with any token and one clip this sort of stri colle check out experience um lending gaming we're we're working everyone it's a really nice um open world that we get to working nice that's all super interesting and I'd love to see you guys sort of passed across my time saying like squid always Powers these really seamless experiences I guess last question that's slightly out there would you bu any chance have any token Alpha for some of our listeners I can't confirm the existence or non-existence of a token um but I can um yeah the the users like the community should get involved with with our Discord and Twitter and we have we're really proud of making everything fun so we'll be coming out with some fun experiences soon which which everyone should engage with one more quick question too I know we only have like another minute here but I noticed that there's V1 and V2 do you mind uh diving into like what exactly the difference is between V1 and V2 squid yeah totally so V2 is still in beta and is going to be releasing pretty soon it's um it's a huge upgrade in how the routing Works um so originally squid was purely you would route bya usdc you'd always Bridge usdc Swap and it was very limited in number of uh say the number of Pops you do with dydx that's a special case where we actually go from ethereum toward mot to Noble to DX and it's like this really complex transaction which we package but we built that specifically for them and this is V2 is super generic so we're expecting this world where there's potentially thousands of chains and rollups and everyone has their own rollup for their application there's tons of scaling happening and we needed something which was going to connect everything in one click so it's it's really a technical upgrade so that we can support those things like l3s all these op stock things that coming we've got rollups and Celestia like you will need to bridge multiple times probably and so we're we're doing that and it's also going to be way faster um needs to be super Snappy like go you get a quote swap get your assets in 20 in like 10 seconds two seconds even um so yeah that's what we're just focusing on like now we've hit the use case really nicely and we're just leveling up the technical routs awesome well we will have to get you on sometime for a full episode fig but thank you so much for coming on we will see you uh hopefully in the future awesome thanks for having me on all right guys now moving on to our hot seat Cruise drone segment this week I'm going to shoot it over to Brick first who's going to give us a dash Roundup from blockworks very own digital asset Summit yes sir so um went to dash last week was a super super great experience unsurprisingly like most of the people you talk to are quite eoric right now and still believe that the market has more space to run um but also like I guess a big difference uh with other conferences I've been to is that like at Das you had more people who were uh super focused on the intersection between tradify and crypto and then also more um like focused on the how the like crypto markets are structured uh which I or what I mean by that is like oh how are how is money flowing and like where's volume going and things like that it wasn't of course there were uh some super tech focused people also but not as much as the other uh conferences I've been to and it was pretty I don't know refreshing or like cool to see also people who aren't as like uh you know just Tech focused people and kind of being in the industry without maybe knowing every single detail that's happening underneath and actually a lot of people I talk to said that they don't even trade crypto that much uh on their like individual accounts which was quite a big surprise to me so that kind of signals to me that uh the industry is here to stay because now you start getting more and more people who are here to like do it as a day job instead of like trying to make it big with uh our true trading then another takeaway would be that big banks are still like definitely playing around in the field and like they're going to implement that like their own structures talk to a lot of different people who said that like they're working on in their Banks like internal divisions for like crypto payments or like trying to implement some kind of a structure where the banks customers themselves can like have a native kind of way to get access to crypto um but then yeah that got me thinking that that might lead to maybe some kind of fragmentation or like uh you will still have some kind of a tradify factor even when like the banks come on chain because everybody won't be like using the same systems and uh I'm not sure how they're gonna they're probably gonna be uh well connected through some like technology way but still like it's not going to be as you know idealistic as within crypto where like everything basically can be connected then when it comes to some vs I talk to it seems that like uh the private markets have quite quickly followed what's happening in the public and everyone's kind of expecting that uh yeah as I said earlier that everything will run up so like given um like private rounds have gotten more expensive and it's now harder than ever to kind of get into these private rounds uh and that's how projects are able to like raise so much money and a few vs even said that they're not GNA like invest that heavily anymore because they feel that the Market's overheating and they just want to take a like super long perspective so they're going to wait for like the next opportunity um then also talk to some dead people uh and their biggest concern was like yeah we already have some institutions here who do deals and like use these products but it's still super small which is why like the market is pretty inefficient from time to time and like few big pain points there are that there aren't enough like trfi like products yet so like or like these derivatives like interest rate swaps or like more complimented dead products um or of course they also exist to a certain degree but it's like you can't access that capital or you can't access those projects yes yet as an institution um and yeah interest rates uh are sometimes or that's why interest rates sometimes are like out of or you they could basically be arbitr if you wanted to but um it's also like hard to close this differen is because because like it's so hard to like access some of these parts of the market I don't know if that made any sense but uh yeah and then maybe my last point would be something that effort Capital has been talking about since we came back from Das as well is that Meme coins are like a super hot narrative still like you would have some super big institutions or like regulatory people even talking about I don't know bnk or we or whatever and uh I think that's a big signal that like meme coins really have a lot of like not I don't want to say staying power but mind share maybe it's the better word uh yeah it was pretty funny to hear like people in suits uh talking about meme coins I don't know if bacho wants to add anything yeah about the meme coins um I don't know if you guys remember but slurf launched that morning that like I think the first morning or the second morning that we were at that and I remember like by midday I had I was like over hearing people in suits talking about it but I mean like slurf was pretty big because it it pumped and then also the dev was crying on spaces so it was like it got really popular really quickly but it was still kind of like a culture like a shock like brick said to hear like people talk about meme coins um and like even on the panels they were talking about meme coins and stuff so I agree that it's definitely like here to stay apart from that I I think the only thing that I really noticed then this is something that I think about a lot is like when these guys come in what like interest do they have in crypto like how much interest they have in crypto and from what I saw is like the I don't like the higher ups the big guys they like understand crypto but they're like oh ethereum is like a little bit exotic like etc etc but then like their analysts are like really really in the Tren and they like they know everything and they're very like interested in everything so like those were the guys that would often talk about slurf um so it was like that was kind of interesting to me because I think on CT you hear a lot about like oh how like banks are going to come in but they don't like that or like the suits are going to come in but they don't necessarily know about it I I don't think that's true maybe that was true last cycle but now like these people are obviously like in the space on their free time and like also they understand it a lot better than we might imagine I think there's a lot to bre down there I I really like Big's point about how these people probably just do it as their day job rather than punting on Pas at home I think that's a very good sign actually because it means that these people are likely here and thinking about how to incorporate blockchain technology into their jobs their companies rather than just thinking about like the financial and speculative nature of crypto which is what it's really focused on right now uh to be honest and definitely agree on the meme coins I think like there's a degenerate inside every person uh and I guess that came out in full force during during digital ad Summit private Market valuations I think we've all seen that it's gten pretty crazy in the past few months we've seen these large raises whether that's like espresso Elixir eclipse and I mean like I can there like1 million do raise from like a single VC like that's probably like one of the largest like of like I'm not sure whether you say like private markets are overheating but if you're like an investor at this point you're probably thinking that there's probably better risk return just from investing in liquid markets or secondaries rather than private markets and totally agree on the Deb market fund right I think we have seen like the early Innings of like people thinking about like rwa on CH whether that's just like token treasury or actual like for example credit pools such as like Maple or Goldfinch but like in the grand scheme of those Market it's still really really small like private Credit in tradice Hobby like I don't have a number but I'll say like hundreds of billions whereas in crypto it's probably like one billion Max and I think there's still a lot of operational processes sort of like counterparty R like legal RIS like what contracts you sign What entity are you interacting with is it a dow the protocol or sort of like a offshore entity that crypto's still figuring out but I do expect crypto to figure it out sooner or later but it's just super exciting to hear that you know the institutions whether that's like super chafi institutions or super Crypton native institutions that are here and they're are at least actively interested in this industry rather than just completely writing it off and I can imagine the large part of that was due to the ETF approval back in January yeah definitely agree there but I find the the inflated private round valuations to be kind of surprising because I have defi llama pulled up right now and I'm looking at the raises tab we topped in October of 2021 at $7.1 billion doll raised during that month alone and today you see during February there was 800 million so we're looking at like an order of magnitude Less in private round fundings amounts and I I don't know it's just like you'd think that this gets a whole lot crazier before people are passing on private round deals but it's tough to really diagnose because obviously there's a bit of a lag between private money raised and public markets Trading yeah that's a good point and actually when you think about it like when I said that the private Market is overheating I meant more like valuations are going up uh and not like the amount of capital raised itself but that's a super good point because like interesting that if a lot of or some vs are already feeling that uh they're paying a lot to get just get in or like how the valuations are high and compared to like the last cycle we still aren't like seeing as much money raised in total um maybe that means that some players are never coming back or like we we will never see a as much of a you know craze going on in the private markets as we saw in the last cycle but we'll see what happens yeah it could be timing too like we obviously had that March 2020 huge dip it was the middle of covid so maybe that funding kind of got pushed back further in the cycle and this time it feels a little bit scarier to you know make a private investment because you think all right I got a one-year Cliff after the token launches that could be in six to 12 months I'm going to be waiting here for two years and bitcoin's already at alltime highs like that feels like kind of a shitty deal at this point in the cycle so maybe it's just apples to oranges comparison I think there's also another thing that would be interesting to look at so one is like sort of deployment right Sam you put that number of 8 point whatever billion in February 2021 versus like 800 million in the current month that's one aspect the other aspect would be how much are people raising for their funds because in 2020 2021 that got pretty ridiculous like the amount that some like first time like uh GPS were able to base for the like crypto funds obviously that was a function of sort of like the low interest rates during the co era and interest rates are at a very different place right now from where they were like two or three years ago so it be interesting to see whether these funds are able to do these like Mega raises again or that they're not able to do these Mega raises because I think the top was like a6z announcing they're like in total they raised like 4.5 billion across their like four crypto funds last cycle and I don't think you see something of that order of magnitude this cycle again just because of a different like Market environment but also be something to pay attention to I think that might also be like a um consequence of the fact that I'm guessing last cycle a lot of funds couldn't really reliably deploy all of the capital they had like then you have to start doing some weird deals and you're like inevitably gonna get burned on that stuff so maybe I'm just guessing here but maybe a lot of managers got a bit you know wiser on that sector and decided to you know what like I'm just going to raise as much as I think I can reliably deploy and be happy with them I don't know I think it might just be we just haven't hit that VC fomo yet where they're like oh I have to have crypto Investments um so I don't I think it might just we're just not doing a left translative cycle like everybody's saying it is it's just going to get sillier and sillier is my take I think another Factor could also just be AI like AI was not a thing in the co era whereas I would guess in the past one year like VCF F mode and based for AI funds to like incredible degree and you see that in these uh fundraisers and these Investments I mean like today it was announced that FTX was selling two-thirds of this anthropic of the anthropic state for like 800 million or something which means that there's someone else on the other side buying their stake at whatever valuation anthropics trading at and so yeah I think that's probably another reason I think there's a lot of like high net worth individuals too who previously maybe would throw 100K check to you know this friend of a friend who's in crypto and starting a VC fund but now it's like okay you can just buy Bitcoin ETFs in a portfolio in your you know regular brokerage account so I I don't know I see both sides I could see the Picacho we just haven't seen that VC fomo yet or I could also see like there's simply just more Avenues to invest and you no longer need to maybe put those checks into like a a more private allocator fund but it'll be fun to watch yeah the thing is for me VC almost always seems like a forced buyer to an extent because they have all this money they have to deploy so I'm almost wondering if it's like if it's just not that time yet where they have to start like they haven't we're still I don't want to say it because it's a bit of a mean by I'm wondering if we're still relatively early in the cycle that they haven't had to like raise those funds and be like oh like I have to deploy this as well and that's when you see like because you see this with like not just F like VC funds but also like chains where they're like oh like I have X amount of money I have to throw it into some form of like program some form of incentive thing it's like that fomo I just that's what I think it's like they're kind of like forced to deploy and it's just not that time yet all right I think that's a good segue into my hot seat this week I've got Trad fi dunkers on the ETF outflows last week I'm actually stealing this from a tweet from fou so be sure to give him a follow he is a a account he's been nailing the macro side of things but last week we saw 900 million of net outflows from Bitcoin spot ETFs and some folks have been kind of cheering on X Twitter about how the most recent runup was basically driven by unsustainable demand for Bitcoin ETFs but um as F likely or rightly pointed out like what they kind of fail to realize is2 billion dollar of the net or of outflows were from gbtc and no one on CT really understands how the Genesis bankruptcy proceedings are actually going so that could be related potentially and this also came during a week when a lot of people were very Unsure how the fomc meetings last week were going to go and it it wound up going pretty pretty darn well the fomc turned out to be pretty positive with language from pal signifying QT tapering cuts through the the end of the year like one two maybe three um so yeah generally positive language from pal despite the the more than hot inflation numbers we've been getting as of late and today's Monday the 25th as we said a few times and the coinbase premium returned which is historically signified spot ETF um inflows so we'll see if that correlation holds up but gbtc is down to about 20 billion dollar of AUM and you have like macro guys like Joseph Wang who used to work at the FED who I personally follow pretty closely uh for macro signal if you will uh and he thinks that the global cutting cycle is just now starting and he's predicting like Pro positive price action ac across risk on asset classes so pair that with the having in you know less than a month there's definitely a lot to be bullish about but again we keep talking about meme coins like that does typically sign signify froth in the market so it's this is just like a tough Market to navigate honestly and it feels like everyone every other day is like gone skitso on us and like one day everyone's bullish one day everyone's bearish and there's been some pretty crazy sentiment swings so I guess just spot and chill is the is the takeaway because it's it's just a hard Market to try and time if you will and I think you're probably better off just holding the bags you have conviction in like like bricko says time in the market not timing the market yeah I definitely agree with what lot Sam say I mean as much as I would like to see 500 million in that infos every day and Bitcoin just grind up 3% like day after day after day I don't think that's a realistic scenario at some point it had to slow down or even go NE negative so call this like info consolidation or whatever you want the market does need to take a breeder from time to time I do think that one interesting thing that I feel like I've noticed at least in the past like few weeks or months is that CT is like flipping like bullish and bearish a lot more frequent than last cycle it feels like last cycle it would at least take like maybe like one or two weeks before like people just went like turbo b like turbo bear but this cycle and especially the past few weeks it feels like that's happening like every few days I don't know what to make of that um to be honest I'm not going to pretend to like understand like CT like social sentiment analysis but that's just something to uh pay attention to and I'm also not going to pretend to like know my Maco stuff but I don't know the MMC seemed pretty positive too I don't know to me it seems that each cycle like people are saying that oh this cycle we're flip-flopping much more like Market sentiment is changing but I just feel that that might be I don't know what to call it re ecy bias where like at least to me last CLE I remember the same thing happening because I was just kind of getting more used Twitter and like getting more more on there and I would do my own stuff trading on the side and then hop on Twitter and I'm like hm last day every or yesterday everybody was super bullish now everybody flipped like what's happening here I don't get this mindset because I'm definitely not like a short-term Trader and yeah I'm seeing it this cycle as well so I feel that that's always happening and that's I don't know why I can't do that day trading thing or like where you flip flop every day you like pick a side or pick you're either bullish or bearish and then you go with that for the next few months that's my Pro tip yeah it's also interesting just on the BTF Bitcoin ETF flows is that every other ETF had inflows every single day net other than grayscale so it's literally just grayscale as the source of sell pressure and to like the social sentiment seeming a little bit more flippy floppy this cycle than last as you were saying Ren I think that'd probably be attributable to the fact that people are more heavily allocated to meme coins that have you know 50% intraday moves regularly so that's what I'd attributed to personally it also might be that now we have like it's over where so back is very like memeified so you're always seeing that and you're kind of always thinking about that as well but it's definitely all like most likely is because people are facing like 50% down swings on The Daily and then they're like it's over it's definitely easier to like flipflop right now because of the like ETF flows it's kind of a Nord star you can follow where like oh today we had like I don't know 10 billion outflows uh maybe not that much hopefully but just a few hundred million not or like tens of milons not a few billi yeah just doing example here but you know what I mean like it's easier to you know start flip-flopping if you see you have a like clear Market Nar or like kpi kind of that you're following so it's easier to like change your mind just based on that because I guess last cycle a lot of people were thinking about the interest rates and those of course don't change them often or as violently maybe no I think that's actually a very good point right like last cycle thinking about like whether you want to feel like positive or negative or like optimistic or pessimistic like it was hard to find like a metric other than like the price itself you know you can't look at the rainbow chart like MVR Z or whatever like those like random metrics like coin holder days but this cycle there's like the net inflows and that's a really easy metric you know like positive number good negative number bad and it feels like everyone's like attached themselves to that number as a sentiment indicator I I totally disagree gbtc was literally the exact same thing last cycle like the premium yeah or not even the premium just like the the dollar AUM like it was the exact same thing everyone was posting charts like oh my gosh like another 500 million of inflows into GB like it's it's the same exact thing just re-engineered and and now fully regulated sure I think that's a a fair take through I think that's a good point to move it on to bachio who do you have in the hot SE Kone this week I have two people teams in the cool Throne this week I have firstly the Ando team who launched Ando GM a couple I think last week that's has like completely ruined my sense of time so I think it's either last week or the week before um Ono GM Ono Global markets um apply name allows you to trade Global tokenized assets um including equities and stocks which is kind of not what they used to do they used to only allow usdy which is a yield bearing stable coin and O USG which is tokenized governance debt um now they've moved on to tokenize stocks and equities and I'm really happy that they did this because there's kind of like a lack of tokenized equities and private equities on chain and I'm not sure if this is like a demand issue or a supply issue it's probably a demand issue uh to be honest but either way it's good that they're at least expanding more and recently they also did uh expanded to sui and Solana so the highr put chains I overall I've just been like over the past few months I've been very excited with Fondo because even though the real world asset narrative kind of died down like only naturally because meme coins are pumping and no one really cares about like 7% or like 4% on chain or something um but yeah I don't think that tokenized equities will become popular this cycle but I do think that Ando has that like Mandate of Heaven for tokenization and real world assets where it's like the protocol for it so I'm I'm quite excited to see what they're going to continue to do um and my second one is with the parallel team and their launch of AI agents in or their potential launch of AI agents in game in eight to 11 months where so they recently released a white paper for parallel colony which is a AI agent LED SL based space exploration game where you basically chat to your AI agent and say hey can you build like X or can you invade Sam's Colony today and then they do it or they can refuse to do it or they can say actually I don't want to invade Sam's Colony I'd rather invent invade Ren's Colony um but with parallel Colony they're also launching wayfinder which is the AI agent framework which I think is the cooler um part of their announcement it's like basically it allows AI agents to interact with the blockchain um it's supposedly launching on Solana although everything is kind of like preemptive at this point because not everything is solidified it still has a ways to go um but overall I'm quite excited and they're meant to emit 45% of the wayfinder token prompt which is the name is undecided to Prime ecosystem I don't know how they're going to plan on doing that from what I've seen on CT it's supposed to be like a caching system which is basically you stake your Prime tokens and you earn prompt but I think we still have to wait and that's likely going to be like at least they're saying quarter four this year I don't think that's going to be the case I think it's like um start of next year but it's I mean this is definitely the coolest um onchain game that I've at least like heard of it over the last few months everything else is like stardo value but value but yeah you need at least 100 Grand in Investments to get a couple of seeds so this one should do relatively okay okay starting with uh Ando i I do agree that like tokon treas is probably just the largest use case today um but I do think like tokenize equities and just I'm not saying like tokenize everything guys like definitely like not just like tokenize like every single Airbnb tokenize like every like house tokenize every like just random things and put on the blockchain but at least from like a super m perspective right like if you are trading equities on your stock Brokers today you can sell your Equity I think it's now T plus1 settlement and then you're going to take another one or two days to go through like the Fiat banking system and then you need to like transfer to your bank account and then from your bank account to like your centralized exchange and then like onra through your centralized exchange like that's a pretty decent time that could have been invested in the market and so just like cutting out those processes by tokenizing equities on chain seems like a good first step obviously there's like probably additional risk and Trust assumptions involved but it does seem like Ono's going a pretty like damn regulatory route you know they're adhering to all of the regulations they have kycs they're registering all these funds and I don't think it takes off just because like you know like equities aren't that interesting when compared to like the upside that crypto offers but in the long term I think that's kind of the blue case of tokenization right like crypto and more specifically like blockchain systems or blockchain technology reduces the settlement time their fiction to like trade between assets and hopefully one day like offer permission is access to all of these investment opportunities just because in the US it's easy but in a lot of the other parts of the world it can still be surprisingly hard to access like us equities to be honest like even in developed countries yeah I got to give a big hat to just off the rip to whoever the CMO is over at Ando because Ando GM is 10 out of 10 marketing I love that brand but I just think back and get PTSD to the days of Mir getting served at some conference that was a equity trading platform called me in the Tera ecosystem and then I also think to gains Network D listing equities specifically because of the regulatory risk so I don't know if they're working with like a big fund like a black rock or some sorts to like go through all this or or how closely they're working with Regulators but like for me I don't want to touch it just because of those risks yeah I get what you mean I think Ono is the thing is I don't want to say anything because I don't want to jinx it but from what I've seen and how they've worked in the past is like they work relatively closely with regulation um obviously this is just me inferring I don't know I I haven't asked them but like with o USG and stuff it was pretty serious I read over their like docs and stuff and their like notices and it's seemed like they were doing everything the right way um but obviously as you said it's like I also think regulation has cleared up a bit more like if you see black rock Etc potentially launching stuff on like they had an ethereum $100 million fund or something so it's like it's kind of easing up so I think it should be better but you still never know so I get what you mean and it's also like kind of you like like you never know you like things could change in a month that's what the SEC is doing so yeah my takeaway with both of these themes is that like if you have a good product and then execute well on the like BD front the market will take notice into you uh especially with I'd say Ono because although I haven't like done very deep Research into it I always see that uh or I'm guessing I'm not the only one in the market who's like not being super into like this vertical but then when they like launch a new product or like somehow advertise it they always seem to like make a perfect job out of it and I guess the token launch event was also done in a way that like basically you know got the Market's attention and nothing super bad has happened maybe on the contrary the token has done quite well so yeah might take way is just that like if you have a good product and you're able to advertise it you're right now going to do very well in crypto yeah I think that's the power of sort of like marketing yourself and somehow becoming the category leader I think when most people think rwa these days they just think on no I at least I like don't really think of anything else and there's a lesson to be learned in there for like marketing and trying to become the category leader I don't think there's like a defined playbook for it but definitely like something that most prodos are trying to do um and then moving on to sort of like the prime parallel side of things vacha did you say that they're gonna launch in eight to 11 months or did I hear that wrongly uh what whatever quarter four is is early but I I don't think it's gonna launch in quarter four like because usually with these games I I love the like the parallel team and I think they're like great but like realistically usually with products you got to give like teams plus four minus not minus four plus four um so I think they'll likely take their time but I think it makes sense it's the AI agent game so yeah I mean that seems pretty far out I would be worried that by the time they launch to be honest like kind of the the fun is over and the Market's kind of died a little but I don't know fingers cross hopefully they ship it in time I do think that AI agents like X gaming is really interesting uh obviously there's that like one super famous paper that came out from Stanford of like multiple AI agents interacting in this like stard valy type world and I think that paper captured a lot of people's attention and parallel seems to be sort of like the leading uh team that's trying to implement this into gamepl it's so hard for me to Envision like it there's like two scenarios like one is like really bearish like the AI agents like don't work like they just keep on like not listening to you you ask them like go build something you're like no I'm kind of tired I don't want to build it and you're going to be like what is this I'm trying to get you to do [ __ ] you know um but then the other is like the obvious bluecase you know it's is like really fun seamless experience you have these like hilarious interesting interactions and even even if this game doesn't work out I do think like overall long term it's going to be an really interesting chend to pay attention to I wouldn't be too surprised if five years down the road as sad as it sounds like kids have this like sort of like friend buddy in the game that they like just constantly interact with and like it's just completely powered by AI agents and that's sort of like their only outlet for everything all sorry this is getting a bit depressing but basically I do think that there's a lot of like day-to-day like AI interactions AI agent interactions that people will have in the future yeah that made me really sad R but the first thing is my be scenario as well like CU with chat GPT and stuff sometimes you have to for like beg it to do something for you you're like hey please do this like I'll give you a reward or something because or else it just gets lazy and doesn't do anything so I'm worried that it's going to be the same thing with um the AI agents but I'm my biggest worry is that it's just going to be like interesting for like a month and that's it like if I was parallel that would be my worry because I feel like for strategy games and like Colony games you want to be like as like in control as possible like I want to do things my way be like be it role playing or be it like Min maxing being as efficient as possible and like at the end of the day I don't know if me saying to an AI agent to do something that way is gonna do it for me um but yeah that's my like big worry is that's just not going to be that much fun after a month I'm such a mid curver on this I just I see chat gbt is useful don't get me wrong but like I'm not using it every single day and like they found it that company in 2015 you know like that was nine years ago so now you're telling me that there's going to be onchain AI agents interacting with the blockchain and doing all these huge new use cases that are super underexplored and it's only an 8 to 11th month development time frame like that just that doesn't sound right to me yeah but do you remember that like first um AI generated video it's like Will Smith eating spaghetti and it looks like horrible and like versus the recent AI generated videos and it just looks like an actual movie so like these things grow super exponentially so I think I mean there's definitely like a risk that it's just not as good as it should be in8 to 12 months I just think like it's getting very very fast to the point that I think it's going to get a bit scary next year hopefully not as like scary as what Ren described with my children having to speak to a AI Avatar all the time but it will get scary so we're gonna see how everything works out yeah I just hope uh or it would be super cool if they get it implemented by that time and then I would imagine that uh going back to the point of you having to like beg the AI agent to like do something for you or whatever like one would hope that you could change the friction of or maybe the frequency or how like negative the AI agent is you know what I mean so that if a player wants to like be able to you know have a super smooth no uh like uphill battles to do within the game experience then you can just like draw the friction down cuz to me this kind of seems like a super big possibility of creating something like I don't know Sims on steroids and just like simple games with that use an AI agent that give you like so many more possibilities for the player I mean uh to do stuff and that's like a big unlock I feel like but that's my question if you're a player playing a game what is the difference between playing Sims and playing this new parallel Colony wayfinder whatever it's called game it's like to the user you don't even understand like it feels like you're interacting with a hardcoded bot that's making random decisions based on a random number generator like it it doesn't actually do anything for the user okay so I I think I need to give a bit more context here so the each agent has its own archetype from what I've understand and B like based on the white paper it has its own archet type so if I own let's say Avatar 75 and I give it certain prompts and I I play with it for like six months it has its own archetype but it also develops its own memories with me so it has its own like ways that it understands instructions prompts histories memories it's experienced relationships and when I sell that one to Brick it keeps those like it's embedded in the token ID so that's like the benefit versus with Sims where it's like and also I mean I I don't know like Sam I I don't know how to convince you of that because it's like to me it's so clear that it's like completely different to Sims and you're like what if it's like Sims I don't know it could be I'm not sure but like it's supposed to not be it's like Chad GPT versus Google what chat GPT is like Google technically if you just Google stuff but it's like also like quite different in my opinion yeah no this this conversation for the listeners is deeply rooted on our morning calls every morning at 9:32 I I've been a uh a bit of an AI naysayer and it's likely because I don't have any bags so I'm excited to see picachio retire in in one and a half years off of his AI Colony agent you're just too old to get it 27 man that's like 40 in crypto terms so yeah you're you're probably right but uh who else do we have left for the hot seat cool thrs Ren I think it's just you I got my last Hot Seat but I'll make this fairly quick um so I got Bas in the hot seat um last week they ran into some pretty crazy fees um so post 444 I think most vop saw a pretty significant decrease in transaction fees most of them were seeing sub one cent fees credit due um but then base went super crazy due to increased demand for transactions and I guess block space and their median gas she spiked up to more than $1.5 which is probably higher than where it was pre 4844 um but yeah I think this happened for a few reasons the lower fees likely resulted in this increase in demand and also just like Bas season kind of really kicked off last week with DJ farasa all of these like meme coins and for context there was this one day where base did a whopping 1.57 million in transaction fees and they paid only $5,000 to post data to ethereum in comparison to the other l2s which I think probably made like less than six figs in transaction fees a day like it was really really crazy that day um but yeah a lot of users were basically paying ridiculous amounts of transaction fees and coinbase wallet also as a thing where that once you send a transaction you aren't able to replace the same transaction with the same nons with a higher transaction fee so you're kind of just left waiting for transaction fees to come down and your transaction to eventually go through so Jesse from the Bas and a lot of other people on Twitter were super cognizant of this issue and basically boils down to that we sort of scale The Da Side partially and now we're running into this like problem of execution because the L2 execution view was the component that was really high um so Bas is working on a few things right now the gas Target is relatively low it's around 2.5 M gas um per second and base is basically at its current Target capacity which it can support and that's kind of determined basically by its not infrastructure and sequencer you can't jack that up without juicing up sort of like the sequencer no infrastructure requirements so they're doing some low testing right now but I think what they're saying is that they can really easily raise the base gas Target by two to three times um and then long term they really want to do a whole host of different things right so you're seeing like parallel pathing work I'm not really sure what that means to be honest um but hopefully that helps them achieve a medium-term goal of 400 Xing the gas limit but obviously that comes with higher da posting costs and I don't know what medium term is for clarity it could be like two years it could be 10 years um but yeah and there's also other things to consider right if you're increasing throughput it leads to a faster rate of State growth and it it's still early days right I think the evm has historically been a relatively constrained execution environment and that's kind of showed for at least only for one day uh for base and you know you're seeing all of these like evm compatible par execution blockchains whether has like say Monet or an L2 that such as like Eclipse that uses the svm but I think one question that I'm interested to see is like obviously like something will always be the bottleneck but what will be the bottleneck after execution in would it go back to like da would it go back to something else would it just go back to for example like sh like Hardware kind of deal with whatever you want to expect from a blockchain um I don't have a complete take on how to move on from here other than just like increasing gas limits make the blocks bigger in the short term but it'll be interesting to see how L2 sort of tackle this especially if they want to eventually have a decentralized sequencer set that doesn't have like insanely High Hardware requirements yeah the only thing I would add here is I think B should be in the cool Throne honestly not not a hot seat like yes like unfortunately the EVMS like rints and in terms of execution and and transaction fees is on on the hot seat but at the end of the day it's pretty crazy how quickly activity over there is growing and that there's actual demand from people to to go over there and try some stuff and I know a lot of people have been Shilling friend Tech because they were on there early they own a lot of keys and points are coming and and there's a lot of funny memes around it so that's something that's a catalyst and then you've got dgen and other meme coins definitely like exploding today hopefully that lasts through Wednesday when this airs but you see the tvl grow from you know zero to 1 billion it took a very long amount of time I see you have this written down here and it was 203 days and then to get from 1 billion to two it was only 23 days which is just mindboggling growth to be honest so definitely a big fan of Base yeah I agree it's like this is a good problem to have versus like if your chain goes down and people don't realize it for 10 hours like it's this is like what you want is like people complaining that it's fees are too high um but I I'm I Westy might get really upset with me but I feel like it'll be da costs um next if they fix this is will be the issue because from what I understand uh with my limited understanding of ethereum is that next like what they implemented 4844 is good for da but it's not like it doesn't actually do anything it's just like the precursor to doing stuff and then in two years they're going to do Dan sharting which is when you actually fix um da costs so yeah but yeah to Echo what Sam said I I don't think B should be in the hot seat probably just maybe like the evm should be in the hot seat base has been on an absolute F I think Jesse has been quite literally Relentless right that guy is like just a force byone and the amount that he's contributed to the growth and development of that ecosystem is just tremendous right this guy is's in the chats This Guy's in the discords he's just like on a complete insane like BD and ecosystem growth grind and it's been really really impressive to watch like the amount of work that he's done in order to building out base and sure like a lot of it is speculative right now you know you have all of these mem coins but one like the culture he's built up I mean like meme coin aping is still culture at the end of the day uh it's pretty impressive and too I do think that you are going to see a relatively so surprising amount of actually interesting apps whether interesting in the sense of like it's a new use case or interesting in the sense of like it's a use case that actually Mak sense for like the seven billion human beings out there rather than like the 100,000 onchain users today so I mean all the best space I I hope they I really hope they sort of make this like coin basis L2 like Vision play out right especially considering they have 114 million verified users yeah I mean for me the main takeway is still that we're kind of lucky that crypto hasn't grown uh from a user perspective uh like a million x or 100x or whatever like a huge amount because you could just not or we're not ready for that kind of a demand crease yet uh which we likely will be at some point but right now I'm quite happy where like the amount of usage is and I think a lot of people don't realize that when they're out there on on Twitter yelling that there's no real use case we don't have enough users yet but the users right now are just super different from what you're seeing like tradify markets or whatever other vertical and yeah I'm quite happy with like how things are looking right now so just give infrastructure maybe a bit more time to like get up to speed and then let's look again what happens yeah you don't want t million users on the blockchain right now I think you have like a 0.1% success rate in landing your transaction in like one hour it'll be just completely broken but I think that's a good point to close out for this week so break Picacho thank you so much for coming on thanks for having us see you [Music] guys

========================================

--- Video 135 ---
Video ID: RPCBV3ivUV8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RPCBV3ivUV8
Title: The Memecoin Dilemma: Fueling Adoption or Derailing Progress? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-03-20 19:55:58 UTC
Description:
In this week's analyst round table, the team discusses the latest news and governance updates in the crypto space, including Zerion Wallet launching an L2, Starbucks shuttering their NFT Odyssey platform, and Polyhedra closing a $20 million fund. They also dive into the dYdX segment with Skip Protocol, the launch of Swell's restaked rollup, and the completion of Shuffle's LBP. The conversation then turns to the legitimacy of memecoins, with the team exploring the increasing market activity around these assets and the potential implications for the broader crypto industry.

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. 
- -
Follow Ryan: https://twitter.com/_RyanRConnor
Follow Pibblez: https://twitter.com/0xpibblez
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:07 Zerion Wallet L2 & Starbucks NFT Sunsets
5:35 Polyhedra Closes $20m Fund
10:47 dYdX Segment: Skip Protocol
15:53 EtherFi $35m Raise & Gov Token Launch  
20:26 Swell Launches Restaked Rollup
27:15 Shuffle Completes LBP
37:40 Legitimacy of Memecoins
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 136 ---
Video ID: oNY1kcclBt0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oNY1kcclBt0
Title: Inside PancakeSwap's Multi-chain Expansion Strategy | Mochi, Head Chef at PancakeSwap
Published: 2024-03-15 17:15:20 UTC
Description:
In today's interview we are joined by Head Chef of Pancakeswap, Mochi to dive deep into the upcoming PancakeSwap V4 upgrade. They discuss V4's modular three-layer architecture, which includes the accounting layer, AMM layer, and custom layer, enabling developers to create highly customizable liquidity pools and execute complex trading strategies through hooks. Chef Mochi shares insights on PancakeSwap's multi-chain expansion strategy, deflationary tokenomics designed to solve LP profitability issues, and the protocol's vision to evolve from a DEX into a comprehensive DeFi platform. Stick around for all of this and much more!
- -
Follow Mochi: https://twitter.com/chef_mochi
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Wormhole is a decentralized interoperability platform powering multi-chain applications and bridges. It provides developers with access to liquidity and users on over 30 leading blockchain networks, enabling use cases in DeFi, data queries, and governance. The platform is trusted by teams like Uniswap and Circle and, to date, the platform has facilitated the transfer of over 35 billion dollars through over 850 million cross-chain messages.

Claim your unique Wormhole NFT at
https://wormhole.com/0xresearch1
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X10 to get 10% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
See you there! 

Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:34 PancakeSwap's Journey
8:41 PancakeSwap V4 Layers 
18:48 PancakeSwap Crosschain Decision
21:13 Wormhole Ad
21:51 Permissionless Forking & DEX Innovcation
35:56 DEX Endgame
48:39 CAKE Tokenomics
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
and I think as crypto develops further dexus and def5 platforms must be multichain as well the way I I see crypto is that it's on the development path of the internet to become part a key part of that multi-chain future uh P swop has to expand uh multichain it has to be focused on uh where the users are and also where the technology is scaling towards we teed up with the Wormhole Foundation stewards of the Wormhole protocol that leading interoperability platform powering Crossing transfers for 200 plus multi-chain teams P Unique War NFD just for zero exu listeners today before we get into today's episode just a quick disclaimer the views expressed on this podcast by either myself or any guests are their personal views and do not represent the views of any Associated organization nothing in this episode should be construed or relied upon as Financial technical tax legal or other advice all right let's jump into the episode all right guys welcome back to another episode of zerox research we have a great episode lined up today with jef Moi the head of pancake saw a leading decks on binance Smart chain today is Thursday March 7th and this episode will be airing on Friday March 15th as a reminder be sure to use code0x research 10 at app. blockworks research.com for 10% off your annual subscription and for those of you who are already Subs I'm sorry but this is only for first time customers all right then on to the interview with Chef Bui the head of pancake SW thank you so much for coming on today thanks Ren and I'm glad to be here yeah a lot of our listeners may not be caught up on pancake swap or know much about it Journey do you mind sort of setting the stage a little for listeners explaining how pancake swap is a differentiated deck as well as the sort of previously previously implemented V3 upgrades sure I I'm happy to do so so in a nutshell in 2023 Peg swap went into a highly focused period with the main aim of becoming the best multi-chain defi platform so specifically what that means is that the panak shop kitchen team uh had an aim to uh make it so that users could assess all the core D5 functions easily on multiple different chains and this would include uh providing liquidity including uh swapping and doing various forms of uh staking launch pads Etc on on many different chains without having to learn the newest upcoming defi Lego and jump around various projects to enjoy the benefits of all that is developing within crypto and so this is what we mostly achieved in 2023 now talking about our V3 specifically uh what we did was we improved on Unis v3's implementation via two methods so the first is providing onchain farming Rewards for LPS that is based on a deflationary reward token so uh I think as Renu would know many first generation dexes uh did this um you know rewarding of uh Native sorry rewarding of uh liquidity providers with their native Dex token rewards however many of these tokens were hyperinflationary by Design and so their prices were not sustainable in the longer run and so many of these tokens collapsed and many of the liquidity providers then left these taxes because uh trading fees were simply not sufficient to cover in permanent loss suffered by by them and so what we did as an improvement over uh the V3 model was to provide uh our kick to economics on top of it and uh is Prov and is provided in a way where uh you know the pancake swap team and the protocol could buy back all the kick tokens that we emit to LPS as rewards so what we achieved in V3 is uh a model where we could subsidize uh impermanent loss suffered by liquidity providers with a financially sound token model that keeps them perpetually in the liquidity pools so that's the first thing and the second major Improvement we made was introducing the VC V escr model uh into V3 and I we we do believe this is a a first so we've grown a voting uh ecosystem which allows altcoin projects to build liquidity in a concentrated manner on panak world and this is a significant benefit so previously the largest venue for building liquidity with the sort of uh voting mechanism was cinet uh but which used a stable swap uh you know pricing methodology but v3's Capital efficiency is you know depending on how you you provide liquidity between three to sometimes up to a few hundred times higher than the stable swap model so what that means is projects can build deep liquidity on PX V3 much cheaper uh than using the same model on curve and they can also receive K commissions to help them build liquidity quickly as opposed to you know Unis which has no incentives reserved for building up uh altcoin projects so to to kind of end that off uh you know V3 has enabled pan SW to become a significant multichain Dex in 2023 uh yeah and so but you know we do think there's still many obstacles that we we're trying to to deal with yeah I really appreciate the sort of intro explainer and it seems like at least with B3 you guys managed to take sort of a bit of the best of like each decks and sort of incorporate it into pancake St and you mention that there are still some obstacles with where V3 is today and I know you guys have some exciting plans so would you mind diving a little into just where V3 is today and sort of some areas in which pancakes off is still lacking sure uh so V3 today allows panak SW to execute uh a lot of trading volume with relatively little uh you know Capital so to to give you a comparison uh pangas V2 which use the nonconcentrated liquidity model the the simplified uh distributed liquidity model we had about as of today I think five to six times more uh liquidity in V2 at the very Peak but uh in comparison V3 is now EX buing way more volumes than than V2 and so we are on uh you know B&B chain as I think we we most well known on but we're also on ethereum we're on arbitrum and we're on nine different chains and uh with relatively little liquidity on ethereum we are now the fourth largest deck in terms of trading volume on ethereum Main net so that's where V3 is at currently uh and then talking about the uh you know shortcomings of V3 we we think there are four main ones I the first is uh hang B3 is still relatively inflexible in terms of uh you know providing iing models for assets so as you may have seen also in in uh know recent years there are assets that don't necessarily follow the XY to K pricing model one example would be for uh I think social tokens tend to use some kind of bonding curves that you know start from zero and go up as more people buy them and you know it doesn't really follow the same sort of uh curve and I think the second thing that V3 laes is uh execution functions that are comparable with centralized exchanges then third you know the Perpetual problem of providing liquidity is impermanent loss and that's definitely something that V3 also suffers from and lastly uh if we're talking about you know gas fees especially on ethereum Main net is very pricey for uh users whether it's liquidity providers or swappers to be uh you know engaging in a lot of uh so I think these are all challenges that V3 faces and needs to you know be improved on in the next iteration now I really appreciate the the frankness in some of the problems that uh V3 is facing and think the main goal of today's conversation is to sort of go through how you guys are going to tackle those problems and I know you guys have a huge upgrade coming up that we are personally very excited for term pancake swap V4 and uh for those listening it's comprised of a three- layer architecture I'm going to put something on the screen right now uh the three layer architecture includes the accounting layer the amm layer and the custom layer and so muchi would you mind walking through each of these layers in a bit of detail for the listeners sure so uh before I dive into the details the entire uh you know the three layers in in together is really what is pegas V4 but let's you know break it down into uh the components to understand how we've built them up and what they are set out to do do uh let's start from the left so it's that's the accounting layer so this is a fairly simple layer uh the accounting layer is per simply a layer that holds token balances across all liquidity pools so uh you know whatever pairs of liquidity you're providing to Peg swap uh as opposed to in the current V3 where you know there is a pull for let's say e usdc usdc BNB uh uh in the next version of SW all this will be simply be put in one layer and so all funds regardless of what liquidity pools are in this uh Vault layer called the accounting layer and so all it does is it interacts with users you know whether you're Trader or your liquidity provider to take the token that you're swapping and return the token uh that you're supposed to receive when you interact with package V4 the next layer is the amm layer and this I think is the first interesting layer this layer houses all current and Future pricing curves that will exist on page V4 so at launch page V4 will support uh the most common uh amm pricing model which is the uh Unis swop uh V2 pricing model x y k but under the V3 uh you know approach which is the concentrated Equity amm or more commonly known as the xy2 K model we will also support uh the liquidity book model which is the X Plus y K model that is used in Trader Joe but uh aside from these two pricing models the amm layer is envisioned with a larger goal of being able to house any pricing curves and any pricing Logics created in the future so taking as an example the bonding curve that we previously uh you know raised as an example this is something that can be incorporated into the amm layer so uh our the reason for doing it uh in this manner is that the existing two amm models that are supported of the Box in V4 is like I I previously raised not suitable for every single asset out there and so if uh there is in the future a better pricing model or even new pricing models for assets that you know need a a different pricing model pengas for V4 is built such that these new models can be added in so aside from the price bonding curve you know you could add in the stable swap curve uh which curve find users even experimental ones you know some for some of your very uh defi native uh users you might have heard for example of sque which is the square e uh pricing curve uh there's no reason why any of these can be added into the package for V4 amm layer and so this is built flexibly for what comes in the future uh lastly we let's look at the right so that's the custom layer the custom layer is where hooks or or extra Logics that can be executed by a user you know whether your Trader or liquidity provider stays so this is where if uh you know any developer with is package or any third party hook developer if uh they created specific functionalities then Traders and LPS will be able to access them at this layer and what this layer does is interact with the amm layer uh together to execute know very interesting uh Logics upon uh swaps or you know liquidity provide uh on liquidity provision in conjunction with whichever amm pricing curve that you think is suitable for for the asset so uh at a high level you know this is what pancakes SW V4 is doing and if I were to sum it up is really you know a the three layers work together to provide a uh a perspective on um liquidity provision where us users can provide liquidity to any kind of pricing curve that they think uh is suitable for the assets and then there is a layer that provides a rich level of functionality for swaps and liquidity providers to Pro to execute more complicated functions that they can do now at uh V3 yeah that's super cool I think one of the key takeaways I have here is that this allows liquidity providers or people sort of like initiating liquidity po to have much more expressibility and customizability over what the liquidity pool looks like and I think that's a trend that we've seen across defy as a whole as you sort of like progress through the different stages from sort of very simple models whether that's like dexes or lendingsuite.co where a lot of the expressivity covers in and you know leading dexes such as unisoft have lean into hooks pretty heavily even though they AR live um and hooks are kind of like externally deployed contracts that enable this greater customization over the liquidity Pro site and I'm excited to hear from you what type of things are you expecting people to be built here in terms of hooks sure uh I think hooks really are General category which try to help dexes compete with centralized exchanges at least uh initially I think this is what Hooks will achieve so personally as a user of a DEX today I find uh you know like you said that dexes are very simple compared to uh you know a centralized exchange or even traditional web to Trey uh financial institutions uh that's it dexus already provide 24hour 24/7 you know availability of liquidity and also permissionless price Discovery so there's no such thing as uh you know Market hours right the market is always on and there's you don't wait for anybody to pull you a price the liquidity pool is always uh providing a price to you as a user so then what it should be able to do next is to do everything and anything a user would want uh or ever want from a centralized exchange or from a web to tr five firm so I do think that um the Hops that will initially develop are going to be focused on helping liquidity providers and swappers and projects alike to tap on uh feature reach functions that currently exist on centralized exchanges and uh TR trei uh you know uh uh platforms so these are things like your DCA functionality your limit order functionality your stoploss functionality and then I think going forward uh as more things get developed you start to look at uh you know more complicated functionality we I'm not sure if this you know in the future available but even things like dark poool trading which is a institutional only uh you know feature may may actually be possible through hooks even though that might be a very complicated one so you know this is uh you know we we we do hope that initially I think a lot of the functionality is borrowed from TR five but and and ciz exchange es but over the longer term uh you know liquidity provisioning yl people is different from uh web 2 and you know centralized exchange so we hope there's something interesting that is uh unique to LPS uh you know there's big build on V4 as well now that that dark idea is really cool I never thought about it maybe some combination of like ZK or like FH to sort of enable that functionality I guess as an objective podcast Hite obviously pancakes exists in a really competitive deck landscape right and so the question I do have to ask is why would a developer build a hook on pancak swoft or someone like unisoft sure no I I think that's a it's a very valid question so uh the way we have designed package SW V4 is such that uh we are not forcing developers to choose uh we don't think uh in the first place that they should be forced to choose between unit Swap and and SW or any other V4 uh deployments so P SW V4 even though architecturally it is different from how unisoft has designed their V4 it is still designed in a way that hooks are uh deployed on unisoft V4 can also be concurrently deployed on pageb B4 and so uh the architectural differences doesn't really affect uh you if you're a hook developer and so um the only time that you will one two or n up developing hooks that are specific to package swap is when you want to access uh Express um ideas that can only be executed on pan for V4 so for example if uh you wanted to access zero slippage trading via a bin pool uh you know that that idea only sort of exists in bin pools then you can develop hooks that are compatible with this type of uh pricing models on on P what V4 and so uh you know if you're looking to to do something that is slightly different from the XY K although you would then come to pan or V4 uh to do so but otherwise you know we don't force developers to choose and we don't see why they they should or want to have to choose gotcha that makes a lot of sense I think for a lot of people in crypto when they think of pancak up they maybe still thinking of sort of like the OG uh BNB chain deployment right and in fact that's just not the case today you guys are on nine different chains including ethereum apas space arum and zing and that's like a pretty wide range of chains you know both from like where they sit in terms of like L1 l2s or also like sort of different VMS so what drove the decision to go cross chain because I would assume the pancakes of brand value is still strongest on this home chain B&B chain oh you're right you're right you're you're totally right that uh pancake swaps brand is the strongest on BMB ch however I think that taken aside I I think taking a broader view uh into where crypto is developing the crypto World in general is becoming very multi-chain and I think as crypto develops further dexas and def5 platforms must be multi chain as well the way I I see crypto is that it's on the development path of the internet eventually we will all think and see a singular large platform that supports all crypto activity but the infrastructure behind the internet even today is not that there is a single technological standard uh you know powering your video your image your emails right your message passing there are several different standards that all are behind the scenes in in you know if I were to put it that way and so I think crypto is going to go uh in that same way where there's a lot of changee but you know eventually it will just look like a singular uh interface to to users however to become part a key part of that multi-chain future uh pangop has to expand uh multi-chain and has to be focused on uh where the users are and also where the technology is scaling towards so our Focus now is mostly on evm and evm scaling layer tools and that's because we recognize that there's a strong developer L culture on these chains so um something you know On a related note in terms of uh expanding multi chain we also table a governance discussion allowing third party teams to F pancak swap uh and you know receive official recognition so that pancake swap as a protocol we we see that we can service more users on emerging standers and blockchains as well woro is the leading interoperability platform for multi-chain Bridges and applications with over 1 billion messages sent and 40 billion in value transferred woro leads the industry in Cross chain message volume and total value transferred if you're a builder woro has an extensive suet of tools and infrastructure to securely build multi-chain applications you can use Wormhole to power D5 nfts governance and so much more and Wormhole supports over 30 blockchains and six different run times came unique Wormhole NFD just for zerox research listeners today F out a form proof that you've listened to today's episode to receive a PO app and you'll get an email over the coming weeks to claim your limited edition nft I wanted to follow up there on something you mentioned and allowing third party developers to Fork what does that process look like can anyone sort of permission to see fork the code or for example is it a sty more like UDA model where if you want to Fork the code you need to go to like a dow governance vote it is more so the letter I think uh foring the code is not uh difficult right I think U there have been many fxs of of many different uh protocols whether it's Dex or defy uh where we think we um provide value for other uh uh protocols that are trying to focus one is um pis as a as a team we are focused on technological development so we're always trying to bring the latest and also uh to add on more things uh you know to pancak SW V4 as well as you know a def5 platform that surrounds the tax uh but the other thing uh that we think we provide a lot of value to is we have built a a brand name of trust around the package of brand and we have a we are you know serving at a large existing user base and so recognition of a team that's officially working with us has had us look through how they F their code and you know getting our official recognition via d vot as well and not just our the kitchen but our as in the the kick uh token holders I think is valuable you know for various teams that are trying to build out their deas on their chains as well following this sort of line of thought behind the multichain expansion right I think in some cases you've seen protocol teams expand the new chains under a new brand for example V Dr AER Drome or for example you've also seen the other side of the equation where teams have expanded the new chains under the same brand for example unisoft and maybe like in between there's like unibot which is unibot on ethereum but then there's like uniso on Sana what do you think about those like few options and would you explain like which one you like more or what's the rational behind like just sticking with the core pancake SW brand across all of these different chains sure uh from my perspective I think expanding via new brands and new tokens if it's operated by the team is not preferable how we have done our expansion is to uh you know expand to each chain via the the main pancakes of brand and under the same toen for this approach we see this as uh the preferred approach because one we focused on the token that has uh you know is originally associated with pancakes we are not there issuing new tokens uh and trying to manage multiple tokens at once we're trying to focus on building the pan swap protocol and the cake token and so one that there is that and two I think uh where the affiliate approach that we we're coming in with that does involve other teams fing pancakes under their own brand name but that is only on the basis that the Peng SW team is not running these uh Forks that's why we choose to officially recognize them after you know speaking with them one of our experiences when we uh you know went to the the first few chains is we realized that although crypto will be a multi-chain future users should be multi-chain today users are L Sil on their chains uh for example you know users of BMB chain may not want to go to ethereum because ethereum just has a very high gas fees right so um there is a point where I think each chain you go to if you want to serve that chains users and projects properly you do need to invest uh sufficient effort and you need to invest uh sufficient marketing and Community efforts to to those chain and so for brands that are official Fox of package we do think it's better if they run their own brand have their own team run their own to and that helps them serve their particular Community better than if let's say pan SW was in 30 different chains and trying to service you know 30 different uh communities all and and 30 groups of um protocols all under the the same team that is running the the main panage gotcha yeah that makes sense I'm in general not a big fan of sort of brand dilution and I prefer like a single token and all of the value uring to that single token rather than launching compartive tokens although like in some select few cases maybe I can see like a reason for doing so I wanted to shift gears a little bit here to decks and more so decks Innovation right we haven't seen a significant amount of Dex inovation in recent years and it feels like there's sort of Cycles to it you know like every one and a half year a huge Dex and Innovation comes along but it's not like a constant like stepwise Innovation it's always like a huge like jump in sort of what's possible on dexas and I guess the latest example of this is probably pan SW V4 and uni uni V4 and uni X why do you think that Dynamic sort of exists in terms of like a long time behind or sort of a long time between these like large amounts of innovation rather than like small incremental improvements I I would disagree with the uh idea that I think uh I would disagree with the idea that uh Innovation is always in giant leaps and uh that there hasn't been incremental uh Innovation I think the state of Dex Innovation is that uh even between V3 and V4 for UNIS and pank SW there has been a lot of attempts to try different ideas the issue with I think what's perceived in crypto Twitter or in general public is that there just hasn't been a noticeable leap in adoption and a noticeable leap in benefits uh you know as compared to say the transition from V2 to V3 uh and our team has been looking through many different ideas that have you know occurred in the past one or two years but you know to be to be fair I think this perception comes out because Tech Innovation is a very difficult topic uh at the tech level there's a lot of Reliance or know technological Reliance on developments that are sometimes outside of what the the def team can do but also there are a lot of attempts that just simply don't uh you know become as big as Unis swap so uh you know I will name some that I think are relatively more successful but maybe from the public perspective uh isn't really like the biggest Innovation ever so I think uh for example Maverick amm did try a very a fairly Innovative approach to liquidity provision where you don't have to keep uh you know changing how how you liquidate position uh I I would I would classify that as you know Innovation as well in in our space but of course you know it's it's not at the scale of unit of V3 or V4 so uh you know there are many of these ideas I think that are floating around uh it's just that I think Unis SW has consistently uh found ways to to make the big impacts uh more visible and so I think this is where uh this perception comes from no I I totally agree with you on that and I appreciate you uh pushing back I do think like Maverick and how they sort of had these like automated liquidity vaults and also a few other deck just in the past years so have sort of tried to improve upon various incentive models and I do think that there's overall like exciting Innovation happening in the space although probably unisoft has the largest mind share but if you like look under the hood there's still a lot of like fun experiments sort of being done sticking on the topic of sort of Dex Innovation um I think one thing that with these like large upgrades especially for example right like the Singleton model and like the flash accounting that's something especially on the flash accounting site that's only enabled by core protocol upgrades for example to ethereum as part of uh denen I think and so the key unlock there for sort of like the flash accounting is transition storage right um do you think that these large deck Innovations is currently limited by upgrades and technological improvements to the underlying BAS and that constraint will like always sort of exist um I I think it's true to a certain extent so uh going back to my point about you know centralized exchange functionality and trii functionality uh from the experiments that I have seen uh in the past two to three years there have been attempts to put a lot of these uh you know let's say like limit orders on chain and there are some um fairly successful implementations uh today but I think the general limitation uh that there is a level of constraint at the Corporal level is true so for example you know the Danon upgrade that you you mentioned uh that has a lot uh you know V4 upgrade and correctly you know as you have noted it's not something that uh defi teams are are going to be able to do so uh that protocol upgrade had to come before V4 uh could go live but I I think that um most of the difficulties around implementing these features are around cost and scale so uh and and complex functionality does range know from slightly complex to very complex and today e l2s and all l1s I think are sufficiently cheap enough to try to implement some of these features at scale via folks so going back again to things like stop liit orders I think these are definitely not limited by protocol level upgrades but bigger functionalities like using ZK to you know Shield some of your information as you do trades and then back reference these uh and then you need to stall our data on chain that is still probably a little bit more challenging so I think we do have to you know as as Dex teams we do have to try out more uh functionality via the books and to see what uh the limits are especially in terms of you know onchain execution how much gas you actually pay for these things before really saying that okay it's we're limited by the call protocol gotcha yeah that makes total sense um one thing that you sort of mentioned sort of exploring the limits right and execution one thing that I feel like a few dexs have started to do is to go cross chain not in the sense of Crossing deployments but also realize that hey we have liquidity on all of these different chains and so at some point maybe we could become a bridge right um and bridges as a space overall has evolved very rapidly and a few dexes these days are also sort of cross chain Bridges and we have seen this sort of evolution of these Bridges dexes and Evans moving to this like intent based RFQ model and I want to hear does pancake swab have any plans to sort of explore the intense space or just more so what are your general thoughts on intense sure sure uh I I finding very interesting that uh intense suddenly became like a new uh model within dexus and defi because think for you know what the narrative is wor RFQ models have been around for a really long time in fact they have been around for for years in this space uh we at Pang uh tried an early attempt at a intend based model last year in 23 as well uh before this you know the the the the term intent based model called on as a Nar on crypto tutor so what we did was slightly different on our swap page today uh we have a logic that helps users uh route through either the amm or send rfqs to selected Market maker partners and we offer the best of these two uh quotes So if you say you know trade $1,000 we'll compare for for e as an example we'll compare what the EMF is giving in terms of e and what the the the RFQ is sending back in terms of E for execution and then we just give the user the the the users the better trade so we we didn't implement this at scale but it's still available on etherum and uh BMB chain pack SW which allows us to especially on ethereum offer most of the popular tokens without actually having a liquidity P now this intent based model has its PKS which is as I mentioned you don't need a liquidity p on chain to service the trade but it also has drawbacks uh so I do think it's a good compliment to amm deex uh trading platform so rfqs you know as you have mentioned is is actually a model that's I think a better solution for cross chain swaps at this point uh especially when we also speak to uh RFQ providers uh you know when talking about swapping a token on let say B&B chain to a token on ethereum and vice versa but RFQ models don't have permanent and instant liquidity that amm have so I I do think over the longer term uh these two will coexist although I personally do hope that amm overcome a lot of the uh you know shortcomings that I've previously mentioned and also you know find a way to to use bridges in a way that uh you could always assess cross chain liquidity instantly um but you know that's say I I don't really know uh whether that can be solved perfectly and so for now I would say that amm rfqs will probably coexist uh for the forceable future yeah I definitely AG Greer and I I hope that they can live synergistically with each other um although I think a lot of that remains to be seen um going to the side more theoretical side of things right you mentioned sort of like the limits of dexus and whether you know we can solve a lot of the problems that amms have today and I was curious about what your view is for the end game for dexus and Dex architecture say like 10 years down the road when with got into like the theoretical limits of like blockchains and like what's possible with smart contracts what do you hope dex's and Dex architecture looks like yeah I I think having run you know early version of uh intent based architecture and also the deck architecture for quite a while uh I do hope uh you know as I kind of said just now that dexus win out in the long run um the the key problems with dexus to today I can see uh profitability issues for LPS which makes them um less likely to put up big amounts of capitals into uh Capital into the the the liquidity pools which then uh limits their ability to execute large size trades so today if you wanted to trade a billion dollars it instantly you you really can't do so on a de very well because one there's not that much Capital to execute instantly and two slippage is something that you have to deal with which is you know if you're dealing with large RSQ makers you you you probably wouldn't have this uh slippage issue so um I do hope that uh we you know at Pang SW with V4 and future Generations help to solve uh LP profitability issues and uiux uh issues which keeps users um know onboarded onto uh swapping and and providing liquidity via amm that in the future amms will be large enough to compete with rfqs very consistently and the you know again the permanent availability of liquidity and the instant execution I think is an advantage uh that rfqs cannot have and so I think if amm can resolve these key issues there is a good chance that the very longterm end game would be that daxas might I'll execute rfqs uh you know over like a large amounts of capital and over a longer time but again I think this is assuming that a lot of issues get worked out over the next few iterations whether it's Bridges liquidity uh inal law so there are a lot of things to solve before we can get to that point yeah uh diving into the lp profitability issue a bit more I think one of the hot debates right now is lvr or L versus versus rebalancing or sort of top of block sex Dex Arbitrage and that's been a consistent pain point for liquidity providers because a lot of value is extracted away from them when these arbitrages or Searchers come in to sort of execute that Arbitrage what are your thoughts on how that gets solved or do you have just any thoughts in general around like lvr and solving LP profitability and what a potential solution looks like sure I I we we are working on a solution right now that we haven't fully formed but we do think the large uh kind of the direction of solving this is to uh balance the profitability of arbitrages and LPS better so as you correctly described uh the the problem today is that LPS are suffering uh I think too much uh vi from from arbitrages uh Arbitrage is a normal activity I I don't think characterizing Arbitrage as uh uh value destroying is accurate all the time uh even in traditional Finance you have firms uh that do hftd trading that essentially are arbitragers as well uh at a very very tiny you know clip but they do provide liquidity in the market so what we think the uh principle uh solution to fixing this is to make sure that LPS are benefiting more from uh sexx Arbitrage as they are today relative you know to they are today so we are looking for and working on a solution that we think has has potential but uh it's not something that we have fully formed our uh you know solution yet so it's a bit early for for me to kind of discuss this at detail yeah no that's toally fair I'll be excited to bring you on uh and to sort of hear how you guys are tackling this because there's a lot of teams in the space working on this issue I wanted to shift GE here a little into sort of talking about pancakes as a whole there are hundreds of different chains today and on these hundreds of different chains there are at minimum probably like five dexes or more you know a lot of these like new quote unquote ghost chains the only thing that they have is like 10 dexes which always L the top in terms of TBL what do you view as pancake soft's sustainable competitive advantage in this multi-chain world filled with dexus yeah good question uh you you're right there are a lot of uh chains where there there's just a bunch of dexes uh executing trades I think that is the fundamental uh need in a lot of a lot of these chains so for you know like we previously alluded to foring contract and setting up a DEX is not difficult uh so having having a DEX and having liquidity is not necessarily uh the the hardest task so I think panging swaps sustainable competitive advantage is in the Kens culture of execution uh in 2023 uh you know if I were to just list out some of the the things that we've done we've push out V3 we've expanded to nine chains we've fixed the Ki uh tokenomics as well from a hyperinflationary token to a deflationary token we've introduced uh the V escro model the V token model which is now used to build allcoin liquidity on panc Swap and then now uh you know we are shortly going to release is a production version of V4 that's all happen in about one year and so you know as a as a I think dexus as a vertical a crypto vertical is quite understood and I think everyone has an idea of what dexes need to do uh in order to continue growing so I do think the the real sustainable competitive Advantage is in the people that are working on these ideas and executing them to the best that they can and I do feel that panak swaps sustainable competitive Advantage is in the the people that we've brought together to execute these ideas I I love to hear that I think a lot of the time when you're inpt are you're really backing the team and the founders not necessarily just sort of the idea there just because things move so quickly in crypto right you have to be on your feet you have to always pay attention to the competitive landscape and half the time you need to Pivot and innovate or die to be honest um one of the things I wanted to talk a bit more about my mental model when I think about hooks right and how that or what that really means for a decks is that it transforms the decks from like a very simple deck to more so like a platform right and on this platform developers can launch much more customized decks as they can create these much more expressive liquidity Poes how do you think about turning pancak SW into a DEX platform or like a DEX ecosystem from what it is today I it uh yeah I think I think for us we've always seen pancake swap uh as I think since last year as more of an ecosystem uh development yeah well since since mid mid last year also so I do think this is the way forward for all dexas and um in terms of uh you know ecosystem building aside from V4 we have built a lot of other pieces that we think will interface with the V4 and the V4 hooks so I I'll just go through you know how we see this as ecosystem effort rather than you know just pure V4 and V4 hooks alone uh We've integrated with a a variety of uh V3 position managers across uh D5 those guys uh generally build out things to help you manage your concentrated liquidity position and uh We've you know chosen protocols that have different approaches to how they manage Equity so there's very little overlap in terms of the strategy uh the V KCK thing uh V Esco model that I've mentioned that's also an ecosystem uh build up for projects to come on the pancakes world and then uh this V4 you know the hooks that we we built uh we are looking for people to build and uh encouraging people to build uh you know we want them to not just build hooks to okay like here's a limit order here here's a a stop loss that you know people want to use we are also hoping that they will uh look at what other parts of P SW have built which are also know inspired by other good things in in the def ecosystem and to get folks that call on you know position managers to position liquidity better call on uh you know our launch pad ifo to create better functionality when projects are launching tokens so uh we do look at this V4 and hopes as a ecosystem uh effort and not just here's a ecosystem of that you can use for all but more so build functionality that uses that works with the rest of what the defi will need and what users will need when they come to defy one part of sort of kickstarting this developer ecosystem and this ecosystem as a whole are incentives or various initiatives right and I know you guys have some exciting fans so would you mind walking us through some of the initiatives you guys have in place to Kickstart developer activity sure so we're going to e London uh I think you know on March 15 which is the release date today and so we'll be hosting our first uh hackathon to bring awareness to pancakes of V4 and to encourage developers to build hooks on V4 because we will also be explaining the architecture that we just went through earlier and how to to build this uh these hooks on pancakes or V4 but additionally we are also announcing a 500,000 ecosystem sorry US dollar like 500K ecos system fund that's dedicated to supporting developers to develop these Hooks and to bring on more developer related events to foster a community to build books on pancakes SW and primarily we will also you know focus on rewarding the developers that books that are used on on P V4 so uh this initiative will go to supporting devs that are truly in the ecosystem the utility to promote you know more expressive lping and and trading activity and on top of that I think you know to allow value alignment we also will uh you know allow developers and I think we'll encourage developers to charge their own fees on their own hooks and I think that's a way to encourage developers to see pangus or V4 as a platform where they're not just uh you know writing code out of pure curiosity and the uh desire to to contribute to to an ecosystem but also one that uh you know gives them Financial alignment to develop tools that people will use that that people find valuable and we do think that uh you know the market will gravitate towards hooks that have high uh usage so this fund that we set up is uh you know to get them to that point of uh widespread adoption that point about financial alignment is great to hear and I think it makes perfect sense because I've always sort of saw a potential risk at least in unisoft V4 and hooks will likely open source you know it's not probably not that hard to Fork a hook and at some point you're going to end up with like 10 versions of the same hook and you're going to need some Financial alignment there in order to make sure that doesn't happen in terms of financial alignment there's one more thing I wanted to talk about which is tokenomics you mentioned just now that cake used to be a highly inflationary token and now you guys sort of have a deflationary mechanisms such as burning a small percentage of Trades uh burning profit from per trading and sort of like various fun l ticket mechanisms I would love for you to dive a bit more into those deflationary mechanisms and also dive into the numbers a bit more in terms of how that has been performing sure uh I think on the mechanisms I will I in the the sources of how we burn KCK hours I will just go through that quickly because it's a long list of just products and uh you know percentages of how we use that to burn but uh so on on on the product we p P from has about 10 OD products now and on the number of these we we do collect fees so the general mechanism is fees that we collect are are you know real dollars that are spent by users for activities that they they view the fees are worth for uh and then we spend those fees on acquiring the kick token back from the open market and we send them uh to the burn address to to effectively remove them from circulation so um at a high level Ki used to be uh you know and Ste is Supply to mostly liquidity providers to cover their perment lots and a portion of it also goes to stakers to encourage them to stick and participate in the v k ecosystem uh in you know let's say this point last year this day last year cake was inflating at approximately 20 to 25% a year and at higher level that is quite unsustainable and so in the year what we did was we looked at what we could do with V3 looked at uh the lp rewards that we needed to give look at the entire tokenomics and we decided to lower uh our toomics and by October I believe uh late October last year we've hit the point where pancak sw's Ki token was effectively Net Zero uh inflation so that uh came to an end and then um now we are slightly deflationary so so of all the def5 products that we we collect fees and then we we burn uh in terms of numbers right I think you you asked about numbers I think we're net burning about half a million US dollars to about a million uh dollars of cake tokens out of the market every month so this means that even though we are emitting cake tokens as liquidity mining rewards as staking rewards we are still on the monthly basis buying out uh all those tokens and then another half to a million tokens with real fees to deflate the K topens blood and uh I just want to talk a little bit about what comes after because that's really what we've achieved so with V4 we you know as I mentioned we looking to be able to um improve LP fe uh metric and so that that subsidizes uh reduces their impermanent loss uh even more so you know it or rather the fees will cover their imp even more and so what we expect there is that as LP fees increase uh we do think that less kick tokens would be required to subsidize uh them to stay in the liquidity pools and so we are going to push that deflationary toomics uh even more uh you know in the negative Direction and so that is what uh we expect to be able to do when V4 has launched gotcha no I I really appreciate the thoughtfulness that you guys have put into so sort of like changing up the tokenomics cuz obviously a lot of like protocols not just defi protocols have historically had high inflation and a lot of them have struggled to bring that back down or balance it out so it's nice to see you guys have managed to successfully tackle that one more thing on sort of like tokenomics one of the bigger shakeups in recent weeks has been the uni fees switch proposal where a percentage of LP fees is taken and then is redistributed to UNI token holders who have both staked and dedicated your tokens and I wanted to hear your thoughts on the uni Fe sarch proposal yeah i' I've been following that uh quite closely as well I'm really glad that they are considering it uh at at a principal level I think the protocols success and the token should be connected um so this is a model that pancak swap is is also doing uh we do collect a portion of fees from Trading out of the lp fees as well and uh if you're a kick Staker we do share some of the protocol Revenue with sters as well so we do think uh this particular action is definitely uh in the right direction and for a you well-rounded utility token I think this is an important part of the utility uh that that should be you know for a DEX or a def5 project gotcha yeah and I completely agree as sort of a closing question I wanted you ask what are you the most sorry what are you most excited about in 2024 for packet of or perhaps just D5 crypto in general yeah so uh I think V4 is the most exciting thing to me uh within the deck space within the the defi space that we we are working on so uh I I I didn't mention this previously so H for V4 will be released as an open source uh codebase it'll be fully open source so the idea we have there you know like you said uh we want to uh we want to see continued Innovation on the on the deck space and so we think that our release of P V4 as an open source coase would then encourage more developers to look at what we've already built and to you know if they wish to build on us as a hook but if they see that uh you know what we've made is still you know that there's still something out there that they would like to improve upon then that's something that they can also iterate on and uh you know so uh I am very excited about the the the level of innovation and experimentation that V4 will will bring on and I do think our contribution to uh the deck Space by making V4 open source you know we we'll make for exciting time in uh Dex development so that's what I am personally you know working on this very excited about that's great to he that you guys are going to open source food and I know that's not always the case for every protoc in defi I wanted to give you the opportunity to leave any closing thoughts that you might have or perhaps a call to action and to end off with where can listeners find you and learn more about pancakes sv4 sure so uh as you are listening to this we're probably right now at East London with a both uh and we'll be you know addressing the uh the audience and we'll have a workshop as well so if you are in London and you're attending East London to come uh take take a look and also even though we are Anonymous developers we actually have shfs uh now at the booth so you can go find us uh you know we might not tell you our names but uh you know we are definitely there you can definitely speak to us about V if you're not there at the event physically yourself uh you know that's unfortunate but uh there are a lot of other places uh you can you can learn more about V4 so if you're a developer we have a landing page for developer was to look at the code base that we we've released and also uh you know how to navigate pangis V4 and uh if you're more General user you're not looking at the code that much uh poft has a block where we write out what we think about uh you know V4 in a more General sense right we're not talking so much about the the technical details there and uh so we we do have a variety of different Outlets whether you know it's physical it's online for you to come and see and interact with V4 so uh you know definitely uh check us out and you know whichever uh area you're interested in whether it's hooks protocol development uh do feel free and we do encourage you to to connect with us and learn more gotcha and just as the last thing could you share what pancak soft socials are where they can find you on Twitter yep uh and that's uh twitter.com pancakes swap for our uh Twitter account and uh I I can't I can't uh I can't remember off hand our telegram link I think it's t.me pancakes as well but if I got that wrong please do go to pancakes. finance and our links are all at the bottom left of the page we will put in the show notes for all of you guys and all of the things that jefi just mentioned but anyways thank you so much jefi for coming on this was a fantastic conversation and I'm really really looking forward to the overall launch of Pancakes all4 and all the best of the launch thank you very much Ren and yeah thank you for the the questions and having me on your platform to talk about V4 really appreciate it anytime have a good one we have teamed up with the weho foundation stewards of the Wormhole protocol the leading interoperability platform powering Crossing transfers for over 200 plus multi-chain dabs Wormhole isn't just a bridge it's the leading interoperability platform for multi-chain applications so go and claim your unique wor nfts just for zerox research listeners today hit the link in the description to fill out a form and to prove that you've listened to today's episode and receive a p app you get an email over the coming weeks to claim your limited edition [Music] nft

========================================

--- Video 137 ---
Video ID: _DDABiTUBGQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_DDABiTUBGQ
Title: Inside MakerDAO's DSR Hike: Balancing Demand and Revenue in a Bull Market | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-03-13 16:36:05 UTC
Description:
In this week's analyst round table the crew dives into the latest market happenings, discussing Eclipse's $50 million raise, MakerDAO's adjustment of the DSR to 15%, Michael Saylor's massive 12,000 BTC purchase, and the odds of an ETH ETF approval. The group then explores the implications of Jito Labs suspending their alternate mempool offering and the dynamics of MEV on Solana. Finally, they discuss the controversy surrounding Unibot's Solana deployment and the future of Telegram trading bots this cycle. Stay tuned for all of this and much more!

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. 
- -
Follow Westie: https://twitter.com/westiecapital
Follow Boccaccio: https://twitter.com/tripleboccaccio 
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X10 to get 10% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
See you there! 

Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:44 Eclipse SVM $50m Raise
6:48 Wormhole Airdrop Sentiment
12:12 Eth ETF Odds
15:03 dYdX Segment: Grants SubDAO
21:08 MakerDAO Adjusts DSR to 15%
33:13 DAS London Ad 
34:20 Michael Saylor 12,000 BTC Buy
41:28 Jito Labs Ends Mempool Functionality
52:19 UniBot Terminates Sol Deployment
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 138 ---
Video ID: Sb3WPcG7HA8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sb3WPcG7HA8
Title: Debating the MakerDAO Endgame | Vance Spencer, Mark Phillips, and Hasu
Published: 2024-03-08 17:00:16 UTC
Description:
In today's interview Sam and Brick are joined by Vance, Mark, and Hasu. Together they dive into MakerDAO's endgame. They discuss the current state of MakerDAO, including the DAI stablecoin and RWA adoption. The conversation then shifts to the bull case for Maker, with a focus on the new subDAO structure and how it aims to drive demand for the Maker token through a flywheel effect involving token farming incentives. The guests also debate the challenges MakerDAO faces in igniting organic demand for DAI and finding product-market fit between more centralized stablecoins like USDC. Stick around for all of this and much more! 
- -
Follow Vance: https://twitter.com/pythianism
Follow Mark: https://twitter.com/AesPoker
Follow Hasu: https://twitter.com/hasufl
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Brick: https://twitter.com/0x___Brick
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Resources
https://www.steakhouse.financial/projects/makerdao-financial-report-2023
PDF: https://drive.google.com/file/d/196mQAbiajSnjFM3SJq-pGuF8GhUwKtL3/view?usp=sharing
PDF (IPFS): https://aqua-hollow-alpaca-520.mypinata.cloud/ipfs/QmdPmF9EuogwY5F2VHbYXG6eke8hYBvBc5p5rXQtvg1WtM
EPUB: https://drive.google.com/file/d/18MVlmvd-b-bnFXAu2hnp7P0cPgj5DYHN/view?usp=sharing
- -
Timestamps

0:00 Introduction
1:37 MakerDAO Overview
5:29 Maker's RWA Adoption
15:52 Future of DAI Adoption
21:27 Bull Case for Maker
28:36 DAS London Ad
29:43 MakerDAO Endgame
35:20 subDAO Structure Inefficiencies
46:04 Maker Token Demand
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 139 ---
Video ID: Vf6hCfDF_sM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vf6hCfDF_sM
Title: The Future of dYdX & Decentralized Trading | Antonio Juliano, Founder
Published: 2024-03-07 18:25:08 UTC
Description:
In today's interview Sam and Ren are joined by Antonio Juliano, the founder of dYdX. They kick-off by discussing the migration from V3 to V4, the platform's focus on permissionless market listings, and the importance of isolated margin. He shares insights on the competitive landscape of decentralized derivatives exchanges, the challenges and solutions related to MEV, and the role of USDC issued by Noble in dYdX's growth. Antonio also touches on the platform's validator set distribution, the potential of yield-bearing collateral, and the dominance of perpetual contracts in the crypto derivatives market.
- -
Follow Antonio: https://twitter.com/AntonioMJuliano
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X10 to get 10% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:36 V3 Migration Reflection
13:11 Competing with Perp DEXs
24:42 DAS London Ad 
25:49 MEV Mitigation Strategy
30:59 Token Revenue Shares
34:32 Validator Set Distribution
38:00 Yield Bearing Collateral
43:14 10 Year Roadmap
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 140 ---
Video ID: NbwS1yFlmJQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NbwS1yFlmJQ
Title: Coinbase's L2 Edge: Can Robinhood & Arbitrium Catch Up? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-03-06 17:42:08 UTC
Description:
In this week's analyst round table the crew discusses the latest news and trends in the crypto space. They kick things off by analyzing Eigen Layer's impressive growth to $10 billion in TVL and debating how high that number could go. The conversation then turns to hot topics like Arbitrum's proposed $400 million gaming fund, Coinbase's dominance and future prospects, Magic Eden's resurgence in the NFT market thanks to Bitcoin Ordinals, and the novel AI agent staking model introduced by Autonolas. Stick around for all this and more!

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. 
- -
Follow Brick: https://twitter.com/0x___Brick
Follow Effort: https://twitter.com/EffortCapital
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X10 to get 10% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
See you there! 

Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:12 Eigen Layer Crosses $10b TVL
14:38 Robinhood & Arbitrum Team Up
17:20 dYdX Segment: SubDAO 
21:47 EthDenver AI & DeFi Conversations  
32:00 DAS London Ad 
33:06 Coinbase Dominance
46:49 Magic Eden's NFT Market Return
54:35 Autonolas AI Agents
1:04:00 The Memecoin Cycle
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 141 ---
Video ID: wA-RYt56b4g
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wA-RYt56b4g
Title: Avail: Unifying and Scaling Modular Execution Layers | Prabal Banerjee, Avail CEO
Published: 2024-02-29 19:19:45 UTC
Description:
In this week's interview Sam and Ren are joined by In this week's episode, Sam and Ren are joined by Prabal Banerjee, CEO and Co-founder of Avail, to discuss Avail's robust base layer designed to meet the needs of next generation, trust minimized applications and sovereign rollups. They kick off by unpacking what Avail is and how it enables validity proofs and erasure coding instead of fraud proofs, aiming to provide stronger guarantees especially for ZK rollups. Prabal also contrasts this with other DA solutions and committee-based approaches. Stay tuned for all of this and much more!
- -
Follow Prabal: https://twitter.com/prabalbanerjee
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X10 to get 10% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
See you there! 

Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:34 Avail Overview
12:06 Avail DA Solution Design
33:34 Why Ethereum?
36:33 DAS London Ad
37:39 DA Building Process
50:05 Application Design Space on Avail
1:00:19 Avail Token Design
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 142 ---
Video ID: 97ev3WPBd7U
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=97ev3WPBd7U
Title: Why AI, Ordinals, and Blast are Heating Up | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-02-28 18:02:02 UTC
Description:
In today's analyst round table the analyst cry unpacks the latest crypto market news including Eigenlayer's massive $100m raise, growing ordinal NFT volumes, and Uniswap's protocol fee switch proposal. They then covered the surging hype and volumes around ordinal NFTs on Bitcoin, the Uniswap fee switch proposal, and the success of Blast's growth tactics including token locking programs and gaming dynamics to drive adoption. To close out the team debates on whether excitement around AI and crypto projects like Worldcoin is warranted. Thanks for tuning in! 

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. 
- -
Follow Brick: https://twitter.com/0x___Brick
Follow Westie: https://twitter.com/westiecapital
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X10 to get 10% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
See you there! 

Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:17 Eigen Layer $100m Raise
3:53 Ordinal Season
8:13 Ethena Insurance Fund 
15:51 dYdX Segment: Osmosis
21:57 Uniswap Fee Switch
32:35 Blast Growth & Mainnet Launch
42:55 DAS London Ad
44:02 Ordinal Volume Growth
52:53 Worldcoin $81B FDV
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 143 ---
Video ID: d4T0vLwTbxA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d4T0vLwTbxA
Title: Everything You Need To Know About Sui | Evan and Adeniyi, Co-founders at Mysten Labs
Published: 2024-02-22 18:38:13 UTC
Description:
In this week's interview Sam and Ren are joined by Mysten Labs co-founders Evan Cheng and Adeniyi Abiodun to dive into what makes Sui the Asset-centric blockchain. Sui delivers the benefits of Web3 with the ease of Web2, offering an asset-centric approach, offline transactions, and unparalleled performance. They dig into Sui's integration of Move programming, Sui's architectural differences from existing blockchains, and the potential applications of a truly scalable, user-friendly blockchain.
- -
Follow Evan: https://twitter.com/EvanWeb3
Follow Adeniyi: https://twitter.com/EmanAbio
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X10 to get 10% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
See you there! 

Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Resources
https://sui.io/
- -
Timestamps
0:00 Introduction
1:18 Can a Single Chain Scale?
4:36 Sui's L1 Differentiation Factor
15:25 Consensus Protocols
21:37 Value of Decentralization
30:00 DAS London Ad 
31:07 Atomic Bundles and MEV
33:58 Fee Market Design
40:28 Sui's Consumer Adoption
45:17 SUI Token Design
51:52 dApps Only Possible on Sui
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 144 ---
Video ID: UJyfBlM_t2M
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UJyfBlM_t2M
Title: Coinbase Earnings and Our Thoughts on Ethena's High Yield Synthetic Dollar | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-02-21 18:35:26 UTC
Description:
In today's analyst roundtable Sam, Ren, Matt, and Brick dive into the latest market happenings including Uniswap's incentives for deploying on new chains, Vertex's new product launch to share liquidity, and GMX's point multiplier alterations. The team then unpacks Coinbase's impressive Q4 earnings and Starkware's controversial token unlock schedule. To close out the analysts asses the viability of low token floats and high fully diluted valuations and examine Ethena's 20%+ yielding synthetic stablecoin based on a delta-neutral strategy. Stay tuned for all this and more!

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. 
- -
Follow Brick: https://twitter.com/0x___Brick
Follow Matt: https://twitter.com/MattFiebach
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X10 to get 10% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
See you there! 

Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Resources
https://ethena-labs.gitbook.io/ethena-labs/
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:06 Uniswap Incentives for New Deployments
7:12 Vertex Launches Edge 
10:44 GMX Points Multiplier Modifications
17:36 Pyth DAO Constitution, Jito Proposal Threshold, and Spark Borrow Limit
19:16 dYdX Segment: dYdX Foundation 
25:18 Coinbase Earnings Reviewed
37:44 DAS London Ad 
38:51 Starkware Airdrop
41:59 FDV is a Meme?
51:13 Ethena: Return of 20% Yield Stable
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
like they're not trying to say this doesn't have any risks they're just trying to build something that can kind of intertwine interest rate differentials between trfi and defi so I think what they're trying to do is super super cool and I think that they've gone about it the completely right way and their launch video had a Kendrick gar song in it which I was a huge fan of so I think they're doing everything right honestly what's up everyone welcome back to another episode of zerox research March is just around the corner and I want to make sure to give you a quick reminder to not top tick your prices of your D London tickets if you use codes 0x10 at checkout you can lock in a 10% discount on your ticket don't miss out on your chance to get ahead of the curve I'll see you in London all right guys welcome back to another episode of zerx research the browick research team is back to bring you another an on this round table today is Tuesday February 20th and we're joined by Matt and brick from the Brock Wick's research team to jam on the latest Market happenings I'll kick it over to you Sam for the news and governance updates first yeah yeah yeah I'll kick it over to Matt actually because he's a little more in tune with this stuff than I am but Unis swap incentives for new deployments what you got Matt so there's a current proposal live on tally or live on chain for UNIS swap governance it looks to create launch packages for new chains that uh receive a Unis swap deployment so although this proposal just allocates our existing chains such as Linea scroll the polygon zkm um blast Tao and a few others the plan is to have this be like a further program so that when new chains in the future receive a unisoft deployment they'll receive this launch package as well the launch package comes with comes with between $250,000 and a million dollars in incentives um for a few months after launch and it additionally comes with a deployment on oku which is a uh a foundation funded project that has a front end Integrations for UNIS swap so a lot of time when Unis swap deploys on a new chain it will not be included on Unis swap. org so oku is an alternative uh user interface that allows for trading of it this proposal is really cool uh Unis swap has actually seen a few Chains It's launched on and it doesn't receive the same success or the same um you know it's not the king of dexes on that chain like it is on ethereum or on arbitr and plenty of other chains so this launch package will hopefully help mitigate that with the future chains that Launches on as well that a good precedent as far as um you know allowing Unis swap to work well with the chains that it's that it's you know that that it's benefiting from and that are benefiting from its deployment how did they choose or ad okay like between 250,000 and 1 million how much allocate to each of these chains because obviously there may be some like CIS of bias here like for example base gets like $1 million and for example scr only gets like $250,000 like one would think that unisoft is trying to align with one of these like how do they overcome those biases or how do they decide how much to allocate so for this original experiment there was snapshot votes ahead of time that you know ask should we allocate I think the numbers were between 20 I think like 25500 or 1 million and then the onchain proposal included you know the the sentiment from the temp checks so I think most of the chains were 250 with binance smart chain being a million um there might be some other outliers in there that I'm missing but again this is an experiment so I think in the future like the actual uh framework for how to quantify how much each chain should get and how it should actually be allocated on those chains of change today the actual allocation which is another interesting aspect of it is being done by Merkel which is an angle protocol uh product I actually don't know very much about it but I think that there'll probably be a lot of lessons learned where in the future you know these allocations will be done differently as far as the amount and which which pools actually get incentives as well I haven't used uh I think you called them oku front end is it look and feel the exact same as Unis swap or is it different and then tagging along on that do they get the front end fee similar to how they do with like Unis swap. org so they have no fee as far as you know uh actually on Exchange currently but they could definitely integrate one in the future I'm pretty sure in the prop proposal it's included that $60,000 a year or $5,000 a month something like that will we pay to oku for those Integrations so it's kind of like snuck in The Proposal a little bit um it just so happens proposal was made by gfx Labs who also created oku so there's definitely a lot of benefit in this from them but I still think it's a great idea and at the end of the day it's necessary to have those Integrations as far as the look and feel to The Exchange it's very different than unisoft front end and Jill is more in line with like a centralized exchange gotcha awesome um next up back to you Matt actually again the arc you want to talk about that a little bit sure so the irdc is one near and dear to my heart it's an arbitrum proposal that already passed tally and will soon be having a uh you know a second step or a second part of it a milestone on on Snapshot so the ardc was look is a group the arbitra research and development Collective it looks to bring service providers into the orbit from Dow to help governance operate more efficiently so there's four seats included in it there's a research seat which we've actually applied to be a part of there's a risk seat and there's only one applicant for that that's chaos labs and there's uh there's a security seat where I think almost like 15 or 14 different security firms including some of the the top tier ones and the best ones in the space such as Trail bits open zeppin celic uh nether mind the list goes on and on I've applied for this seat and there's an Advocate the Dow Advocate which is a position who there's three applicants for who actually leads these roles as to what they should be working on so should they be doing you know review what what should they be auditing what should they be doing research on what should they be doing risk assessment around and that's The Advocates job there was I believe 17 maybe 19 total applicants um and soon on Snapshot there'll be a vote to decide who actually fulfills each seat so it's a pretty cool proposal first of its kind I believe the total budget allocated to it was something like uh 2 million ARB so $4 million at current prices so there's a lot of money at stake and it's an RFP process where these service priers could come in and I think it should actually help the Dow operate more efficiently and smoothly it'll be interesting to see who gets included obviously we're hopeful that blockb research is including the seip so if you have our votes please go out and vote for us next week when it goes live um we actually partnered with Deli on this initiative which is kind of a first oods kind partnership and it's kind of all of it is is a first firstwood kind experiment that hopefully will lead to you know a more efficient and effective governance for arbitr in the future maybe other DS as well in the scenario that um for like the risk because you say there's only one applicant that being chaos Labs does the dowas still have to vote that in or do they get like no choice and they basically have to take chaos so the rumor I heard is that there'll be like a ratification like a yes or no for voting chaos in but at the end of the day that'll be up to uh a mutable lawyer who actually created The Proposal as well as the multisig that the funds been allocated to which has five signers on it so I'm not sure what they decided but the rumor I heard was that it'll be like a yes or no ratification process all right if no one else has any thoughts on that I can move on to the next update we have we have vertex launching Edge I'm personally very excited about this I know listeners are used to listening to me talk about vertex but this is actually really cool uh it enables other Peres to basically Fork their code and plug into their sequencer uh to gain access to their order book liquidity on arbitrum which has over $50 million of liquidity in there I think this is a 10 out of 10 Direction and move and I think people are kind of sleeping on vertex their volume has dropped off over the past couple months due to declining value of incentives as well as post tge hype which you know we're pretty used to at this point but I do find it really interesting that if a new chain pops up you can just launch a launch a pers front end basically Fork their contracts and then plug into like very deep liquidity and ideally this will increase the amount of volume rooted through arbitrum liquidity base and increase revenue for the arbitrum Dow so I think it's a big win for arbitrum um but then it's also a big win for vertex and vertex users because depositors will likely earn higher yields on those assets that are deposited and it's just generally a really clean uh user experience in my opinion the cross margin setup as well as uh the the embedded money market as well as per borrowing spot Etc so pretty cool development there not sure if anyone has any thoughts on vertex I think one thing that comes to mind for me is you're seeing a lot of these apps like Vertex or synthetics law Launch Cross chain like interoperability for lack of a better term Solutions like verism order order book liquidity which will be accessible on multiple chains and it kind of begs the question you know like on one hand I think a lot of us want to figure out interoperability between rooll of whether that's like Atomic asynchronous synchronous composability pick and choose your combination of words but on the other hand you could also argue that some of these apps may make that type of interoperability redundant however like there is a cavey out there that this is only within one protocol but for example if someone were to build like a cross chain like derivative margining and like sequencing layer then perhaps like you don't need the rollups themselves to figure out inoperability that interoperability could occur at like a protocol slash app level and I think that's like a interesting possibility I gotta say vertex has become an interesting token to me again to keep an eye on um like you know two and a half whatever three months ago I was trading at 600 mil fdv and at the time it seemed like a very rich valuation it's had a lot of pullback in price action recently I think it's down to something like a $300 million fdv the fact that they keep shipping law and products and in my in my opinion it's one of the best uxs of any exchange um additionally has some interesting tokenomics it's making me want to pay some attention to it um I don't own any and I don't plan on buying it anytime soon but I definitely one that has now re-entered my radar and SP essential purchases um in the coming months I think that $300 million doesn't seem as bad for a perch exchange that's you know constantly shipping products has real yield to its token and uh yeah yeah as like the shared sequencer narrative heats up I could see vertex getting a reating especially as those tokens La of like espresso and Astria cuz honestly that's kind of what they're doing it's still going to be centralized in offchain and you're definitely trusting like the vertex team there but it's kind of Falls within the same narrative Basket in my opinion so curious to see what happens after those token launches but uh moving on GMX in actually in in line with the pers theme GMX is looking to reduce the APR multiplier of points in an effort to make the base fees more attractive to new users so people who aren't familiar with GMX basically you can stake GMX get es GMX uh and then you get a lot of points which multiplies the amount of yield you earn from the fees paid from Traders but I think they're starting to realize it's hard to attract new Traders because people have those points stacked so high that you know the base fee for new people coming in isn't very attractive so they're trying to alleviate that I look at this as like a very good move for GMX GMX has fallen off pretty substantially over the past year uh and losing market share to more of the order book design so I think this is a 10 out of 10 move and hopefully this can Revitalize some of the activity occurring over there yeah it's even it's interesting that even with such an insane amount of incentives over the last few months that it still hasn't really been able to make a dent in its market share um at least not that I've noticed I haven't looked the numbers in a bit of time so there definitely needs to be some changes to GMX like you know they pioneered the glp model SL you know per amm they brought D5 dgs to arbitrum and like there's a lot of amazing things about GMX but it does seem like with the launch of you know quenta SL first we2 and and vertex and all these other Peres of late you know GMX really has falling off um so I'll definitely be looking for more for more ideas coming out of that team and and hopefully some some big changes in the future so GMX has like the new GMX like V2 vaults and which are a lot more siloed how do you guys think that performs in aable Market I mean we've seen the market rip up like atle like onx or whatever for most Majors uh and a lot more for like slightly smaller altcoins and obviously like in a bare Market where people were getting chopped up I think GMX did relatively okay um but then with the blue Market coming up you know like liquidity providers will probably like experienced a lot of realized profits from the traders who are trading and I think you saw something wrong with Hyper liquid just last week but that was probably a little adjacent and it just seems like the liquidity provider model is not that sustainable especially as you head into a raging boom market I'll disagree with that at a at a high level I think that there's ways to build you know LP per like per Ms that work I think it's all about balancing open interest so that LPS don't have as reduced exposure to you know per to trade or p&l as possible I think last I look GMX still had an absurd amount of long oi compared to short oi something like um I don't remember the numbers but they tried to you know create mechanisms to balance open interest and it kind of just didn't work likewise per we2 has created a lot of mechanisms to try to balance open interest and as the B market is heating up it's not working so well so that said you know I don't think it's an easy task to create mechanisms to balance open interest but if you look at you know traditional sports betting and how they balance lines like how they move lines to balance the amount of money coming in um you know betting on both sides of it I think that there's a lot of lessons to be learned there and in the future like you know per amm for longtale assets definitely do have a place in our industry SL for gambling um but yeah no one figured it out perfectly yet for sure to me it just comes down with um like if you look at Majors or if you want to trade something like eth or BTC now we have order books on chain like why not just use don't don't like com over complicate things um but then when it comes to longtail assets I do see the um appeal of these amm but then again it comes back to like yeah having to design a system where LPS don't get screwed over which is going to be a hard problem to solve I just look at dydx and you know you've got really really cheap fees and you've got 100% of that Revenue being passed on to stakers like if you have an LP base that you have to incentivized to actually provide liquidity to make it a useful product you have to charge higher fees so like I just don't see how that model is sustainable other than longtail assets potentially um but even then getting deposits on those longtail assets it's like a very difficult task so I'm definitely on team order book I guess I mean one thing that maybe could work is I've been actually lately looking at those Moses quite a lot and if more and more of these like amm decide to or would decide to build a cosmos chain then you could inake into the chain like this different types of like transaction fees and um me fees and whatever that could be channeled to like native token token stakers or even those that provide liquidity to the amm and by that um like method increase the yield that they are getting I would just Echo your guys's thoughts that you know for anything in the top 100 definitely for Bitcoin eth and likely anything in the top 100 there's no way that per hand M make more sense than an order book at least from my perspective but I don't think it's worth discounting the value of perms Al together like if you look at the total value of that market of course it's going to be bigger than for trading longtails um but I definitely think that there's a lot of money to be made in burp amm just far as long Tales then one thing that we've never seen that I really hope we do in the future is you know these perp amms integrate a more Campbell F Type Outlook like for example and this sounds so djen but you should be able to trade you should be able to play Blackjack against you know pers amm L pers amm LPS oh my gosh so like I don't understand why that's not something we've integrated yet um you should be able to you know gamble against them like with sports betting and things of that nature so I don't think that you know per amm should look like exchanges and I don't think they should try to become you know uh Market leaders for trading Bitcoin or ether anything of that nature but I do think that there is a huge Market especially as we see gambling increase every year over year like gambling I think is like an all-time high as far as the amount of people how much money they're gambling in the real world um I think pers amm actually do have the ability to like capture a large portion of that market in the future that's the um the winner model right like winr they have a basket of liquidity that people can trade against I'm really surprised that there hasn't been a a partnership between GMX and one of these arbitrum native gambling platforms where they just set up a GM pool with usdc and that's what people bet against and then that team builds the UI that's actually a really good idea Matt yeah I honestly know nothing about wintering it's one I need to look into for sure yeah the liquidity just is is not great but moving on we've got pyth just established their Dow Constitution via vote pyth is is killing it pith pyth however you pronounce it not sure but nevertheless they are uh the first chain link competitor that we've actually seen that's uh seems to have some actual legs underneath it so that's pretty exciting and then we also had goo lower the proposal Thresh old to submit uh or sorry the token threshold to submit proposals to 10 million goo tokens from 30 million uh and the foundation just delegated 12 million tokens to 20 different addresses and excitingly enough blockworks research was on the receiving end here so we're super excited to uh be stewards in the jto Dow because we view that as one of the most promising projects in the salana ecosystem um but aside from that we have some spark updates brick you want to take that one yeah sure so um maker recently passed a proposal to increase the kind of the D the die that spark and borrow from 1.2 Bill to 1.5 Bill uh still needs to pass an executive proposal um to be implemented but um it's pretty sure to go through and this just helps or will help spark grow more uh during the year and they've been doing pretty well um my prediction for this year was to uh for spark to reach three billion um dollars in supplied capital and it's looking better and better all right we uh we got a segment of hot sea cool throne but first let's go to our uh daily section with dyx all right for this week's dyx segment we have David the VP of strategy and operations at the dyx foundation could you please uh start by telling us what exactly the dydx foundation is absolutely thanks for having me uh so the dydx foundation is an independent nonprofit uh based in Switzerland whose main purpose is to support and grow uh the dydx prot protocol ecosystem by enabling communities developers and decentralized governance uh the foundation has been around for about two and a half years now uh and was established in June 2021 all right yeah and blockwick recently posted that the foundation has being allocated 30 million in dydx from the community treasury could you briefly walk through how that would be used and maybe the threee Strategic road map of the foundation absolutely so yeah the foundation put together a pretty extensive proposal that was posted on the forums about two weeks ago uh you know the foundation now has appro or had approximately six months of Runway left after about two and a half years of operation and as a nonprofit uh the foundation was looking to seek Community funding to continue to operate and deliver on a three-year strategic road map the foundation's vision is that the dydx chain will become the underlying infrastructure of the largest D5 protocol in the world uh where really any asset that has a price feed can be traded um and the dydx foundation wants to help support um and accelerate the growth of a robust dydx ecosystems so um how do we do that um there's really you know seven different uh verticals that that we explore um the first is really enhancing The dyd Exchange governance velocity and impact the second is around fostering Dow enablement uh the third is around supporting Technical and strategic Integrations with the chain infrastructure and applications um helping to scale the adoption of the dydx chain um enhancing Global Marketing and Communications around the brand more broadly um and then lastly hiring and retaining an a player that we built uh an a player team that we've built at the foundation and supporting operational excellence across the the ecosystem um so the proposal went up about two weeks ago um and the voting period ended with really pretty overwhelmingly positive support um I think there was about 98% uh of the the stake weight in favor and 86% voter turnout um so you know we're we're really excited that the community is uh supportive of of our threee strategic plan and we can't wait for what's to come next yeah congrats on that funding by the way that's super cool to see the community kind of rally support around its foundation that's uh not not exactly what you'd see in every doubt potentially so congrats but um I feel like one of the big uh unlocks of going from V to V4 was really the added utility to the dydx Token can you dive into that a little bit absolutely so yeah the community uh decided to adopt the the dydx token as the layer one token of the dydx chain which effectively expanded the utility of the token um so once the ethereum dydx token is migrated to the dydx chain and stake to validators uh that dydx chain dydx token then secures the network uh and allows for its holders to take part in governance um and so you know to date there's about 95 million tokens that have been staked um and contributing to the security of the network and allowing stakers to participate in uh governance we've seen over 11 governance proposals uh already um and as a reward for uh securing uh the the proof of stake blockchain uh all protocol fees generated uh flow to validators and two stakers and there's been a bit uh over 5 million usdc uh in rewards that have been uh distributed to to validators and and stakers all right yeah I mean it's always really interesting to see a token that so much uidity and it being like genuinely integrated with an ecosystem that's pretty rare to come about and I know dydx has a lot of plans for 2024 so I would love to hear what the road map is for dydx chain for 2024 absolutely so yeah the the dydx uh trading team and and really one of the the core contributors to the open source software uh recently released a blog post around their 2024 product road map um that went into really great details around three big product improvements the first is around permissionless markets second is improving the trading experience and the third is around enhancing the the overall user experience um you know the the post goes into really great depth on all three of those but those are some of the major catalysts for you know 10x improvements on on product Market fit and continuing to drive uh Innovation for for the ecosystem uh you know beyond that personally pretty excited about uh an upcoming Android uh application new Integrations at the dydx chain level and then uh the launch of liquid staking that just happened about two weeks ago and then uh other really novel uh Integrations in in the pipeline awesome that sounds great I know we're really excited to keep following dydx closely but David thank you so much for coming on we'll have to do a full episode sometime in the future because obviously we could talk about this stuff for quite a while but thanks a lot we'll link to that blog post in the show notes uh as well as your Twitter um but we will catch you next time over the hot SE cool Throne yeah sure let's do it uh this week on the cool Throne I have coinbase so coinbase announced the Q for earnings last Thursday proceeded to rip like 15 20% after market hours just because it beat earnings pretty hard I don't think any of us were surprised by this but evidently Wall Street was still very surprised by this so just ripping off some numbers here transaction based Revenue came in at 529 million for Q4 which represented a 64% year on-year increase and within that consumer accounted for roughly 490 million which was a 59% yeary year increase at institutions accounted for 37 minut which was a 174% y your increase I think within that there's some really interesting numbers institutional volume came in at 125 billion in Q4 2023 and that's the exact same number as it was one year ago in Q4 2022 but for 2023 transaction Revenue came in at 36.7 million versus 13.4 million a year ago so on the back of like the same transaction volume they made like 3x more from institutions than what they did a year ago and then consumer also ripped up 59% year on year I think it's attributable to one main thing actually it's existing users trading significantly higher volumes qu on quarter which means it's really good for us because it's more so like existing participants trading more rather than new participants uh coming in and trading more on coinbase which is good you know like there's a coinbase store at rank that people use as a barometer for where we are in a cycle and it seems like we're just not that far in in the cycle yet and I think it's crazy right like coinbase St makes an average fee of 1.7% on these consumer retail trades which is like a crazy high fee granted that probably comes down over time as more centralized exchanges build up their reputation and there sort of like a fee competition going on as is what happened in chadf um but I at least with this cycle coinbase will still maintain that branding and reputation and that trust premium that perhaps other exchanges just don't have right now um there's a whole bunch of other things they blew away earnings coming at 1.04 earnings per share versus consensus estimates of negative 9 cents earnings per share and another interesting St was that for much of the bare Market coinbase has had subscription and services Revenue slowly be a larger and larger percentage of their total revenue and at Peak it reached more than 50% but I think that has finally reversed and I think it'll continue to reverse heading into slightly more increased Market activity and yeah it seems like all of the stars are aligning retail volume on coinbase is still 80% vetto Peak uh there's a lot of growth that we're seeing in coinbase international which is sort of the purose exchange and there's a whole bunch of like accounting things that we can talk more about later where coin base will finally be able to account for their crypto assets at fair value instead of at cost which should be a pretty significant boost to earnings per share but I'll take a bre dur and if you guys have any thoughts i' love to hear them I think one interesting perspective that I haven't heard talked about much is uh you know if coin base is the custodian for the ethereum ET ethereum ETFs or a large portion of the EFS and the EFS get approved in summer obviously there's a lot of ifs here and staking language is included so staking is included in these eth ETFs all of a sudden coinbase might have like an extremely large Revenue stream from these e ETFs as far as like you know whatever take crate they have on the staking reward from the eeld and ETFs so there's a lot of ifs there you know none of it's guaranteed but I just think that's one interesting Catalyst for coinbase that I had never thought about until recently but as the chatter about an eth ETF come summer uh you know Trends upward it is something that I'll be paying attention to I thought one cool takeaway and it's just tangential but they're like posting their earnings on chain and I saw Brian tweet like I'm going to try and post these on chain like literally right at 4:00 so that way all the analysts are going to have to try and figure out like how to view the earnings on chain like in that moment which is like super cool to force people to actually look at the chain thought that was kind of fun and also minting the nft um that they dropped for the earnings is is kind of interesting because he he said like I'm sure you can guess like what this might win you in the future with like a little smiley face so that's like super cryptic but in my opinion Brian is directly telling people hey make sure to Mint this nft because there might be some goodies for you later on so be sure to do that if you haven't yet me to takeway here was that Redi markets are still kind of Bamboozled when it comes to crypto stuff or like they don't really know how to Value these things and right now at this price I think there's still a lot a lot a lot of like growth expectations in baked and nobody really knows what's going to happen in the next five years especially on the trfi side um and yeah if like revenue or like EPS or profits start reaping suddenly um in the next few quarters like I could see tread fine markets going absolutely h on this thing and just bidding it to follow up on that point the fast be change I'm not an accountant this is not account ing advice um but based on what I what what I understand it would allow coinbase to record any unrealized gain on the crypto assets at fair value right um so if you were looking at their Q4 2023 sort of financial statements they have $780 million in unrealized gains and they did like buy the DI at the end of 2022 they had 202 22 million in Bitcoin a cost basis and at the end of 2023 they had 127 million in Bitcoin at cost basis same thing for Eve and at the end of 2022 they had 47 million at the end of 2023 they had 129 million and so if you allow coinbase to quote unquote like Mark the crypto assets at fair value today or at the end of 2023 on December 31st they would have recorded 780 million in unrealized gains and that would equal to $325 5 cents earning per share and that's compared to the earnings of $1 and like 04 cents last quarter like 3x increase in earnings for share obviously like that's kind of reflexive like when crypto asset prices go down they're going to have to like Mark that down to and there's going to be a really really big negative impact on earnings for share but at least in the bull market it looks great right um and I just think a lot of that probably is being priced in already like I wouldn't be too surprised if you're watching anal you have to be looking at coin bases like balance sheet and these accounting rules and how it would potentially affect like how they're marking all of these assets on the balance sheet and how that affects like earnings for sh but yeah I think it's still like even now the narrative feels like it's really focused on coin bases like spot exchange or even like base but it feels like their International Exchange isn't even really talked about a lot sure volume is still like really really small compared to other other exchanges it only sees like one billion in Daily volume but but they recently increased their leverage from 5x to 10x they're listing more assets and just given the brand that coinbase has you know if you're trading spot on coinbase maybe like it's probably easy to set up like an international account if you have an non us-based entity and yeah it just seems like they're probably going to do pretty well this cycle again I also think on the perss front like that market is going to mature and expand Beyond just Bitcoin and eth and longtail crypto assets like perss could be applied to so many different Financial items like and I think coinbase is prime to capture that growth so I'm super excited to see how International grows as well as how the pers Market matures and as more products and assets are added yeah that's an interesting point because I think burs have been tried before um but they never caught attention or they never got adoption in like the tread Market but then here comes like crypto and suddenly everybody and their moms are using burs which is an interesting setup um and I'm not sure why that is like because yeah per are a nice product and they're EAS it to use like why not get the option in try mat I think I might be stealing this Theory from you but uh didn't you at one point in the past say like it's really weird you just cited the same thing brick just said like why haven't they got an adoption and you kind of cited well CME is making bank on rolling the contracts and in per land you know the the Longs pay the shorts or the shorts pay the Longs and then yeah you have your opening and closing fees but it's probably not nearly as large as the rolling fees that commodity producers actually have to do now I'm getting off on a tangent but I just thought that was like an interesting thesis as to why perss didn't take off yeah that's been my ongoing Theory but I remember like when I first came up with it our resident trfi expert Byron who writes our newsletter for Block Works kind of shut me down and it's like there's no way CME is thinking about pers but um yeah that's definitely been an ongoing theory for me there's no there's no question about it like perss would be worse for futures exchanges than futures or traditional Futures I also just got to shoot down the whole App Store ranking battle like that is such a dumb argument in my opinion like if you have 120 million verified coinbase users in the US then obviously there can't be another 120 million well I mean I guess there could be considering there's like 330 million Americans but I don't think the App Store raking really holds up that much because everyone already has it downloaded on their phone and yes it is in part due to usage and downloads I actually Googled that because I was curious how the App Store algo worked but that being said if you're looking at the App Store rankings for top signals then you might be uh might be left holding the bag waiting for it to get to number one again do you know if it accounts for international downloads as well or is just for the US I do not know okay CU I know a lot of my friends who okay okay a lot of my friends don't trade crypto but those that did in the past cycle used to go to binance or ccken or whatever so I think there's some value still left in there if it accounts for international downloads because not a lot of people used to use coinbase uh back in the previous cycle but now things are probably changing I think if you wanted to have like a coinbase related metric it either be sort of like verified User Group or monthly active users as a percentage of like total verified users because monthly active users right now is still like 7 million or something like ridiculously small verus there total verified user base of 110 or 120 million and yeah I do think that Sam has a point there and that like perhaps the coinbase absolute ranking is not the best barometer of like where the cyc tops Just One Last point on coinbase um I think a lot of people have seen like the coinbase ventures portfolio and they think it's like the most insane Venture portfolio ever in the history of crypto which to be fair it kind of is if you go look at coinbase venters portfolio page it is incredibly incredibly stacked it's basically like every token above like a 10 billion market cap like coinbase ventes has probably um invested in it at some point but I think one thing to notice coin based ticket sizes I'm completely guessing here but coinbase ticket sizes probably aren't that big and they probably cut in like more so at like a later stage than at the C stage so not everything's going to be like a th X or like a 500x but it will probably be worth like a significant amount at the top of the bull market I don't know whether they get to Mark those assets at a fair value but if they do I think that'll be pretty crazy what's up everyone March is approaching fast and I want to give you another reminder not to miss out on D London it is coming it's right around the corner and it's in March from the 18th to the 20th we have three full days of content this is your chance to bump shoulders with some of the world's top Executives and have open dialogue with both attendees and speakers we're going to be focusing on a range of topics that I'll let Ren discuss for you first on the list we have Bitcoin Catalyst the Haring and spot ETF next we have a view from the buy side from investors on things like strategy portfolio allocation and more we also have a topic on Aras tokenization and stable coins which I think we can all agree are going to pay large vow in crypto's future we'll also talk about global regulatory Frameworks like compliance best practices and the evolution of global standards that is shaping the global investment landscape we'll also have someone from the institutional front to talk about infrastructure such as Banking and payments with financial giants like visa and JP Morgan and last on the list the macro case for digital assets so don't miss out on this Monumental event seats are limited so be sure to register today by hitting the link in the description and using the promo code 0x10 to save 10% on tickets see you in London how it's going to hop in with a with a hot seat unless anyone has more coinbase thoughts nah let's hear it so I'm I'm holding Stark strk token on the hot seat today um they successfully did their airdrop for those that don't know starkware creates rollups um Stark Stark net is the main layer to rollup associated with starkware strk is the token related to this rollup so they launched Str strk and it's a lot of success I think it was trading around $2 last time I checked which put it something like a 20 billion doll fdv uh it after that pumped you know a good amount I think to almost $3 or almost above $4 potentially even and Tuesday February 20th so that was earlier today and yesterday um despite you know positive price action it being the highest fdv roll up at one point in the last 48 hours there is a huge overhang of an unlock coming up so in April mid April I believe 14th or the 15th 1.3 billion Str strk tokens will unlock um this is I think 180% increase in Supply versus circulating Supply today and you know two months from launch until until the biggest unlock and the supply increases by 2.5x almost like that is that is egregious um so they're in the hot seat you know I'm a huge fan of their team I'm a huge fan of what the products they built I think starx and Stark net are both uh you know revolutionary and a big step in the right direction for crypto but this decision with the unlocks is is absolutely absurd and uh they're getting a lot of heat for it as they should be so they get hot toat today yeah this kind of Blends into my I'm not sure if I want to put this in my hot seat or cool drone but new shiny token investors overall like everybody going mad on these new launches um and valuations are going through the roof but especially with this um like how the Stark net or the S strk token is being released is quite um like interesting because you'd think they would want to keep their float pretty low because that has especially in the last few months has worked really well where like you keep the float low and then you just watch your native tokens price increase and then at some point start throwing in these unlocks and uh even though they are coming to the market like not that many people care but now because the unlock is so close to the Token becoming liquid and the unlock being so huge that markets have definitely like picked up on this and especially on crypto Trader people seem to really be bashing the like the decision to do this stuff it's crazy that thatf SPF model of low float high fdv it's still in practice and still succeeding you know three years later it's a it's a crazy part of crypto that I think a lot of people outside this space don't realize like markting cap verus FTV and how we how we Define our our valuations yeah exactly but yeah for my this kind of Blends together so I'll just hop into my hot seed coolr I don't know which one to put this on because it's cool to see prices rise but like this new regime is super interesting where like you look at some fdbs or even market caps and or mostly fdbs for new tokens that have just launched and they pretty much have no fundamental value cruel in place and uh they're trading at like 10 or 20 or five billion fdv and then you just have to kind of trust that the growth will be there or this new tech that being launched uh opens up something really revolutionary that we haven't thought about um before and that's kind of the thesis I think that's driving these things okay as well as like stake this token and get the air drops that has been a good narrative recently but yeah if you look at like J Dimension recently launched pixel even Manta like all of this stuff is trading at such a high valuation like an fdv compared to like the underlying fundamentals and I guess it's true that like fdv is a meme especially in the bull market but it's good to remember that it's a meme until it isn't like when tokens really start unlocking you'll uh probably never see those prices come back again or I think Lio is a good example of this of like it trading at $6 um at an all-time high sometime in 2021 and currently like things are looking really good for Lio um like the leading in the market might be getting some tread fire adoption even if these ETFs can throw some money in stuff like that and it's still not trading even close to its all time I'm again and that's just because like the float isn't um that restricted anymore and yeah I think the prime example of a low float token is World coin which has recently G an absolute like um Mayhem um I think it's up like 150% or something like that in the past seven days and trading at something like a 60 billion fdv uh which is pretty crazy to think for a token that yeah the value acrel is pretty unclear uh at the moment yeah I've been saying this for a while I personally don't have any tiffs with the lowf float High fdv Playbook assuming the vesting schedule for everyone isn't like a three to four year deal like if you want that to work I think it's got to be like a 30 to 40 year deal and unfortunately no one in crypto actually thinks in terms of decades we think in terms of months so I I I'm waiting on the day where we get regulatory Clarity and these type of token launches are more normal but until then I think we'll get more of the same to be honest and you'll see people on Twitter either who were seed in you know who participated in the early rounds and you'll see people who didn't and it'll be highly controversial battles between the two for pretty much the remainder of the bull market I think at this point of time the market really doesn't care about valuations I mean like I don't think it ever really has to be honest it just sees like a new shiny token uh and then it just bids it up I think at least until the first unlock but also yeah I mean like like most of you guys like last cyle was my first cycle you know and I joined like the bandwagon like oh my God like s SPF like salana low flow High FTB is like the most like predatory thing but then now like as air drop recipient like low flow uh low Market low flow and like high fdv is like the best thing ever because it means that your air jop launches are like some stupidly high like valuation and you make a lot of money you know and at the same time I bet those people who say like it's the worst thing is also the best thing because of sort of like the narrative between the air drops that they received and the long-term like Supply dilution that they experience if you do hold the token I don't think there's like a good in between right now to be honest but I I do expect this sort of like low float High FTB thing to just continue throughout the cycle just because it's in a lot of parties like incentive to do so low to high FV gets a interest I don't think it's fair to label all coins that are trading at a low market cap high fdv as the same like to Sam's Point a 30 40 year vest on you know your outstanding Supply your non-circulating supply is so different than two months after launching a token you know increasing the circulating Supply by 180% and likewise you have to look at who those tokens are going to um is there like an incentive for holding them as far as like can they stake them and sell their the tokens that they're receiving as rewards for that so we kind of like to bucket this huge category of lowf flow High fdv when there's ways of doing it that from my perspective are totally viable and valid and not predatory and then there's ways of doing it that uh there is no way to look at as not predatory so I I think that you know it's all about education and you know understanding token distributions token release schedules and things of that nature and unfortunately our Market doesn't care about these things so uh yeah I guess it's a it's an interesting predicament back to Stark too like it's at like a$ 24 billion FTV is that right like that's that's insane to me that's worth basically as much as arbitrum and optimism combined I think it's down to a 20 now um the token price has come down pretty heavily today and that's my point like I think they uh especially um taking or accounting for this environment we're in right now like if they would have not released that many tokens immediately they probably would have seen the same playbook play out as with these tokens I mentioned earlier where like you see the token Louch at a super high price and then you're like okay this is not going to go up and then you open up I don't know your trading view next day and it's up like 2X or something like that um and yeah I think it's just the market kind of punishing them for that right now but we'll see what happens in the coming weeks like I think there's an interesting play to be made here if the token plummets enough like you just scoop up some and hope for the best how do you guys think F launch Futures play into all of this I think they're like one of the products in 2023 that have seen relatively more product Market fit or like assemblance of f Market fit sure like volume and open interest is still like pretty small in the grand scheme of things but at least for me and I would guess a few other people too like pre-launch Futures have done a relative good job or an increasingly good job for recent air jopss and actually pricing what the token will launch at and at some point I don't know if this is the right term but it becomes like a self-fulfilling prophecy in some sense like people see that the pre-launch token is trading at like the pre-launch future is trading at like a 20 billion valuation and it say The Token launches at like 15 billion dollars and then everyone's like oh but they should be trading at 20 billion because the prelaunch Futures indicated that was like 20 billion and so I do think that there's some like interesting Dynamics into how these air drop like price actions may be impacted in the future by what the pre-launch Futures are trading at before the air drop happens and I do think that there are certain shenanigans that a protoc could do to pre-launch Futures in order to influence the market price of the token if they wanted to yeah big agree there same as Welles Market too like you can trade points OTC like I think the same exact thing is going on there it's it's very easy to spoof the numbers and try and inflate the valuation that people are expecting I think it's worth noting that pre-launched features aren't a new idea they're filling a hole in the market that you know FTX has has created um that was probably one of the most successful products the FTX ever offered as far as onboarding new users um getting deposits so I love prelaunch Futures I always have but it is worth noting that it's not new and it's been a successful product in crypto for a few years now yeah I just think it's super interesting that as you mentioned earlier that the volumes on these platforms aren't that large like there's not that much liquidity out there and still they manage to pretty much every time hit the uh launch price or get pretty close to it so it's like who's trading this stuff is it insiders or who is it because it can't be that small group of people always manage to like um find uh or become or get pretty close to like the launch price yeah that's a good point like who is trading these things and how do they know um but if no one has any uh other thoughts on that I can head over to my hot seat or cool Throne that this one's controversial what does anyone have anything else no all right so I've got Athena I think most people would put him in the hot seat based on sentiment on Twitter but basically it's a synthetic dollar that is yield bearing and right now it's 20 plus% interest paid out to USD e stakers so if that sounds a little scary rightfully so everyone's still got a little PTSD from terraluna and the US anchor ordeal where you got 20% fixed just for depositing into anchor but basically how it works is whitelisted users can mint the protocols stable coin by depositing Ste and in return mint usde but nonwhite listed users so people like o retail uh can only buy usde which interesting tidbit it's rooted through cow swap uh to various liquidity pool so maybe this is bullish cow um but holders of usde can stake their usde for sde as I loaded to a minute ago and right now the yield is 27% and this yield comes from two sources it comes from the uh execution and consensus lay rewards on Ste as well as the funding and basis spread from the Delta hedging derivatives position um so as you can imagine sex's and dex's alike love this product probably they currently have 4% of all open interest across the supported exchanges such as synthetics dydx AO derit Kraken and others and so I guess you're probably asking now like what's the catch the docs do do a great job of kind of identifying some of the risks so we can link to those in the show notes but we have liquidation risk like what if their purpose position on sex Sexes aren't maintained with the proper amount of uh collateral or funding risk like what happens if the market turns and the funding rate goes consistently negative um custody risk do we trust coppers the coppers of the world to actually custody these assets there's exchange risk what happens if one of the major exchanges goes insolvent there's collateral risk what happens if stpegs like there there's a lot of questions here and they're all really good questions to be honest uh they do have an insurance fund which is currently at 1 million right now but I think that's supposed to get seated with some of the uh funds they just raised they just raised $4 million from uh notable investors and they are planning on uh redirecting 10 to 20% of the protocol Revenue to the Insurance Fund in my opinion like I I guess I see the hot seat case here because I don't understand why you wouldn't redirect 50% or more personally like during a Raging Bull Market no one really wants to be holding stables for 25% yield in my opinion people are much more interested in being risk on so you might as well just build up that war chest while people are risk on so that way you have a massive Insurance Fund When the tide turns so people have confidence in the stable Point stable coin and it doesn't just massively deeg as soon as that happens but I think the founder actually put it put It Best in my opinion he said that they're trying to create a vehicle through which interest rate differentials are forced to converge between CI D5 and trafi and I I think that's really cool like this is like a novel design um people are saying that it's really just like a yield Vault and that this has been tried before and it's not going to work and you shouldn't call it a stable coin and maybe that's the case I don't know but we haven't seen a delta neutral stable coin like this at this scale pretty much ever um and I think it's going to be really interesting to watch play out yes there's concerns around scalability and if they already have 4% of open interest like what happens when this thing balloons to 1 billion two billion $3 billion of Supply but I guess that's why I'm in Camp increase the revenue take rate to the Insurance Fund but what do you guys have uh on Athena I really like Athena I think I think it feel is an awesome idea um I do tend to agree with the sentiment that it's kind of like a a cash and carry delta neutral fund or yield vault laring as a stable coin but at the end of the day like that's not a big deal if the rebranding allows them to attract more capital and people want the stable coin aspect of it all of a sudden it's not laring it's an Innovative novel idea that's changing the game of stable coins right so um you know this the actual core tech there isn't something super novel like friction on salana used to offer something very similar which was a yield Vault that would long um spot salana shorted on Mango or one of the per Sexes on salana so it does look pretty similar this to that and I thought it was really cool when that occurred um I don't think it's scalable so with the one strategy of uh basis trades of of delta neutral Cash and Carry trades so long Ste short eth um long long spot Ste short e burps I don't think you can like scale that to a multi-billion dollar stable coin U I actually know you can I've done a lot of research into catch and car trades and there's just not the liquidity to do that maybe at the peak of the bull but in a fa Market especially like a billion is already kind of pushing it that said if they cap this strategy in a couple hundred million or something of that nature and you know find new strategies to produce yields I do think that uh you know if they can grow to a couple hundred million tvl or a couple hundred million vented in the stable coin they've already succeeded so I'm a huge fan I love it I love the idea of um you know creating a more efficient market and reducing these these funding rates that are so out of whack like for instance today ethon binance traded a negative funding rate meanwhile on quenta and AO where these where uh ethena has huge positions it's trading at like 80% annualized and these are these are both annualized so negative 11% on binance 80% on Avo and quenta so I think that it is uh filling an inefficiency the market today it is worth taking into account smart contract risk of course you know having money on Avo rollup does pose risks I'm a huge fan of AO but it's just factual that there's risks involved same with holding on on sets but holding on debts even more so so I don't um I think it's important to look at very quantitatively and to assess all your risks at first the reward and see if it's actually worth it I would say that I agree with Sam completely that like there's no need to pay 27% in a bu Market especially most of these people are probably depositing collateral BR the stable coin to go buy more crypto and to leverage up on the crypto exposure rather than like buying a crypto stable coin for 21st 7% yield I think Luna and Tera create created this like mental hurdle like if anything offers me like more than 20% on the stable coin like immediately I just think of teral Luna USC and like I just think it's sketch you know like even like if your docs are like perfectly explain everything makes sense but in my head that 20% mental hurdle is just so hard to get across and I think a lot of people still have very strong PTSD from last cycle and so there's no need to pay like 20% and I I think the ideal move here is to cap the amount paid out at I don't know like a 10% annualized yield save like an insane amount of that interest or like funding rate Revenue into like a protocol Trey and then basically do what D is doing with the DSR and edsr throughout like 2023 just to keep the momentum going and to keep the stable coin sort of market cap increase and yeah as Mt to I think last cycle in 2020 2021 you saw like a 100 or like a stupid amount of like hedge funds get created and they're all like delta neutral crypto strategies you know they're like doing basis trades C trades whatever and I think that's like basically that but they're just fundraising in a decentralized manner you know they're saying like everyone can come in and sort of uh B NLP in this sort of like delta neutral carryer trade which I don't think is like the worst thing to be fair and as mad say like it helps Arbitrage some out some of like the market in efficiencies especially between C defy and chadf my first thought with this is that like if you look at some of the largest uh fund blowups historically it's usually some kind of a carry trade or where you kind of lock your positioning and it's always like we did our research this can't backfire and then boom within a couple of days you lose your whole fund and I don't know that's I'm not saying it's going to happen here but that's just like my first thought and yeah as Ren said like every time you see these high high yields you immediately start thinking about like can this be sustainable and like there has to be something wrong here but I don't know we'll see what happens yeah it's like imagine if they were just paying out 4% right now and then all of that Revenue was flowing to the insurance fund and then you know you could have a dowal vote in a year or two years whenever the bare Market hits and it's like okay this is our run rate like we can actually pay out 5% sent for 5 years with our current Insurance Fund and now all of a sudden in a bar Market you have the most attractive stable coin to hold and everyone's confident in the pck it's like why not take that approach over what they're doing today and paying out 27% to people in a bull market where clearly just farming the shards which is their points program for those not familiar yeah but I do get it what why they do it right now because yeah you they're probably like super super uh focused on growth and like you could argue that just the shards and invite links and stuff like that is enough to like get Market um attention but here they're like I guess going full on with it I wouldn't blame them if they like in five months or four months decreased the yield and like made the take rate for the Insurance Fund much larger but I think it's super important for a project and something that's quite often overlooked by like non devs and non business people is to like quickly gain market share and then it's easier to grow from there than to have like low market share and then suddenly try and like penetrate the market I think there is a Black Swan of that potential like to your point of like how will this blow up um you know I don't foresee it but a Ste dpeg in combination with funding rates like overarching funding rates flipping extremely negative would probably uh be a very very bad event for how with UniFi protocols designed um I'm sure I would hope that they have mechanisms in place to mitigate this this is also like I said a Black Swan bent I don't F see cfd Peg anytime soon um you know we're deep in a bare Market I don't per funding rates flipping super negative any them soon but that would be one potential event that could cause a lot of trouble for you know Athena 5 protocol and it's LPS and I will give them credit like they did you know historical studies over the past three years which included you know the worst bare Market arguably that we've seen with 3ac Luna Celsius blockfi like FTX Alam like everything blew up so like they they looked at that period and you know the funding was only negative for 13 straight days versus I think it was 108 of positive straight days so that deficit was definitely not that drastic even in the worst of times but my main thing is they're focusing solely on funding rates and historical dat which black swans typically don't include historical data and then on top of that you're not pricing in all of the other risks like liquidation risk like the funding or sorry the custody risk The Exchange risk the collateral risk like all of this is really looking at funding and maybe se's Peg like at the deepest level and I think they need to prepare for something that could potentially be much worse because like like I said we've never had a delta neutral thing like this at scale and I think they have a really good chance to build something that's super super ingenuitive and actually scalable over the long term as perss mature as more markets are added as they dabble into Bitcoin as collateral or even perose for Bitcoin to to increase the yield and scalability of it so I would just like to see him take like a more thoughtful and conservative approach so that way that end result can actually be achieved one thing I actually haven't seen talked about yet is like what are the attack vectors here or if you look at Luna I guess you could argue that or there is some evidence that like the stable coin was attacked by somebody um and could it be or could the stable coin here be attacked in a similar where where way where like I don't know on some specific exchanges they maintain the funding rate negative for like an extended period of time and then take another trade on another site which then like benefits the stackers um once everything breaks down yeah you could you could potentially like I don't know what the incentive would be there really is none with no governance token today but like you said you know all of Athena's per positions on are public like you can go look at them on their dashboard which is awesome but you know if they have a disproportionate amount of their per or amount of their uh you know amount of their value and per position on one change you could potentially go and like Market you would you you know you'd uh Market short on that perfect exchange to in an attempt to drive the funding rate negative I don't see why there would be an incentive to do this for anyone but like that would be a potential way to you know cause some chaos or cause some trouble with h you know with Athena and if they do have a governance token the incentives could change in the future setting up a poly Market too it's like all right prediction Market does USD dpeg by a month from now and then you could cause some serious chaos no I was just going to say I would not be very surprised if there's like some hedgman out there staring very very closely at Athena dogs and trying to figure out a howy profitable trading strategy and I think another thing that I'm wondering about is like sure increasing like the stable coin Supply and market cap is great but do they have any sort of plans in place to incentivize like onchain liquidity because ultimately I feel like these people want to use like the usce to go do something whether that's like buy more like tokens and like no just going to hold usde and they boom market and so I think that's another thing that they have to figure out and I think the last point I wanted to make was that I get the value of doing historical studies on like exchange like tick by tick minute by minute like historical data but I also think that there's a reasonable argument to be made that market structures change over time in crypto right I bet you like if you did some historical study on like Bitcoins and Bitcoin whatever like metrics over the past five years like now with the BTC ETF there's like a fundamental shift in Market structure and it's very possible that something like that occurs for E for example if e ETF comes online with like e staking and then like all of these large Trad five funds come in to do the same like Cash and Carry trade assuming like the regulatory environment opens up blah blah blah then the market structure could fundamentally change and all of those historical quantitative analysis that they've done like just get shown completely out of the window I think where the opportunity arises from is pretty obvious like there's a reason that on binance you know this this Arbitrage doesn't exist or Arbitrage is a is a stretch but this you know this trade doesn't exist that's because traditional Market MERS the Sig the jumps the Jan streets they're willing to trade there so you know it's an efficient market but when you look at onchain venues like AO and quento where they're trading it does seem that you know whether it because of a lack of liquidity or you know uh too much perceived smart contract risk or whatever maybe it's just a lack of knowledge about its ex its existence but these market makers clearly are not plugged in there in the same in the same way that they are in other exchanges if in the future we see you know the reputation of these exchanges increase you know the perceived smart contract R decrease likely this type of trait will not exist I'm pretty confident in that but as always you know inefficiencies in crypto can exists a lot longer than anyone thinks and I am overall a huge fan of Athena so despite these you know criticisms it's I think it's an Nazi protocol yeah and as I said I think they're doing a good job on like marketing it and like with BD stuff um the Rens point about will there be liquidity or use cases for this in the future like I think they're doing EPO for the shards and each eoch is like you get shards for different things so right now the best thing to do is like um buy the stable coin and then LP it on Cur and then lock the lp token but then next de they're if I've understood correctly they're doing something with like I don't know lending protocols or something where like if you lend against this asset you're getting more shards so I really like that aspect um how they're like approaching growth yeah and they said that this program will only go on for either three months or until usde hits a$1 billion market cap because they diagnosed Market fatigue on points program so I think all of the armor very much appreciate that and I I just want to Echo Matt's sentiment too like I got on crypto Twitter I think it was yesterday when they announced this on Monday and everyone was so up in arms about this like kind of like angry at Athena for even trying something like this it's like come on like these guys have been nothing but transparent about the risks the the docs clearly state it they've been answering everyone's questions on Twitter like they're not trying to say this doesn't have any risks they're just trying to build something that can kind of intertwine interest rate differentials between trfi and Def and you know usde is just that mechanism that kind of is the liazon between all of that so I think what they're trying to do is super super cool and I think that they've gone about it the completely right way and their launch video had a kend gar song in it which I was a huge fan of so I think they're doing everything right honestly Kendrick Kar bullish all right if we got nothing else on there are we all wrapped up with the hot seat C runs for this week all right well Matt brick thanks for coming on uh we will be sure to see you guys next week hey everyone thanks for watching today's zero X research episode I wanted to take a second and remind you about an upcoming 2024 digital asset Summit in London this March seats are limited so hit the link in the description and use the promo code 0x10 to save 10% on tickets see you in London [Music] oh

========================================

--- Video 145 ---
Video ID: AqUIEy2BmqM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AqUIEy2BmqM
Title: Why One Chain Can't Rule Them All: Polygon Aggregation Layer Deep Dive | Brendan Farmer
Published: 2024-02-15 18:22:18 UTC
Description:
In this week's interview Sam and Ren are joined by Brendan Farmer, the Co-Founder of Polygon. Brendan unpacks why no single blockchain can scale like the internet due to heterogeneous requirements across chains. He then introduces Polygon's solution - an Aggregation Layer that enables low-latency, trustless interoperability between ZK rollups to scale access to shared liquidity and state. They dig into interoperability and liveness, updates on ZK proof innovation, how the Polygon CDK and Aggregation Layer preserve sovereignty for connected chains, and the outlook for developer adoption to grow the Polygon ecosystem. To close out they also discuss novel use cases enabled by the Aggregation Layer. Thanks for tuning in!
- -
Follow Brendan: https://twitter.com/_bfarmer
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X20 to get 20% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
See you there! 

Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
3:53 The Aggregation Layer of Crypto
6:46 Polygon CDK Vision
10:48 Novel Aggregation Layer Use Cases
19:15 DAS London Ad 
20:21 Security & Risks of Agg Layer
25:57 ZK Proofs Updates
32:47 Agg Layer Value Accrual
42:03 End Vision of Aggregation Layer
47:02 POL Token Dynamics
- -
Resources
https://mirror.xyz/0xfa892B19c72c2D2C6B10dFce8Ff8E7a955b58A61/TXMyZhhRFa-bjr7YHwmJpKBwt2-_ysirbh_VpNy3qZY
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 146 ---
Video ID: CnGWOzASJfo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CnGWOzASJfo
Title: Why the Next Ethereum Upgrade Will Ignite Layer 2 Ecosystems | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-02-14 18:40:51 UTC
Description:
In today's analyst roundtable Sam, Ren, Matt, and Pibblez dive into a range of topics including Arbitrum's incentives program, issues with Solana's fee markets, Bitcoin L2 solutions, potential for Ethereum ETFs that enable staking, and the the upcoming Shanghai upgrade bringing several EIPs. The conversation opens by analyzing Arbitrum's incentives program, finding the TVL growth did not justify the high customer acquisition costs. They then dive into Solana's fee market issues, including inefficient compute usage and easy account spamming. Shifting focus to Bitcoin, the merits of different layer 2 construction approaches are weighed. Potential Ethereum ETFs come up next, with hosts excited by the prospects of staking rewards further enriching companies like Coinbase. Finally, the major improvements of Ethereum's upcoming Shanghai upgrade are discussed, including several EIPs that will directly boost the Layer 2 ecosystem.

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. 
- -
Follow Pibblez: https://twitter.com/0xpibblez
Follow Matt: https://twitter.com/MattFiebach
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X10 to get 10% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
See you there! 

Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Resources
https://dune.com/hildobby/btc-etfs
https://hackmd.io/6lwnNQf2RTmc3UQoWvAVQw
https://twitter.com/ercwl/status/1756575133907452312
https://twitter.com/ElBarto_Crypto/status/1757036165520036299
https://bitcoinlayersreport.com/
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction
1:17 Effectiveness of Arbitrum STIPs
4:54 Solana Fee Market Designs
10:24 Bitcoin L2s & VM Nuance
17:19 dYdX Segment: Stride
25:05 Bitcoin ETFs & BTC Supply
32:09 Bitcoin Mining Profitability 
37:17 DAS London Ad 
38:23 Ethereum ETF Applications
45:34 Ethereum Dencun Upgrade & EIP 4788
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
Denon is set to go live on eth mainnet on March 13th and this is a huge moment for the ethereum community who has just been bag holding while everything else rips for the past few months obviously e 4844 which is going to introduce data blobs and that's going to kind of set the foundation for dank sharting in the future uh I think L2 tokens are kind of primed to rip off of this because transaction fees are going to go down significantly and hopefully you see some applications arise that will just bring on a whole new wave of entrance to the LTS what's up everyone welcome back to another episode of zerx research March is just around the corner and I want to make sure to give you a quick reminder to not top tick your prices of your D London tickets if you use codes 0x10 at checkout you can lock in a 10% discount on your ticket don't miss out on your chance to get ahead of the curve I'll see you in London what's up everyone welcome back to another episode of zerox research today is Monday February 12th this should air on uh Wednesday February 14th and today we are joined by zerox pibbles and Matt from the blockworks research team to jam on the latest Market happenings ren do you want to kick us off with kick us off with some governance updates yeah for sure so first is an interesting tweet that caught our eyes this morning on sort of like the effec effectiveness of the arum STI program so elbarto crypto on Twitter put out some interesting statistics we'll link the post the tweet in the show notes later so overall the program drove a $400 million increase in TV and it basically cost the Aral $54 of incentives for every new address and overall the program resulted in roughly 27 million of additional free Revenue which works out to $1 off fees for every $2 in AR um so in VC then there's this thing called LTV and CAC LTV stands for lifetime value CAC stands for cost of customer cost of acquisition or customers customer acquisition cost right so at least just for this arbitrum s program it has a LTV the CAC ratio of 0.5 which means you're kind of losing money you're spending more money to acquire a customer than the money that you're making from a customer and in terms of arbit from the only money that you're making is sequence of profits right normally VCS want to see a ratio of 3x of the lifetime value to to the customer acquisition cost so overall I don't think this was as effective as individuals thought but that's like a relatively superficial statement right like it drove an increased number of TBL you don't know how much these additional new addresses that came in will basically help Drive future profit so it kind of remains to be seen anyone have thoughts around the incentive program design and perhaps like what kpis the Dow should be incentivizing for optimizing for in the future I guess one thing that comes to my mind is that this was an experiment and it was looked at and it was posed in that in that light um so even though maybe it didn't have the success that it could have I think that there'll be a lot of good Lessons Learned for future incentive programs so that's definitely another barometer or like important metric to take into account which is what lessons can we learn for future incentive programs the arbitrum DA has already actually voted and passed a ltip long-term incentive program so they'll be giving out way more incentives in the future I just think it's important that that program takes into account the Lessons Learned here and if it manages to do so successfully then this can be looked at as a win um of course you know spending more money than you actually the the metrics that you uh POS are not looking so good but at the same time I just think that's another important thing to keep in mind I'd like to see the rewards actually vest over 6 months let's say and then you can only claim that month's allocation as the user if you were active on arbitr from that month just so the value of the customer over the lifespan of the incentives that you paid out is a little bit longer I think there's a lot of room for improvement on incentive proposal design and uh hopefully like Matt said they incorporate some of the Lessons Learned into the long-term incentive program that they uh just passed on the Forum the other day yeah and if you compare it to the other competitor you look at optimism's retroactive public good funding and like you see like synthetics and vrum got a little bit of rewards but then you see a lot of the op get wasted on random initiatives like I'm going to translate the optimism white paper to Korean pay me $250,000 so it's like if these are our two models at least arbitrum is you know a little bit more successful and useful for the ecosystem yeah I definitely agree with you there all right next up on news we have Sal of fee Market designs it's been getting a decent amount of attention lately so for those have that have been listening salana of Fe markets are a little broken today not completely broken but relatively broken especially the isolated fee markets so there's a few things that pay here sana's base fee is fixed per signature which means that no matter how many compute units or in ethereum land gas your transaction users you pay the same base fee however priority fee are priced per compute unit requested but 50% of it is burned and the other 50% of it is distributed or passed on to the validator ER the scheduler today or like the default scheduler implementation also has some wonky issues with it it doesn't work as well as it should and it results in sort of transaction placement or inclusion being pretty non-deterministic and add in some Network Jitter and it basically means that a lot of the time you don't pay for for what you get in terms of your transaction being included fast enough or at like a high enough part of the block this is being partially fixed in 1.18 but overall there's still an incentive spam right uh some statistics from jto is that 58% of computers Wasted by failed arbitrages and 98% of Arbitrage transactions fail and for example 50% of priority fees being burned means that out of protocol payments are encouraged so there's a few problems at the core here one is inefficient compute unit usage and request because different compute units sorry different transactions carry different Compu units and those cost the same base fee and the second one is it cost us to write lock accounts when you sort of write a transaction on salana you need to specify which accounts you are touching or if you're more familiar with ethereum which pieces of state that you want to interact with but this doesn't cost anything and and so you could quote unquote dos or spam salana just by sending in infinite infinite number of transactions at right lock accounts so for example one attack Vector is Right locking a Oracle update account right if you keep on right locking that and the actual Oracle update doesn't get priority then the Oracle price feed basically would never update so there's one ongoing proposal that's very much being debated right now and it's called SD 110 or Z 110 and it's basically an exponential fee for right lock accounts it increases the fees in a targeted manner over time to reduce the incentive to spam and how it works is it basically proposes tracking the exponential moving average of each account's compute unit utilization per block and the cost of right locking an account would increase exponentially based on its respective trailing compute unit utilization so it's kind of like EIP 1559 but much more granular for specific accounts and every single account that exists on salana however the fire dancer team doesn't really like this proposal in this current state and they're going to draft the counter proposal but overall I think the main takeaway is that salane markets are pretty broken today there's a lot of active debate and discussion that's ongoing but we haven't found the optimal solution yet and I think salana will be forced to find a solution in this year if not when users 10x when activity 10x is something will likely break that was a bit nerdy but anyone have any thoughts it it kind of reminds me just of back in the day and it feels like a lifetime ago but before EIP 1559 like you'd constantly log into metam mask and and have transactions get dropped on ethereum that's a lot how it feels like interacting with salana today when it gets pretty busy it's tough to get a transaction in so I think it's just a testament to the fact of how novel salana is and there's still a lot of iteration to be done but I'm definitely looking looking forward to like a more baked out fee mechanism because I think it'll make the chain like 10x better yeah I definitely see both sides of it which is on one side you know Salon is a pretty nent network uh they're trying to like you said novel it's trying to achieve a lot of new and Innovative things um so you know facing difficulties early in its life cycle is not only expected but uh it's 100% likely like that that was going to happen um so I do think you know Salon is a great Network I think it's really has a user experience and even though sometimes in times of high congestion it gets hard to get transaction in uh hopefully and likely it will be fixed on the other side of that um even the solutions posed today aren't you know encumbers don't fix the whole problem and they'll likely be more problems in the future I don't think it's like as simple as just adding um you know a fee that exponentially increases depending on the number of right locks that this account has uh put out like for instance if I'm understanding correctly you'd potentially be able to just sible via many different wallets opposed to you know doing it all from one wallet so uh like you know on one hand Salon is innovative and nent and early in it's life cycle and on the other hand these problems will likely be difficult to fix and continue for you know uh the foreseeable future yeah agree there right next moving on to bitcoin l2s Sam or Matt do you guys want to take this or I can take it too sure there was a interesting tweet or it was actually a portion of a Twitter space that Eric wall uh put on Twitter where he basically is explaining you know what something actually needs in order to be a Bitcoin L2 and why uh by his definition and I guess by many thought leaders definitions anything that Launches on top of the bit VM is not actually an L2 um basically his main point and the way he posed it was because the bit VM Bridge does not have permiss it's an optimistic Bridge uh so basically it has a you know you have a reliance that at least one validator is actually acting honestly and flagging uh you know malicious transactions he says because that's not permissionless because there's no ability for anyone to go be that one validator that one honestly acting validator it's not actually a uh you know a roll up or an L2 by his definition I think really what he meant even more so than that was that there's no ability to exit the system without that one honest actor so for instance arbitrum is the exact same in that it does not have a permissionless validator set that allows you know there's a whitelisted 20 validators who are able to to create these fraud proofs and say a transactions malicious so very similar in that regard but the difference is that you have uh forced inclusion and an escape hatch so you actually have the ability to get your Bitcoin out of the system despite um you know this this being a fact of the the way the protocol is set up so it was a very interesting conversation um my main takeaway from it is that nomenclature is a big issue and I think we we already all know that like I think this is most exemplified when we're talking about tvl and rollups for instance when I think of tvl and Roll-Ups I like to think about it as L2 beats definition which is the total value secured of externally bridged natively bridged and natively minted tokens but if you look at defi llama's definition of l2b it actually has nothing to do with you know the value secured by the rollup and rather it's all about you know the total value in defi smart contracts Lo on on total value locked in defi smart contracts on the rollup so you know these are just completely different metrics they're both valuable but it's important to understand both and likewise the definition of what is a rollup is you know very up in the air today with a lot of controversy and you know people not really understanding uh you know the differences and the nuances between what is a rollup so of course this is going to be a problem with these centralized systems like who defines what these what this nomenclature actually means but it's just you know a crazy show and makes it really really hard for someone who's not so deep in the weeds to understand it's even difficult for you know all of to understand I think yeah God knows that 95% of crypto users don't understand the trust assumptions of ethereum based rollups so I think for Bitcoin it's probably like exponentially worse and I do think at some point that you're just going to see like a really big rug or like something goes wrong on a bridge contract and everyone stuck there there's no Force inclusion and like a huge amount of TV or assets are basically gone forever I agree Ren we can also drop that uh the link to the space in the in the show notes and as well we'll drop some notes on uh basically different types of pro proving mechanisms that would need to be enshrined on bitcoin via soft Fork um into the show notes as well I found it pretty interesting but for the next news update we've got informal systems on Twitter today on Monday announced an integration between uh bab ba I always butcher this bab Babalon there we go and the cosmos Hub and it's essentially enabling anyone to delegate Bitcoin to a validator of a consumer chain and the consumer chain can actually set what percentage of their security is uh backed by Adam versus Bitcoin and that yield will be paid out um actually I'm not sure if that yield would be paid out in Bitcoin now that I'm thinking through it that wouldn't really make a whole lot of sense but nevertheless kind of an interesting spin on the consumer chain narrative over in the cosmos ecosystem not sure if you guys have any thoughts here I think it'll be interesting to watch how much it gets adopted because one of my main questions is how much Duo token staking will be utilized in i l so rather than a middleware a protocol whatever being restake purely by sorry being secured purely by restake Eve a protocol can choose to have a dual staking model where it's partially secured by restake and then partially secured by their own token and I think the main reason you would want that it's basically you don't want like all of the value of curo inflation going to like resy if you also want some of that to go to your own token so it'll be interesting to see if anyone adopts like a dual token staking model do you think would the in your head in your mental model would dual staking be to secure different parts of the protocol or ecosystem or would it be uh you know two different assets that are both able to be slashed if there's malicious actions um in the like one part of the protocol I think at least for me it would be two different assets securing the same thing or like the same components of the protocol however I'll have yet with that I don't think that we're going to see a lot of like dual token staking models I feel like it's going to mostly be either if like you use I to secure a protocol and at some point you're like okay I'm going to switch I don't need this like share security or like food security anymore I'm going to switch my own token I think it's a good move though because obviously Adam hasn't performed super well in the the security of it is directly tied to the market value at stake so I think having I guess like an exogeneous collateral in Bitcoin as a slash asset is is definitely makes the consumer chain value prop a lot stronger for the next news update that we got I got vertex is uh has been teasing Blitz I've been talking about vertex for quite some time so I felt the need to shout this one out but they have an order book decks coming to blast which is the yield bearing L2 by Pacman and Co and basically I'm not sure what the relation is between vrtx the token or vertex the protocol devs and blast but the fact that they're kind of hyping it up on Twitter makes me think maybe they're intertwined in some way so I found that kind of interesting and then one other update coinbase earnings on the 15th I believe that is Thursday this week so definitely know a bunch of guys on the team are excited about that to see what the numbers come in at I think everyone generally thinks it will beat analyst expectations but I guess we'll see um not sure if a coinbase run as well would lead to kind of like a base alt season I think a lot of people are thinking maybe that's a way to get beta exposure to coinbase equity but uh nonetheless definitely excited to see those numbers now we'll have a quick word from stride thanks for our fantastic sponsor dydx all right guys for this week's dydx segment we have visha co-founder of strid labs the leading liquid staking provider in the cosmos ecosystem so stake dydx be to need launch can you explain a bit about how stake dydx works yeah absolutely um so dyx is super interesting and it's a littleit different than other um lsts uh so the way uh sddx works is users will comment with their DX and uh liquid stake it so what this means is they'll assign some transaction on the DX chain so on liquid stake um those funds will then get automatically sent to the stride blockchain and automatically converted to St idx which is to the user uh on the back end what happens is the dydx stride will send it to an account that it owns on the dydx chain and when we say mean by owns uh the way stri works is kind of unique it's not like this account is owned by multisig or a validator or something like that it's actually owned by stri blockchain so it has the same kind of trust properties as any sort of POS chain in for stride it's backed by billions of dollars Economic Security so it's it's a very kind of trustless and decentralized custody of these tokens um after stri gets to thex goes and mistakes it on the dydx Chain but here's where it starts to get a little bit interesting um dydx uh as some of you may know doesn't give inflationary Y in DX token rather it streams usdc revenue from Traders and users of the DX protocol U to its stakers but sride needs to convert this usdc back to dyx to help to restake it and allow for compounding all sorts of benefits and the way it does that right now is I think pretty novel so it takes that USC and trustless sends it to osmosis another account the blockchain owns and then we automatically kind of uh trade that usdc for dydx and does this it batches it up so it only trades once every hour doesn't relatively small size make sure there is enough slippage um build be executing these trades converts that usdc to dydx then sends that dyx back to the dydx chain and rakes it and so from the users's perspective let's say I liquid stake one DX I get back one SX um the token doesn't rebase but through time as you get thec real yield the one STD idx can be redeemed or traded for more than one dyx so in a year for example one stdyx might equal 1.2 dydx that's a really clever design for a token that's you know usdc bearing uh for stakers so thanks for explaining that um how has adoption been thus far yeah it's a great question so we've seen pretty good adoption early on for stdyx uh right around $3 million in tvl with around a million dollars in liquidity U we're expecting that we've seen pretty healthy growth on that so far we're expecting some pretty good traction going going forward to we have number of kind of really interesting Integrations with SX on leting markets to stable coins per markets Etc um as well as a few kind of custodial uh solutions kind of coming forward um and a pretty large stri airdrop for early users as well um so we' seeing good growth in that and we're expecting uh you know a pretty good growth going forward as well I think one thing that users are familiar with is liquid staking at least within the evm context but within the cosmos ecosystem right what benefits does liquid staking bring for users and perhaps what are the current limitations yeah it's a great question um so some of the benefits are kind of the same as anywhere um with ethereum as well but you get um so for Cosmos chains there's kind of this fundamental trade-off that most chains have between staking yeld and defi um for ethereum it's not as large of concern because most of the kind of BAS currency is e which has relatively low staking yeld for most Cosmos chains they care a lot about the chain having really high Economic Security for something thex for example it matters a lot the chain has high security so that Traders feel comfortable trading on it depositing large amounts of collateral um and it makes that the chain kind of function better but in order to get that high Economic Security the chain has to pay pretty significant yield to sakers and while all this help secure the chain it makes it really hard to use that idx salware so if you want to for example Min a stable coin against your DDX um or you want to deposit it as a collateral lending Market or or even use it on amm like Unis swap um you're forgoing this 15 20% seeking yeld that the idx token offers and it generally makes it so very little defi will occur on the token um but liquid staking you can kind of get access to this uh yield benefit um without having to compromise being participating Def and one thing we've noticed is um the rate of which LSS are used in defi is significantly higher in Cosmos than any other ecos system um and large part of that we think is because uh you have this really high kind of staking yield one thing that's reallying pretty X is they have a really big priority on Mev um in particular from validators not doing Mev extraction so this whole kind of framework that we can talk about that D ex to enforce on validators about try to help encourage validators to not uh not basically M extract dyx users um but for a lot of the people who delegate stake on DX uh a lot of this is totally abstracted away from them you know they're uh Believers in the protocol beli in the product but not necessarily aware of all the politics of validators liquid staking helps do is kind of provide one layer of abstraction on top of this U and stri really Prides itself in having a really high quality delegation strategy but stri tries to take all this stuff into account so how much contribution is the validator doing to the protocol is the validator m extracting is the validator running perform infrastructure um are they doing stuff with go to market um we can help kind of better the decentralization of uh the validator set two other kind of quick benefits just want to highlight one is uh for DX because there's usdc yield a lot of users might just want to hold their dyx position they're like hey really believe in DX here's the percentage as my portfolio and that they're not necessarily checking in every day or every week to do something with a usdc or to reinvest it uh but with strive you can just hold your St idx and you know exactly how large your dyx position is um and also leads to buy pressure on the dyx token from users who say hey I don't want the usdc I want that to go right back into the that's token out I really believe in um the last thing and this depends on your jurisdiction um but with the uscc a lot of jurisdictions treat uh staking income as uh short-term capital gains or income or just like dividend income um but SX just holding a token that's not rebasing um under some jurisdictions it might be long-term capital gains so for users who want to hold idx for a long term um they can significally make it uh much more tax sufficient to hold the LST version um but there are some kind of limitations and two kind of big ones to highlight and we hope these will get kind of get addressed over time um but one is liquidity so if you're kind of a large user uh you want you want to hold like a eight figure stdx position you want to have confidence that you can exit that position quickly in order to get maximum utility from the liquid nature of your Elsy um what we observed is over time liquidity will build up right now there's right around a million dollars of liquidity which is enough for most retail users but not necessarily enough for Wales but we hope that kind of liquidity will increase another thing is the ls is really useful if you can use it in duration so if you commit stable coins against it deposit as collateral and borrow against it um you know trade with it and lots of pairs on amm um we have uh right like six or seven Integrations for STX we're hoping to kind of expand that to the whole Suite of defi applications in Cosmos but also on ethereum Salon Etc Through Time wow that was that was awesome that was like a ton of information we could definitely do a whole podcast on this so maybe uh sometime in the future we can do that but unfortunately we're out of time here we will be sure to link to uh strides documentation the site as well as your Twitter velle but thank you so much much for coming on thank you so much for having me really excited to ask youx and see where it goes awesome well let's get over to Hot Seat cool Throne all right moving on to our hot seek kous Throne segment I'm gonna throw it to Sam first Sam who do you got in the hot seek kous Throne this week I got Bitcoin ETFs in the cool Throne I'm actually looking at our podcast prep sheet and I think we've got all cool Thrones this week which is kind of funny but I guess that's what happens when price goes up but anyways they collectively hold three and a half% of the total Bitcoin Supply which is uh over two and a half billions of net inflows since they launched and meanwhile Bitcoin just hit 50k today so that's kind of exciting uh there's this awesome dashboard from hild dabby which we can link to in the show notes as well basically shows um if the current Pace continues then 2.33% of Bitcoin will be funneled into ETFs each year which is pretty mind-boggling and a fun fact actually that I feel like a lot of people don't know uh the having block reward is actually equal to the four-year inflation rate so today that block reward is 6.2 5 so that means 6.25% inflation over 4 years or 1.56% per year so when the having hits in April this year that will actually be reduced to 3.125 which equates to 78% of inflation every year which I kind of find like a fun fact um the passive flows in my opinion from the spot ETF approval was just massively underpriced like people did not think it would be that big of a deal and it's proving in real time to be a very huge deal uh Dan mentioned in our chat the other day actually just how his friends have been asking about Bitcoin ETFs and I've been getting the same thing so it feels like real like high signal interest uh and not as much like the retail frenzy that we've seen in in past years and on top of that we still have ordinals rocking there's a new project like literally every half an hour to an hour so that's definitely still going crazy and then we already talked about Bitcoin L2 conversations picking up so I don't know I just think this cycle is going to be a lot of fun yeah I think something that's interesting is how underes estimated the ETF flows where and we foreshadowed this on our analyst hours call I think in December I think it was you Sam and me and we were just like people are still under allocated Bitcoin and they will stay under allocated Bitcoin for the entire run and like you're seeing that a lot in like the crypto Twitter bubble where people like all right this is the top like we're going to pull back now and we're like expanding Beyond this little bubble that we've lived in for 3 years on crypto Twitter and we're fundamentally seeing something different that's just going to keep growing yeah I wanted to follow up there with some more personal data points my dad asked me about the ETF approval uh a few weeks ago I think and then he basically asked me like oh I've seen like prices going up which ETF should I buy and I told him like I have no clue maybe go like support one of the more Crypton native ones like bitwise if not black rock is always a safe option and my girlfriend too my girlfriend I think she thinks that I'm like becoming rich and so she's asking me like can I give you like a few thousand dollars to put in crypto I haven't took the money yet just because I don't want to lose it but I have told her that if she wants so she can go buy a Bitcoin ETF um so I do think like eventually as price goes up even more right people will be like like I need to have like some allocation to it I don't want to miss out on like free money and I think at this point like everyone knows how much money that some people made last cycle during covid and so the Bitcoin ETF is a very natural entry point for a lot of these participants and even if like these participants like never come on chain I do think those flows are like significant not just from like institutions but also like just like normal retail I've been seeing that chart float around on Twitter a lot today though like Google search interest for the word Bitcoin and it's still super super low like that I think that I don't love looking at that metric and putting too much weight to it but I do think it's a testament to the fact that not many of my normal friends who like don't pay attention to crypto like they have no idea Bitcoin is only 15 16 17K off alltime highs which is just kind of wild I also add on that I think I've seen some discussions or from like the Bloomberg ETF guys about two I'm not sure if this is a correct term like index funds or sort of like investment options and then they basically allocate between like 60% stocks 20 20% bonds um 10% Like Emerging Markets or whatever and like a few of these have started to include like a 1% or like a 0.5% Bitcoin allocation and basically the bet there is that like people will allocate to these like Diversified portfolios which have some small percentage of like a Bitcoin allocation and over time like I do think the flows from there will be relatively significant I'm not sure how this information is displayed to users but if you did like a back test right of just like diversifi portfolio the one with like a one or like 2% Bitcoin allocation would probably wildly outperform like the one with like 100% SMP because that goes up like 10% on average every year so perhaps like that'll be kind of like a self-fulfilling prophecy but also like a little bit reflexive in nature I wish I could find the tweet I lost it but one of the vanck guys or one of the bitwise guys tweeted this morning and was like I think it was like six or seven times as much institutional Capital was now exposed to to crypto as before the Bitcoin ETFs launched um don't quote me on that again it was just a tweet but it was from one of these reputable sources and I think it was six times it was like you know 1% of I want to say financial advisers uh you know advertised that they were allocated or their clients were allocated to crypto and I was sitting at like six or 7% if I remember correctly I definitely agree it feels like no one you know even if your parents are asking you like oh what do you think you know Bitcoin ETF coinbase stock like are these things that I should be getting interested in it's not at all all like a level of craze where your friends are texting you about um you know some ghost chain scami coin which is what I would expect uh once we reach the Mania phase to me it feels a lot like it did when Bitcoin first surpassed 20K um in 20 or you know surpass 20K after uh the bare Market in 2018 2019 and you know for us it's like super exciting times are interesting there's lots of cool stuff going on lots of cool things being built but for the rest of the world they're like not paying so much attention yet and it's always interesting how the Mania phase doesn't really start until we're at the point of like oh this stuff's all you know the mindset of a crypto native at the point when Mania starts versus at a time like now changes completely as well so I guess just all things to be aware of and like keep in mind when you're thinking about starting when to drisk and uh you know remove exposure to this base I just think it's wild too to zoom out and think like Apple's like a three trillion doll company and bitcoin's like a$1 trillion doll asset like which is you know 50% of the entire industry's market cap so I don't know that's just like mindboggling if you think about it and it's an entire asset class so I'm definitely excited for for the years ahead but Ren who you got in the hot seat cool Throne I got another cool Throne this week um it also helps in F go so I have cleanspark on the C this week so clean spark is a Bitcoin miner I want to say they're maybe the third of four largest they announced their Q4 2023 earnings last Thursday after market closed and since then they have basically gone up by 100% or doubled um overall all of the other miners have also proceeded to Fen for example today marathon is up 12% R is up 9% and it seems like wet is kind of finally pricing in like both the ETF flows but also it's kind of like the positive impact on BTC miners so for some statistics on clean spark specifically their quarterly Revenue increased from from 27.8 million to 73.8 million year onye which is a 165% increase their net income increased from negative 29 million to positive 25.9 million so it went from a negative 46 cents earnings per share to a positive 14 cents earnings per share and their adjusted EIT increased to roughly 69 million from -2 million year on year so I feel like I've been boo posting about Bitcoin a lot on my Twitter um and it's good to see that the Market's like finally pricing that in and even though like all of the data is on chain especially in December which was kind of like a blowout month for ordinal activity if I'm not wrong out of the total sort of minor revenue 177% of that was from like order no activity and transaction fees and I just don't think Wall Street price that in enough right if not like if the market was like even close to if Queen spark shouldn't have ripped 20% after market closed and then 30% the next day which is like basically 50% in like 12 hours um after announcing their earnings and I think another thing to notice that the Bitcoin minor infrastructure war is obviously heating up a lot right on the back of the Haring which is coming in roughly 60 days or so Kleen Sparks might hash rate surpass 12.5 EXO ashes per second and they have strategic call option to purchase 100 60,000 bit main miners um for up half to 50,000 EXO hashes per second and there's like a crazy amount of minor infrastructure investment last year if I'm not wrong the number was 1.2 billion in mining machine purchases and I wouldn't be surprised to to see that heat up even more this year so any thoughts on bitcoin miners I'll just add that it's really awesome to see for the first time ever that Bitcoin miners are making more money from the transaction fees as opposed to block Rewards so there's finally this vision for you know sustainable security for Bitcoin um I know a lot of people on our team always had this you know fundamental issue with Bitcoin in that in their heads there was no way for the network to Su sustain its security while block rewards were going down in other words eventually once enough happenings happened whether it was this one or the next one or the next one um you know the wouldn't be profitable to be a minor anymore and the network would start losing security so finally seeing multiple days over you know past couple months where more of the block of a Miner's revenue for mining a block was from the transaction fees as opposed to the block rewards is really really cool and it gives us this in a way for us to Envision how Bitcoin can be uh sustainable and have sustainable security into the future so shout out ordinals um you know there's a lot of hate for them but at the end of the day I think in my head anyone who says that ordinals are not bad for Bitcoin is mentally ill has something wrong with them because um this is really really really good I think Riot's pretty interesting too just want to call out the fact that you know they once the electricity prices in Texas get to like a certain ridiculous P like point they just sell that extra energy capacity back to the grid and that's like another way that miners are starting to like scale their revenue and diversify their their revenue I guess I should say uh through different mechanisms as opposed to just directly mining Bitcoin and I think we'll see a lot more of that I think that's the beginning of a bigger Trend and not just like some oneoff use case I also add that I think there's obviously the big Catalyst for Bitcoin in terms of the ETF flows but also like Bitcoin really didn't have anything other than Bitcoin last cycle where this cycle you have like L2 ordinal like different like VMS made for Bitcoin and probably like one of the best ways to get exposure to that other than Bitcoin itself is this Bitcoin miners who will benefit from all of the ecosystem activity that developer mind share the additional transaction fees and there's a great Spartan report that they put out in December last year with basically an overview of the entire Bitcoin ecosystem including like ordinal infrastructure LT VMS whatever and I feel like it's definitely worth paying attention to not just like Bitcoin the asset but also Bitcoin the ecosystem what's up everyone March is approaching fast and I want to give you another reminder not to miss out on D London it is coming it's right around the corner and it's in March from the 18th to the 20th we have fre full days of content this is your chance to bump shoulders with some of the world's top Executives and have open dialogue with both attendees and speakers we're going to be focusing on a range of topics that I'll let Ren discuss for you first on the list we have Bitcoin Catalyst the Haring and spot ETF next we have a view from the buy side from investors on things like strategy portfolio allocation and more we also have a topic on Ras tokenization and stable points which I think we can all agree are going to pay a large roow in crypto future we'll also talk about global regulatory framework like compliance best practices and the evolution of global standards that are shaping the global investment landscape we'll also have someone from the institutional front to talk about infrastructure such as Banking and payments with financial giants like visa and JP Morgan and last on the list the macro case for digital assets so don't miss out on this Monumental event seats are limited so be sure to register today by hitting the link in the description and using the promo code 0x10 to save 10% on tickets see you in London next uh we'll pass it off to Matt who you got the Hy Throne I also have a cool Throne today um so I'm going to hold Arc 21 shares in the cool Throne they've recently added some language to their ethereum ETF application that includes uh you know the ability for them to stake the assets to drive more Revenue to Holders of their EF if it gets approved this is really really cool um basically you know if you hold Arc 21 shares ethereum ETF if it gets approved and launches you'll also receive staking rewards so not only does this mean you know potentially a good way to to get exposure to ethereum or at least if uh you know I don't think anyone would want to hold EFS that didn't have that exposure at least no one in this room would so very good for for us but also interesting and amazing to see institutions you know wanting to be involved in staking um being sophisticated enough to have the infrastructure to do so so very very cool good for Youk 21 shares and uh hopefully that you know we see this narrative start to kick off throughout the year whether it be you know this month next month or Q2 Q3 I think that ethereum will have its moment in the spotlight um I don't necessarily know if it's going to be the the best performer throughout the whole year but I do think definitely EF something that's imminently going to start being talked about and Arc 21 chair is probably at the lead of it yeah one thing that's interesting about this is wondering what uh staking provider they're going to opt for you know is it going to be coinbase e because if so then it's going to feed coinbase revenues and then coinbase stock will continue to rip or they could just do their own thing with like figment but then you have to wonder at what point do people deem something like Leo to be safe enough to institutionally stake Assets in like when they want to sidestep some of those coin Bas coinbase eth fees and get something that's a little more EV another thing that's important about this is just the development of DVT especially with someone like obal Labs bringing their chairin or Karen client to Market I don't know how to pronounce it um so far only ether fi is using obal so far and that's the only like well there's also SSV but so there's two DVT plays on the market right now and I think prioritizing validator uptime and just Geographic dispersion is really important especially as more and more institutional assets come in the LST angle is actually really interesting to me because my main qualm with it was you're going to have to have a certain amount of liquidity so like I thought maybe like it would only be allowed to be like 10 15 or Max like 20% of assets under management to be actually Stak because if you get into a scenario where everyone's selling and then you have a long withdrawal Quee then obviously you don't have the underlying to sell in order to make sure you're you're even on the books or maybe they could do some hedging through derivatives I don't really know but the liquid staking angle is pretty interesting just because you'd have that added liquidity obviously then you introduce Peg strength uh risk but nonetheless feel like that'd be a much more attractive Avenue to go and obviously bullish lstd providers yeah I'm actually going to talk about the DVT angle too because I think that's also very interesting if you're you know securing very very large amounts of e Stak it makes sense to be using a DVT solution so obal and SSV which are really haven't had so much um you know haven't really been looked at or really uh caught a narrative yet definitely could be a catalyst these e eth ETFs for for them if there is any Partnerships there there is also a third play outside of SSV and obal that's Diva um so obal does not have a token interesting one to potentially uh Farm because likely they will have a token in the future D.A does have a token but it is not transferable so you can't buy it can't sell it but um they did like an airdrop a few months back to I believe holders of LSD tokens and you know a few other parties but D.A is actually like an LSD DVT solution so it's got instead of just being a DVT layer where you know uh anyone can go and launch their own validators with this technology that have multiple node operators for a single validator with Diva it's actually the full stack all the way up to the LSD token itself um so yeah would definitely be paying attention to that space as the ethereum ETF narrative potentially gets closer to you know become catalyzing and being being a catalyst for these DBT protocols I'm not sure if I'm thinking about this completely wrong but assuming Arc Stakes like some portion of their e in this e ETF in to something um isn't like the ETF stock or like shares off the ETF kind of a liquid staking token because you can use that you can like borrow margin against it like that would have its own peeg like I have no clue how to think about like the liquidity and like Peg risk given that now there's like a offchain LST with like a onchain like staking component and I probably need to think that through a bit more but I think that would be like a really really interesting Dynam I also wonder if Lio would ever introduce like a institutional version of Lio where only institutions can stake they have like a wh listed validator set rather than eventually expanding to like 5,000 validators kind of similar to how like say a two years ago launched the arc which never really turned out to be anything but that was like just for institutions only because institutions do have very stringent requirements on what they can do right like for example if you're institution you're listed I don't think you can interact with any contract that has had a tornado cash asset like even just pass through it before so if like I troll I send some like tornado cash e to like a specific validator like is a regulator going to come after me and I don't think that that's something that an ETF issuer or like a custody I don't think that's something that they're going to want to deal with so I feel like they're going to adopt institutional Solutions and for now it seems like coinbase is the safest option obious they have like uh like that 25% I think take rate but also you know they're like a qualified custodian and there's only so many qualified custodians within the us as a coin stockholder the thought of a 25% fee revenue on ethereum held at an ETF is just absolutely uh puts a smile on my face yeah I agree with your last Point too Ren in terms of like having to be ofac compliant aware and maybe having like a wh listed validators set for those kind of solutions although I don't think any of us here are super keen on that idea but unfortunately I think that's just like the reality of the situation and back to your comment on like does this become an LST that is really interesting it's like we just talked with stride you guys just heard that in the dydx segment a minute ago and are they going to take the eth and just put it back in the trust and then your Shares are redeemable for more like I yeah I I don't understand how that'll actually look in practice but it'll be fun to watch watch that play out all right Spencer you want to hit us with the last hoty Kone yeah so this actually continues to play into the eth ETF thing Denon is set to go live on eth mainnet on March 13th and this is a huge moment for the ethereum community who has just been bag holding while everything else rips for the past few months but um one thing that's neat about this is it it has EIP 4788 which is going to kind of replace the um the need for custom oracles for liquid staking Solutions because right now Lio igen layer Etc they have to use these complex oracles that are also a risk for um reporting Beacon chain validator data so this is a a huge like necessity before you start seeing this broader staking narrative pick up especially with like igen layer set to like actually provide some avss in the near future another cool thing is obviously EIP 4844 which is going to introduce data blobs and that's going to kind of set the foundation for dank sharting in the future uh I think L2 tokens are kind of primed to rip off of this because transaction fees are going to go down significantly and hopefully you see some applications arise that will just bring on a whole new wave of entrance to the l2s especially as eth mainnet just continues to get more and more congested as more people come on with the price going up um one final EIP that I'm looking at is transient storage which is going to lay the foundation for UNIS swap V4 which is moving to a Singleton contract and it's going to have its own flash accounting system but basically it's just going to like optimize smart contract development to where you can do a lot more interesting things within the contract I think out of like 44 which is like the very obvious one I think EIP 11153 is probably the one that I'm most excited about I'll be interested to see a few things I think ambient launched on ethereum after they launch on scroll and so it'll be interesting because amban also uses like a Singleton contract model so it'll be interesting to see like how does ambient volume or like liquidly respond to EIP 1153 or more specifically un Sol V4 going live another thing that I'm excited about is UN solt V4 hooks I feel like hooks are maybe like the frames moment for faster it allows like anyone to build kind of anything that you can code right depending on like specific events happening whether that's like depositing liquidity withdrawing liquidity tipping to liquidity providers or making a swap and I think there are some really interesting hook ideas that are going to appear over the next day half of your though that may have implications both for liquidity providers sort of like top of Block M and also sort of just general uni ecosystem so to say because it goes from like a DEX to like this a crazy ecosystem where people can build like all of these different hooks but I also with that think with that comes like a whole host of problems like what if someone just copy and paste a hook governance turning on a fe switch but that's probably a problem for later I just agree with pibbles on the the L2 token narrative I mean mainnet is literally completely unusable right now like there's nothing going on in G at 100 plus like that's insane to me I've been seeing a lot more cries on Twitter of why don't we like try and optimize the Bas layer a little bit more within Denon or like maybe like an upgrade after that and I I would personally really like to see that because you just can hardly even Bridge through ethereum without paying a $50 transaction fee and that's just horrible ux yeah I'm pretty done doing things on ethereum to be honest like it's just it prices me out or maybe it's not even pricing me out and it's rather just the ux on l2s and on salana and everywhere else is just so much better at this point um especially for cross chain stuff like you mentioned you can't Bridge through ethereum like I have assets on ethereum and I want to go buy something on arbitrum looking at you know current rates like $50 00 fee um so yeah I do agree I think there has been some conversation about um do doing small things to help with making uh you know block space a little bit more abundant post enun uh this would not be anything including an upgrade in Fork it would rather be at the validator client level the node client level um so hopefully we see more progress there I know Justin Drake and vitalic were both in support of it so likely that's a very good foundation for it to succeed in making block space more abundant I would just agree with both of you guys like l2s and Unis swap are both poised to catch narrative with Denon and will most definitely be uh getting myself exposed to those tokens at some point in the future at least for a short period of time uh Unis swap specifically I think is kind of slept on I think everyone knows or at least not everyone at all but everyone within our in our Circle knows about the how dun impacts l2s but I think it's a little bit less known about how it impacts Unis swap so I do think that's a very interesting angle to look at it from all right well I think that's a good place to call it we got a a quicker episode today but uh thanks for coming on pbes and Matt we will see you guys here next week hey everyone thanks for watching today's zerox research episode I wanted to take a second and remind you about an upcoming 2024 digital asset Summit in London this March seats are limited so hit the link in the description and use the promo code 0x10 to save 10% on tickets see you in [Music] London

========================================

--- Video 147 ---
Video ID: fjXkg8vGHfo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fjXkg8vGHfo
Title: Will Farcaster Retain Crypto Natives and Reach Mainstream Adoption? | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-02-07 19:29:08 UTC
Description:
In today's analyst roundtable Sam, Ren, Westie, and Brick dive into the biggest news this week including the rise of farcaster, Jupiter's historic airdrop and much more. They unpack Solana mobile's 60k unit sales milestone and whether growing LST protocols are sustainable. Other topics covered include Apecoin DAO's vote on which L2 to launch on, Clusters' partnership with GoDaddy, and an in-depth discussion on Spark Protocol's growth in the MakerDAO ecosystem. Stick around for all of this and much more!

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice.  
- -
Follow Westie: https://twitter.com/westiecapital
Follow Brick: https://twitter.com/0x___Brick
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X10 to get 10% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
See you there! 

Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Timestamps:
0:00 Introduction 
1:21 Jupiter Airdrop Review
3:17 Solana Mobile 60k Units Sold
7:07 LRT Expansion
11:48 DAS London Ad 
12:55 Apecoin DAO Voting on L2 Launch
16:41 Clusters Partners with GoDaddy
18:09 dYdX Segment: Chaos Labs
23:07 Spark Protocol Growth
29:26 Farcaster's Rise
43:56 Stride Airdrop for stTIA Holders
51:27 Crypto the Game
- -
Check out Blockworks Research today! Research, data, governance, tokenomics, and models – now, all in one place 

Blockworks Research: https://www.blockworksresearch.com/ 
Free Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
I think the reason why you have a lot of a Crypton native audience currently is because they feel like they're early to something which is like so native to these crypto audiences who are farming air drops or you know trying to be early to a certain token or meme token like that's really what's being monetized right now is being early and as obviously we go months from now I guess the question is how does farcaster retain the audience what's up everyone welcome back to another episode of zerx research March is just around the corner and I want to make sure to give you a quick reminder to not top ticket your prices of your D London tickets if you use codes 0x10 at checkout you can lock in a 10% discount on your ticket don't miss out on your chance to get ahead of the curve I'll see you in London what's up everyone welcome back to another episode of zerx research the blockworks research team is back to bring you another episode of an analyst round table today is Monday February 5th so this will be airing on Wednesday February 8th or February 7th actually and uh we're joined by Brick and Westy to jam on the latest Market happenings also just a little update Dan has actually moved over to light speed for the time being so he will only be uh hopping on in the capacity that he's able to but hopefully we'll get them back over the coming weeks here um but ren do you want to kick us off with some uh news and governance updates yeah uh for sure it's been a relatively buy week as usual um first of all we have the Jupiter airdrop which happened on Wednesday I think in general from the network perspective that went pretty fine I think we saw some like degraded Network performance it obviously took you a while to claim your fair job and maybe sell it but overall I think the network sort of like remained resilient I do know that Jupiter got a bit of community push back I don't think a lot of people understood their launch Pro Dynamics and how the drup the team was basically putting up 2.5% of the total drup supply for sale through the launch F between the prices of 0.4 and 0.7 which equates to a fdv of 4 to 7 billion and so I think the community pushed back because they basically thought all right we're going to do an aird drop but meanwhile the Jupiter team's also going to cash out at the same time but I think like they got a bit of flack or a bit too much Flack granted there was some communication missteps or maybe perhaps too much communication from the founder but overall I think it was a relatively successful aw from the Network's perspective anyone have any thoughts there I have a question so why exactly were transactions failing to go through is that more of a scheduler problem or more of the lack of like a like a really well- defined fee mechanism I would say it's probably a combination of everything one thing is like definitely like the scheduler and how it's like stly nondeterministic that should be partially fixed in 1.18 or at least like improved so that's probably one thing I think another thing was was just like the RPC you use I think we saw tweets where like if you use the default RPC probably your transaction didn't go through but as soon as you switch to for example like helios's RPC your transactions went through and just overall like Network congestion I would say but yeah next on the list sticking with salana we have the salana mobile I think they just announced that they reached 60,000 uh sorry 60,000 units in sales which far eclipses their previous round one which I think they limited to 20,000 it'll be interesting to see whether they can keep up with sort of the manufacturing capacity but I have no clue about global supply chain so I'll let the salana foundation figure that one out but I mean it's interesting to see that like that's a pretty good amount of money for the salana foundation assuming they're the ones to sort of like build and launch this product and I think other than like Hardware wallets aside it's interesting to see a company make their first big like hard Hardware push will salana one they become the apple of web 3 I'm not sure but I think internally within the block Works researching we've always had out got feeling that you know one of these like large like either like protocols or companies probably more so coinbase was going to launch a hardware product sooner rather than later yeah I think this is just a good move on both sides both from the salana foundation themselves it's a good Revenue driver as well as a way to start sort of the mobile movement within salana um and then on the other side of things it makes sense why there's a lot of pre-orders I think it's pretty obvious it's going to be plus EV with the amount of air drops you're going to get potentially Bonk coming to these addresses as well um so yeah I just think it's a no-brainer overall and I mean we're going to have to wait a year until these things are actually in people's hands um but at the same time yeah I definitely understand the move here toy actually talked about this in a recent light uh speed podcast and if I understood him correctly uh the foundation is producing these phones at a loss uh and it's more about like trying to penetrate the market because I guess the problem here is that uh it's going to be or maybe better to let him explain it so it's a good idea to uh go and listen to that podcast but I think the main problem is that it's kind of hard to rent seek if you want to call it that um for the phone like it's going to be hard to basically take a cut out of the uh fees generated through the like app store um because of a certain like relationship between the app and then the end user um or if you compare against like a a app builder that doesn't really once the app is built um it doesn't cost anything to like you know produce some more units you you can decrease your margin uh without becoming unprofitable as long as you're yeah basically that but then with these phones like even if you increase the supply but uh there's always going to be this certain cost of like increasing the supply sorry I explained this really badly but that's basically the short no worries but yeah I think to totally has the end goal of like at least I think he memes about it but I don't know how serious he is about it about disrupting the Google and apple Dooly for context they both charge I think 30% on any revenue generated through your mobile app so for example if you're cash of clans someone pays $10 for an like expansion pack or like additional gems I don't know what they call it these days um Google and apple basically take $3 off that but yeah if you're too poor to buy a salana phone just get a salana sticker and stick it on your phone it works a little differently but same brand um next up we have LRT protocols expanding I think LRT protocols have seen an incredible amount of growth like puffer so their TVO has gone like pretty vertical really really fast um and now some of these L Protocols are expanding that to L2 so for example Renzo is expanding their Stak to l2s I think starting off with arbitrum through Conex Network I feel like there are some potential risks there with allowing like sort of like users to St through an L2 but I would love to like hear your thoughts on like do you think these L protocols I hear to stay is it too fast too quick does anyone really understand the risk involved I think they're here to stay and I think we're at like literally like inning two or three of this to be honest I think it's going to get pretty crazy uh I'm not personally partaking in like the the reaking protocol or the the liquid reaking protocols right now mainly because I'm a little bit worried just about how like the points allocation with igen Lair ends up going like I don't know if you know if you have 200 points on Renzo of Ian Lair points and 200 Igan lir points in like an eoa that you deposited directly into IG lir I just don't know if you'll ultimately get the same igen allocation once that air drop actually happens and in my opinion it's like Igan is definitely want launching at like a 20 billion fdv or something like that and I don't know about the LRT protocols as much so I just kind of think it's a little bit risky to to gamble on that I mean I'm sure it'll be fine because I mean obviously Ian Lair is incentivized to to make sure that all the people who deposited in these LRT Protocols are are happy because ultimately they're customers of of igir as well but it's just a little bit dicey when you have such a layup on the Igan lar drop in my opinion yeah I definitely agree with everything Sam said I also think the end state of these LRT protocols is that they just can keep competing with one another to get more users yield Etc in this move of Renzo expanding to l2s is just one step and what Sam said is like the first inning of what these LT Protocols are going to do but I think eventually you know as we start to see riskier and riskier protocols pop up the fact that L lrts themselves already stack risk uh smart contract risk on top of smart contract risk I just think the end state of these things after a couple years when they're all competing for the most yield with all the users that some of these are going to end up uh blowing up and contributing to um yeah pretty big uh blow ups within the ethereum space so I'm definitely cautious about using the LRT protocols uh and it's hard to to tell who is really winning the race at the moment since I keep seeing another one pop up every day uh that increases their tvl so yeah that's that's how I'm thinking about the LRT space at the moment what I don't understand there is like how many of these protocols do we need number just keeps going up and up and what are really the competitive advantages there like you being seen as the safest project I would reckon and you having like the most liquid underlying um that you're issuing so like based on those two factors it's yeah most likely going to be similar to the LSD market and you're just going to have like a few winners and then all of these other projects drop off also I at least I hope that at some point crypto Market becomes more efficient at pricing risk so like if a one project pays out let's say 10 basis points more than another but it's mechanism is much more riskier like at least I'd hope that people still choose the project that pays less yield but on a risk adjusted basis is better yeah definitely agree with all your point I mean it'll be interesting to see the market dynamics play out but I think like L it's should be uh like winner takes off or like a few winners will dominate the Market but I think there's a Nuance there in that different Alles have different ABS exposure so it's not exactly like pain vanilla like a the I'm staking where like everyone has the exact same risk exposure different outties will have different risk exposures so maybe maybe we'll see a world in which there like multiple like dominant aots what's up everyone March is approaching fast and I want to give you another reminder not to miss out on D London it is coming it's right around the corner and it's in March from the 18th to the 20th we have three full days of content this is your chance to bump shoulders with some of the world's top Executives and have open dialogue with both attendees and speakers we're going to be focusing on a range of topics that I'll let Ren discuss for you first on the list we have Bitcoin Catalyst the Haring and spot ETF next we have a view from the buy side from investors on things like strategy portfolio allocation and more we also have a topic on Aras tokenization and stable coins which I think we can all agre are going to pay a large vote in crypto future we'll also talk about global regulatory Frameworks that comply best practices and the evolution of global standards that are shaping the global investment landscape we'll also have someone from the institutional front to talk about infrastructure such as Banking and payments with financial giants like visa and JP Morgan and last on the list the macro case for digital assets so don't miss out on this Monumental event seats are limited so be sure to register today by hitting the link in the description and using the promo code 0x10 to save 10% on tickets see you in London moving on to our next news we have apoin L2 um they're basically there's an ongoing vote in the Dow as to which L2 that they want to launch on there's a few options I think one of them is polygon one of them is optimism one of them is arbitrum and one of them is ZK sync there's a few like there's a slight controversy there because polygon bought a significant amount of ape and they are using that to vote within this proposal as to like which R up stack that they should use I think it got a bit of push back personally I don't think it's that bad you're buying like quote unquote equity in a company you're using that to like basically partially decide the direction of like a governance vote not that much different from like a shareholders vote and obviously you would do so in a Direction that's beneficial to your own company you know like I'm not going to like be a Manufacturing Company buy stock in Apple and then use it to like uh choose another like manufacturing supplier that makes zero sense so I don't think like it's one of if anything like I think it's better than trafi at least like you get the transparency that you know like polygon bought x amount of a if they're using it to vote on this proposal rather than like all of this happening behind closed doors you have no idea who's like voting um but other than ape there's also been a lot of l2s that are trying to quote unquote incentivize treasure da to build a L2 under stack for example ZK sync optimism and Scot so I mean like it kind of just seems like good oldfashioned BD Wars is happening again but this time it's for protocols to build an L2 on your roll up stack rather than just building on your L1 for example I'll be interested in hearing how you guys think this plays out like is there a winner or is it just who has the most money I don't know one would hope that it's the best deck that wins but I'm not quite sure about the fact that you can just or I'm not sure I agree with the fact that it's a transpar ENT way for companies to operate uh that be be being being able like just buying tokens of the market and immediately go and vote with those because yeah actually I don't know how it works with companies but at least when a fund buys a large allocation of shares they have to like uh make an announcement about it and then the market has time to react and blah blah blah meanwhile here yes you can see if somebody's buying the tokens but you can just do it immediately and I guess there are really no restrictions so in the worst case scenario let's say a few projects are like neck to neck and then somebody just decides to acquire some tokens on the market and like push over the vote which would not be ideal in my opinion yeah that's definitely a fa take as far as thinks on the new segment we have Elixir Elixir is like a decentralized market making protocol and they are setting up PO for rabbit X on February 6 so it could be a potential play if you want the Stark air drop while also sort of farming the elixir farm at the same time Sam was there anything you wanted to add there no I just think it's a pretty good play honestly like people are looking for things to do on Stark net that token is coming that token is coming soon and uh it's a good per platform from what I've been told I haven't actually used it myself but if you look at the daily volume leaderboards it's pretty much every day rabidex hyper liquid dydx V4 V3 and vertex at the top five so definitely like a a promising protocol and worth using if you want to trade yeah lastly for the new segment we have clusters which is sort of like a multi-chain ens or domain name using layer zero uh as an underlying technology I think youve seen a relatively large amount of activity within like these like onchain names recently especially with forecaster which will dive into a lot more later seeing strong growth but also I think ens recently announced a partnership just this morning with god daddy so I haven't read into what the partnership entails but I would guess you can use your ens as a domain name which is like pretty cool if you buy like an ens then you like own the domain name and you know you can set up a website under your ens so I think that's really interesting to see yeah I like this idea too like I don't know exactly how clusters Works underneath the hood but I do know like it's a pain in the ass when I'm like dealing between a phantom wallet and a metamask a rabby wallet and I have to like remember the names from or the addresses from chain to chain it'd be really nice if I just had you know Sam and I could just send I'm sure I wouldn't actually get the one Sam that's only three letters and I'm sure someone would grab it before I did but nonetheless it would be nice to have like one domain name that I could send across chains to um just identify my addresses MH yeah well all right next we have a quick word from chaos Labs thanks to our fantastic sponsor dydx this week we have om CEO of chaos Labs on for our dydx segment quick starters what is chaos lab's 20 million launch incentives for dydx and do you mind giving us a quick rundown on how it's done so far yeah the $20 million liquidity incentive um or launch incentive program for dydx is a program meant to bootstrap liquidity and encourage migration uh to the new dydx chain from previous versions like V3 uh the idea here is to incentivize early adopters who are driving volume on the platform and driving organic flow um that's high level the program is structured across seasons and should run around six months um and the incentives are distributed in dydx tokens uh through governance at the end of each season you really can't argue with the fact that the incentives of worked pretty well uh so far but I'm curious on the market maker side because a lot of the critiques and worries heading into V4 was that market makers wouldn't want to set up the new infra has has this actually been what you've seen or do you think most market makers have successfully Market migrated over by now so the volume is has been really really impressive like if you compare um around the current time frame the the volume that ID xchain is doing versus other prevalent uh Perpetual protocol it's been number one for a lot of the time uh since the launch of the program so I think those concerns have been put to rest um and the incentive programs is actually performing and serving its purpose in incentivizing people to migrate over and giving them sufficient motivation so there's still room to grow um and we're seeing that happen week over week but the the start has been very very strong and promising so focusing on the statistics right um what type of numbers have you seen so far are there any any outlier statistics that perhaps you weren't expecting we would love to get us sort of like a rundown so the last right now we're on season two uh we've seen on the dydx Chain over almost 22 billion in trading volume across 34 different markets uh over 2,000 uh Traders and 1,100 market makers have been earning points through the program that we're administrating um and then there's some a lot more interesting data on like the performance of trading traders in the market like liquidations and so on I think what's really also nice to see here is amount of deposits so we spoke about new infrastructure and having to migrate and all of these things well in the early weeks we've already seen over 40 million usdc deposits on the dyd exchange and then I do want to ask a little bit about wash trading what is you guys' methodology or how are you guys going to try and combat that because obviously in crypto whenever there's incentives there's people who want to try and extract those incentives in the most efficient by let's talk about what was trading is or or at least how we're defining it so basically when you're administrating a program like this everybody knows that in crypto farming is a really big U part trying to get the points trying to get the airdrop allocation um and really it's hard to differentiate between users who are organic and supporting the the platform and there because they find Value and just folks that are either sting a Bots or there to kind of maximize on that airdrop allocation um with the wash training module of chaos Labs we make that distinction and differentiation uh so we run several different algorithms that are rooted in the latest acad a research and how to detect watch trading with sophisticated metrics and conditions uh we do an analysis on on basically graphs uh in the trading venues so basically takers and makers um and then towards the end we're able to see if there are any Cycles so so a really really naive example and I'll show this now when I pull up my screen is two traders who are trading back and forth their p&l will stay net neutral um throughout the the trading season or throughout different positions but they're doing incredible amount of volume and this is typically something uh that we Define as wash trading and we don't want to incentivize it or encourage it so there's a blog post about it on the chos blog we also go into detail about it on the dydx Forum and we kind of give some intuition for how the algorithm work how all the different algorithms work and how we're detecting cycles and graphs yeah that makes a lot of sense and I'm sure there's you know can't really fit it into a five minute segment and how extensive this uh this wash trading detection actually goes but I'm glad to see that you guys are actually taking a thoughtful approach breaking this up into Seasons kind of doing retroactive rewards based on activity and doing your best to reward the behavior that you want to see but I do believe that's all the time we have for today so Omar thank you so much for coming on if you want to leave the audience with uh where they can learn more about chaos Labs dydx we can link to that stuff in the show notes after after uh after we're done recording here for sure first of all thank you for having me I really enjoyed it if you want to learn more about chaos Labs the easiest is Twitter chaos laabs or on our website chaos laabs XYZ we're always happy to talk to builders uh thanks for having me today yeah of course let's get on over to hot seat and cool Throne all right back to the hot seat cool Throne segment this week I think we'll let wesy go first I know Wes's got some cool data that he wants to show so Wesley please go ahead I'll share my screen for you yeah appreciate it uh in the cool Throne this week I have spark protocol which I've been seeing a lot on my timeline recently so forther a little clarification spark is a subd under maker Dow uh it's essentially a money market similar to a I believe it's a fork of a V3 but they actually have a direct deposit module from maker uh into the money market so users can borrow die against it um but yeah spark has had an immense rise over the past nine months I believe it it launched in May of last year and now has over were I think $3.4 billion in supplied value and $2.2 billion in borrowed value which you can see on our blockworks research analytics page that Ren pulled up um for those watching on YouTube um but yeah this this rise has been obviously attributed to plugging directly into maker but they're also in the process of what they call pre- farming for their token or users that are uh supplying volatile assets and borrowing d are able to earn up to 30 like a a pool of 30 million spark tokens which represents 2% of the total Supply after four years of farming um and from there we can expect subow farming to commence in May of this year so coming up in a couple months and the way that works is the first two years 500 million of the subd tokens will be given to Farmers um with 350 million of those going to uh the stable coin Farmers so not die but there their rebranding die to new stable uh which is yet to be named and then 150 million of that 500 million is going to the new government's token that's replacing mkr um and then from there the following two years after that you have 250 million split up the same way evenly across the stable coin in the new governance token and then the remaining four years 125 million are split up and so I think obviously with Sparks immense growth over the past nine months we can expect there'll be a lot of eyeballs on subd farming when it goes live um people are obviously farming as much as they can right now for even such a small amount of the spark Supply that once you know sub farming starts I think there's going to be a lot of eyeballs I think you know maker is obviously going to benefit on the back of this given that there's portion of the subd farming going to those that want to use maker and yeah I just think you know spark protocol is killing it their top eight in D tvl overall and didn't exist a year ago so yeah I don't know if you guys have any thoughts on spark I think the narrative is definitely there after the January 1 especially after the January 31st FC meeting where I think jvon pow was a little more hawkish than expected and I think maybe the market is realizing that we may not get as many Cuts as they thought we would so obviously with higher interest rates for longer that benefits make it out just from off like increase interest revenues especially from all of their rwas and I think that natur really carries over to spark but on top of that you also see leverage or stable coin Supply starting to come back right if I'm not wrong like December and January was one of the first months where us saw a growth in the stable coin Supply whereas like in the previous one year it's like straight up being a down only chart and so that bols well for maker Dow in addition usct I think hit a absur market cap like 97 billion and I think the statistic was that usct made or like tedra specifically made more money than the entire like Goldman sack like usct made 2.2 billion Gman Sachs made two billion in Q4 and usct is probably run by like one 100 with the Manpower and resources of Gman sex so it's really interesting to see all of that play out especially like onchain in the form of Makow yeah one one thing maybe worth noting is that if you think about for example holding usdc or borrowing Dy or like creating a vault and then taking up D like those are two different things so kind of for D to grow um big time or a lot uh the markets like demand for leverage has to go up because otherwise the like circulating Supply kind of doesn't increase um but it will be interesting to see now that if that kind of Paradigm starts again where I guess we some are already saying that we are in a bull market and it's going to get much better from here than I think D could see huge growth when like people want more leverage and now there's an even easier it's much easier to borrow to spark for the Cal than it is to set up your own Vault or whatever yeah I think Spark's going to be a home run I remember we had Sam mcferson on one of the co-founders of spark or contributor I'm not really sure what his title is at the exact moment but he definitely had some cool things to say and I recommend going back and listening to that one for sure but I mean like you said Ren just to recap rates are higher for longer um the demand for leverage is returning and you have subow tokens as well as almost like a split for the maker token so it'll look cheaper on paper to to retail and you get a fresh chart so as stupid as that sounds we've seen it worked like way too many times in the past to to fade it to be honest but unfortunately us people can't farm that airdrop unfortunately yeah there's definitely a reason why like even in the world of equities they do stock bids all the time but Sam who do you have in the hoto couton this week yeah I definitely picked the easiest one of the week I've got foraster it's a social media protocol SLB backend built on uh optimism mainnet so forecaster is like the back end of the protocol and it's essentially just the account management so you sign up by calling the contract on op mainnet and in return your wallet gets assigned a forecaster ID or an FID as they call them for short and this process unfortunately requires like multiple steps and transactions and you need to like rent storage add a key um and a couple other things which is kind of cumbersome so like you can use a uh ens domain which they support as Ren alluded to earlier if you want an onchain solution but the fids are actually offchain and stored between the peer-to-peer network of nodes but regardless the clients make it a lot easier to sign up warcast is the most popular client right now and it's a a blend between like Twitter and Reddit and I'm not going to lie I tried it last week and it is very smooth like I find the channels super super compelling much better than Twitter lists I feel like that was like their failed attempt at at Channel honestly um and uh it basically just streamlines the account creation process and you give that uh client a key to tr transmit transaction data on your behalf which is basically propagated to other Hub operators um so basically you have apps which are like the clients that you're interacting with at the top of the stack and then you have actual forecaster for account management at the bottom of the stack and then you have the hubs in between them basically propagating information that's sent from users of the different clients to each other uh and that stuff's technically off chain but it it's still pretty damn decentralized like they call it a sufficiently decentralized social network and I would actually agree with that Testament we saw warp cast go down because it's experienced such explosive growth but you know your data was always there and propagated between the network of hubs um and you could have interacted with any other client that's built on farcaster despite warcast being down so that actually is a huge improvement over the current things we see I will say I'm a little bit apprehensive just because we saw the friend Tech height we saw threads for like a minute everyone was like ah like let's switch over to to threads from Twitter and it you know didn't actually pan out so I I don't know if it's here to stay but it definitely feels a little bit more special than any of the things I just mentioned or lens no shade to lens but the ux over there just isn't that good in my opinion like with too much onchain stuff I think this model is a lot more solid I guess um the question just comes down to for me is how are the Hub operators going to be incentivized to store and propagate all this data as you know it actually grows that was like kind of my main tip with noer back in the day and this seems a little bit better because people are paying to rent when they set up an account with h warp cast so maybe you know if you have a successful client it could be pretty cool to see the competition between the different clients um nevertheless I think it's going to like I guess spur Innovation at the app lir uh for for different social media channels all built on foraster which is super interesting another thing that I've got to mention when talking about warcast is frames which is basically an extension of Facebook's open graph protocol so basically in short they allow creators to embed applications directly into an iframe within the warcast UI um so instead like normally on Twitter you know you see a link it gets butchered by the algo uh you click on it takes you somewhere else you got to maybe buy something log in create an account check out it's this whole process this kind of alleviates all that you can just click on uh the frame and then since you have a wallet associated with it you can just check out right there which is pretty neat I could see a ton of use cases coming from this like purchasing items like I mentioned or using an application like a game without actually leaving the warp cast UI so that's pretty promising I guess my take on this is it's got a long way to go like personally for me the the frames don't work half the time to be honest and I'm not sure what I'm doing wrong maybe I'm just an idiot but definitely isn't super smooth yet um but I can see like how they'd be really good for gaming or nft mins or community building so still wrapping my head around warcast but I think it's going to be a pretty big deal um on top of that like meme coins over there have gone you know 10 to 100x over the last month or so since people started using it uh a lot of people are tipping people in this token called dgen which is pretty funny um and I also think uh a good way to play the adoption of it is probably just longing op not Financial advice but metrics on optimism are going to look good right as we head into 4844 and we have a e spot ETF narrative narrative hit uh heating up so that is my cool Throne do you guys have any takes on warp cast foraster Etc yeah I think as far from like a business model perspective I think it's fairly interesting they charge $7 a year for basically storing all of that data and with that $7 you get 5,000 cast which is basically their version of tweets you get 2,500 reactions 2,500 links 50 profile data and 50 verifications and anything that exceeds the thresholds that I just mentioned basically gets pruned um kind of similar to like blob pruning I guess um and you can pay more for more storage so in the sense like forcaster is probably a social network with I want to say 20,000 followers I haven't checked the Dune dashboards yet and it's turning on it's like Fe switch from day one you know if you people are willing to pay $8 a month for Twitter premium but still have to deal with like millions and millions of like Bots spam scams like surely you'll be willing to pay $7 to get access to foraster on the other hand I don't know what their da costs are how much they're paying to like post all this data but I feel like this is kind of like the other use case of sort of Da layers right there's like so such an abundance of Da and on one hand like it's going to take us a long time for us to reach a world where we have like thousands of rollups or maybe not that long um but decentralized social media or like even decentralized identity seems like one of the solutions that's going to fill up that da layer and it'll be interesting to see whether faster basically fills up that Da Gap and how much data they really produce and how much they able to monetize you know if they're able to get 10 million users on F that's like 70 million a year not even including I don't know maybe like some ad model where they turn on and perhaps like the ad model could be an ad model that social media or like web to social media hasn't really explored before you know like you can put ads but then the ad money goes back to for example like users through some research or whatever and it's uniquely enabled by crypto and yeah I'm just very interested to see all of these like experiments play out and the different like market dynamics of a slightly more crypto native like social media Network yeah I think the thing that I first start thinking about is like comparing this with frch and how sustainable is this but I think this this time it might be different uh because I remember with frch it was more about the underlying token me or the key mechanism that got people hooked on it and then because the product itself um wasn't that good it was hard to like you know just open the app and like continue using it but here I feel that there might be like tangible developments compared to for example Twitter or at least their potential for those and I guess as long as the teams continue developing and like smoothing out the experience and introducing all of this like new cool features then yeah I think that this uh platform could be super sticky uh but also comes down with it's so hard to bootstrap a social media site so I think it comes down to like continuing with this momentum that the platform has had during the like recent week or so yeah I personally see a lot of comparisons between forecaster and threads when it came out and that you know everyone is piling in everyone's starting from scratch and needing to build their follow is up so most of your timeline is just engagement baiting like not really quality content just whatever hits people's dopamine centers gets a bunch of likes a bunch of follows um and I also see some comparisons with frch although obviously you're not like buying and selling keys of these people but I think the reason why you have a lot of a Crypton native audience currently is because they feel like they're early to something which is like so native to these crypto audiences who are farming air drops or you know trying to be early to a certain token or meme token like that's really what's being monetized right now is being early and as obviously we go months from now I guess the question is how does foraster retain the audience like obviously this is a good bootstrapping mechanism to get a number of crypto natives on board which they've done a really good job already but how do you get people that aren't Crypt native and how do you get the crypto native people to stay and make this their home base and even if that's successful one thing I'm also thinking about is let's say crypto Twitter does migrate to something like forecaster does that sort of Silo the conversation to a new social media platform that maybe normies who are trying to learn about the space don't have access to or don't know about and so all the conversations that are happening on Twitter that they see are super low quality because all the high quality people have left so we need to make sure that we're you know controlling the narrative and getting quality information out there at the same time so yeah that those are like all my thoughts on forecaster at the moment I think I'm really excited about frames because if you think towards like web to social media right every big app that took off introduced a new like exciting media form that caught on and eventually stuck around until they reach just like viral app status right for example example Snapchat posting pictures and videos that like automatically deleted Tik Tok short form like reals be you know like the front and back camera I feel like I'm too old for all of that stuff um but foraster has the potential to do the same with frames right for example I know our big bosses Mike and Yano are really excited about the intersection of uh foraster and prediction markets so as a news and media organization maybe there's something we can do there like every time we put out like a news article you can bet on a prediction Market within a frame right we put out a prediction Mark uh we put out an article about say IP 4844 and you can predict and beted on whether you think 4844 will happen by before March or after March you know and you can extend that to like quite literally anything given the extensibility of frames for example like micro payments to read like one of to's latest articles or buying something like integrating shopping experience within a frame I feel like at some point like people are going to build Innovative enough frames that attracts an audience outside of the core crypto audience and I think it's very possible that they replicate like a cleaner less spamer like more fun version of Twitter even outside of crypto circles yeah I agree with that but then that kind of comes back to the point of like having to maintain momentum when building because I feel that you mentioned B which kind of reach some popularity but then at some point it just like plateaued I guess it really didn't um like introduce anything that new at the end of the day and okay maybe the business model was kind of broken because you had to post a picture every day of your life and like most people's lives or everyday lives probably aren't like that's super super interesting so I guess that's also a reason why the platform kind of died down but let's say forecaster comes up with something really Innovative in let maybe a year and a half but in between that time like nothing has really changed then it's going to be hard to again like um bring on new people and gain this new like hyper on the platform I think something that could be sticky for forecaster is if uh people or sorry protocols use it as a filtering mechanism for for airdrops because obviously we don't really have a a proof of human yet but I think this would at least improve an airdrop allocation you know if you're active on forecaster then you know and you can prove that and you already paid your rent storage for that year then maybe if you're on that list of users you can get an airdrop for some protocol like I'm sure we'll see some of that because we're already seeing a ton of like bounties being posted for unique ideas with frames and if you can just tap into a network of users and use a frame to provide them an experience it's like that that's very strong for community building and something that could keep people coming back well into the future in my opinion yeah as a as a closing point I think what I'm excited about is the ecosystem and the fact that like any developer can come in and build on Fame and I think just within like 24 hours of frames launching right uh this is probably organized beforehand but you saw like hacker houses in New York you saw hacker houses in SF led by for example Varian fun and Bally from base and you know like it's really like whatever you can dream of just go build it and I feel like we see a camrin explosion of like just fun Innovative frames within the next like two or three months obviously like there will be probably risk involved I wouldn't be too surprised I know this was a a point you made Sam in our warning C that like one of these frames is goingon to have like an exploited in it and no one have will have any clue on how to audit that and that'll definitely be a risk so try carefully maybe moving on to my or this week's cool TR for me uh which is tried airdropping their native token sdd to stake Thea holders um and yeah basically stride is a liquid staking cocen um IBC enabled chain which already dominates most of the like markets within the ad ecosystem um and they will drop 5 million s strd which is worth around 20 mil as we speak over the next 150 days or so uh and it's cool to see because uh in the past few weeks we've just seen more and more projects like mess around with points and like yeah we might do an airdrop at some point but here's a point program first let's see what happens uh meanwhile here the rules are like well defined and you know in advance that like the airdrop will be proportional to the holders like percentage of the total eligible stts Supply um and yeah basically St holders on stride blockchain and then those who LP on Osmos and asort neutron will be eligible with three million tokens being dropped in the first 60 days and then 2 million in the next 90 days and the drop happens on a daily basis but it takes six months after the location for the tokens to West um and yeah I think like since the LSD Market is mostly a winner takes all this is a really well thought out kind of scheme to attract Ste sticky users over a certain time period and then also yeah once people get used to or people are probably already used to using stride because of it's like large markets in this other other um Adam ecosystem projects like stri will probably do really well in the in the longer run by yeah do you guys have any opinions on this yeah I think obviously like I really like the no BS like we're just going to give out 5% of the supply to S TI uh stakers and that's like a pretty hefty amount you know but obviously with the whole like modular money narrative I would guess they're making a b that that 5% of the supply that that they're giving out is well worth it not just in terms of like any potential fee revenue from like stake Tia but also being the def fact though I'm not going to use the word canonical but maybe like preferred liquid staking issuer within like any like Cosmos or like IBC enable chain right and I think like overall the design of stride is relatively interesting from an architecture perspective right how they use like interchain accounts so that anyone can issue lsds from other external chains on stride and that's something that it it kind of feels like ethereum is struggling with these days for example like rap stake de you're seeing snapshot vote after snapshot vote people have to rely on like external bridges in order to bridge like rap stake de to say BNB chain or Avalanche whereas Cosmos like doesn't really have that problem today you know like obviously interoperability is still a big concern for ethereum and it's like rollups and there isn't a good solution there yet and Cosmos does genuinely have very interesting Tech that we'll probably get copied by ethereum at some point or later and I think stride is a great like index bet on the cosmos ecosystem like overall or like the IBC ecosystem or like the first bet that you're probably going to make is like Celestia but I think the Second Great bet would just be like whoever is going to issue all of these liquid staking tokens for all of these proof of Stak chains and it seems like stri is a clear winner right now yeah it's not even stride for all proof of stake chains like to me this announcement specifically in terms of like their raise plus the STA uh incentives to me show how much they want to penetrate the Celestia Market not just Celestia in terms of Tia but Celestia in terms of the rups built on Celestia because if you noticed in the Rays it included Neil Sani of eclipse who's building rollup on Celestia as well as s oir was building Sovereign Labs which would be a role as a service provider on Celestia and so to me stride clearly sees Celestia rollups as another place where they can sort of plant their flag um as these rollup tokens come out but also specifically with Tia obviously this is a bet on TIA becoming quote unquote modular money or Tia is used throughout rups on top of Celestia in some way shape or form and they're hoping to obviously be the number one liquid staking provider of Tia and with that comes um some pretty big advantages I think we're probably going to see some of these Celestia rollups copy the blast Playbook of having sort of native yield to their rollup uh but have that be actually an LST underlying within the bridge and obviously T is a perfect candidate for this given it'll be on many rollups it has a pretty high staking rate um and so yeah I just see this as a really great move to establish themselves within the Celestia ecosystem I do think they'll become the biggest at the very least Tia LST if not you know the LST for all these rollup tokens as well so yeah just great move overall by stride I would also just add I do strongly believe that we're going to start seeing sta get the air drops if you will you know in the past we've seen people trying Cula staking uh via staking obviously to get aird drops and I think that it makes a lot more sense to aird drop to St holders because those people are actually liquid and they can come partake in your ecosystem so I think that'll be a pretty big push moving forward as well and also helps contribute to the modular money narrative so it's just kind of in everyone's best interest to do so yeah one last point on stride is State dydx um with strides Products St dydx is basically Auto compounds the the rewards into more dydx and dydx has been doing like a pretty hefty amount of volume on V4 I think the metrics have shown Sean gr and that could be another clear winner uh in addition to St Tia but all right viick go ahead I was going to close this off by saying I realized I kept saying Adam ecosystem instead of the cosmos ecosystem so please all the cosmos homies don't come after me all right thanks Rick um last on the hot seat Kone this week on uh maybe a bit of the hot seed I would call it a crypto the game I think it's a game incubated by Deli it's basically an onchain crypto Survival game so it's basically replicating Survivor but like with a mix of like onchain elements on it um right now I think the price should be well above 100K $100,000 in E and you basically have to pay zero 0.1 e to play after you get started in a game you get assigned to a tribe and then every day your tribe stash team faces an immunity challenge ranging from competing in arcade games to going on a digital scavenger hunt and then whichever tribe wins a daily challenge gets quote unquote immunity and the other tribes have to vote some of their own players out of the game until ultimately the game is left with one player who wins the entire prize F that's not the interesting part for me I think the hot seat part was Anish um one of the founders at richro he basically added 200 contestants to the game and paid around $50,000 in doing so he instantly became the largest voter base comprising I think 40% of the player base and he said like on Twitter that he was open to alliances and he blasted all of this on Twitter through a tweet however the game developers basically commented on the street saying like did read our terms of service and then a bit later they basically revoked all of those participants or they removed all of those participants from the game and they got a lot of heat um for keeping the $50,000 that andish basically deposited in order to play that game so that was like definitely questionable but then I think Anish made a really good point right like I think onchain agents have a place to play in an onchain future obviously the first like iteration of that is probably like more so transactions based having an onchain agent control like your wallet or like a multisig stopping like malicious actions but it's not that hard to see a world in which like AI agents participate in these type of like online games or protocols um so I thought that was a really interesting like experiment so to say and I wouldn't be too surprised to see onchain AI agents get deployed more and more you're already seeing like AI agents being deployed maybe not on chain but for like air drop from protocols where they try to randomize your activities um and I think the other super interesting thing about this was that he created a prediction or not he created he took part in a prediction Market on poly market and he put up $15,000 against him winning on poy Market I think when he first tweeted about it there was a 10% odds of him winning now there's a 25% odds of him winning and like you could say that one may vote on yes initial win for crypto the game and then you use that to influence like within the game who they vote to kick out and if you bought like the yes shares then you probably wouldn't want to kick out a nich so I just thought like it's very interesting like bri mechanism so to say and I wouldn't be too surprised to see like more types of these like really interesting Vibes or like Hedges come to fruition on poy Market just given how much poy Market is taking off in overall volume especially boosted by the presidential election this year yeah I mean this is like a perfect case of where proof of personhood or maybe what Sam was talking about where linking forecaster accounts where there's probably some pratic way programmatic way to make sure there's no AI agents in this game and you don't have to rely on a terms of service it's just automatic um within the game itself that's first and foremost but second I think it's awesome what Anish is doing here I know Anish is pretty big in the mbv space as well and obviously he looked at this particular mechanism as a way to Arbitrage basically the MV between you know the winnings and uh prediction markets being able to basically create a way to have positive expected value both for himself and the rest of the players playing um I thought it was really really cool um I'm excited to see how this plays out in the end if he does win I mean it it's in every individual's best interest to basically bet for him in the prediction market and vote for him to win and they even though they lost the game they still win uh on the prediction market so I think it's pretty cool overall my thing is the game just doesn't sound very fun to me it sounds like like a Discord grind to get on a white list except you have to pay 0. one e to partake so I'm going to pass on playing but that was a very very clever use of prediction markets I agree wesy I will say I know some people that I've been playing and they said they've been saying it's super fun um but I haven't been playing myself so I can't can't say anything about that but yeah I just wanted to say that fair take I'm glad you added that color honestly because I also haven't even seen any of the games that are being played here but brick did you have something to add there yeah I was going to say that the whole prediction Market point opens up another kind of worms where like uh you might have these situations where it becomes or your EV is 100% better um in a situation where like you lose uh on the thing you're or like you win the bet but you lose on the kind of underlying thing so then suddenly you become like incentivized to kind of destroy your own action sorry that was bad explanation but let say I don't know you're a football player and then you're suddenly able to like um bet on your own game and nobody can kind of uh scream for that then you're of course like okay that's legal but you know it's kind of the same thing here in a way yeah I definitely agree on that point and I think especially in Asia you see a decent amount of like five for teams to lose already whether that's like traditional sports or like Esports so definitely something that I could see having very important implications like I don't know maybe one day a Dev who hates his job creates a prediction Market saying like will this protocol be hacked before like this state and then like I don't know maybe he buys no um maybe he buys yes and then like Hedges against himself like actually hacking the protocol or so something ridiculous like that um but on the point of like the game being for I haven't played the game myself too so I don't want to comment on that but I definitely could see that one day there's this like super viral game I don't know like maybe like Pokemon go but with like pudy penguin IP you know and then like everyone gets like permission this access to play this game and it becomes just like super crazy like viral movement you know I think like when Pokemon go first came out like no one was ready for how much it would take over the world I remember like just like do like 1 million people fting like Central Park in New York cuz there was like a Snorlax and there was just like crazy videos on their net I think it'll be really really cool to see like a movement like that happen once again but with like either Crypton native IP or facilitated by crypto rails someday you just made me think of an idea too Ren like what if you back to forast or made a client that's literally a game like there's so many different things you could build in the context of gaming and crypto and like we just haven't quite yet seen it come to fruition but I agree with you super exciting prospects yeah all right I think that's a good point to close it out if no one else has anything else to add um thank you wesy and brick for coming on this weekend see you guys next week hey everyone thanks for watching today's zerox research episode I wanted to take a second and remind you about an upcoming 2024 digital asset Summit in London this March seats are limited so hit the link in the description and use the promo code 0x10 to save 10% on tickets see you in [Music] London

========================================

--- Video 148 ---
Video ID: 2OjPnYXQKqc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2OjPnYXQKqc
Title: Analyzing Rollups-as-a-Service Business Models, Economics, and Adoption | Analyst Round Table
Published: 2024-01-31 20:13:34 UTC
Description:
In today's analyst roundtable Dan, Sam, and Ren dive into the data and metrics behind the rise of rollups-as-a-service. They analyze recent modular blockchain rollup launches on Celestia from providers like Caldera and Conduit, review adoption in terms of users and transaction data, explore concerns around long-term sustainability of fee revenue, and debate tokenomics incentives and business models. They also touch on competition from other data availability solutions like EigenDA, the strong growth of Sui, and discusses scalability considerations around block building for validators. Dive into all of this and much more!

As always remember this podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice.  
- -
Follow Dan: https://twitter.com/smyyguy
Follow Sam: https://twitter.com/swmartin19
Follow Ren: https://twitter.com/purplepill3m
Follow Blockworks Research: https://twitter.com/blockworksres

Subscribe on YouTube: https://bit.ly/3foDS38
Subscribe on Apple: https://apple.co/3SNhUEt
Subscribe on Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3NlP1hA

Get top market insights and the latest in crypto news. Subscribe to Blockworks Daily Newsletter: https://blockworks.co/newsletter/ 
- -
Join us at DAS (Digital Asset Summit) in London this March! DAS is the #1 institutional conference in crypto, hosted by Blockworks. 

Use the link below to learn more, and use 0X10 to get 10% off your ticket! Sign up now because the price goes up every month. 
See you there! 

Learn more + get your ticket here: https://blockworks.co/event/digital-asset-summit-2024-london/home
- -
Timestamps
0:00 Introduction
1:02 Uniswap DAO Goes Multichain 
6:23 LidoDAO Temp Check for BNB wstETH Bridge
9:57 Rollups as a Service Data
28:38 Token Unlocks: OP & dYdX
31:38 UMA Oracle MEV Product: OVO
33:34 dYdX Segment: Noble
40:28 Jupiter Airdrop
49:35 Unibot Launches on Solana
1:02:33 DAS London Ad
1:03:40 Polygon Aggregation Layer
1:09:36 Sui TVL 4x
- - 
Disclaimer: Nothing said on 0xResearch is a recommendation to buy or sell securities or tokens. This podcast is for informational purposes only, and any views expressed by anyone on the show are solely our opinions, not financial advice. Dan, Sam, and our guests may hold positions in the companies, funds, or projects discussed.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

