--- YouTube Channel Transcript Export ---
Channel: Andrew Huberman (ID: UC2D2CMWXMOVWx7giW1n3LIg)
Export Date: 2025-05-12 14:41:40
Total Videos Found (in channel): 349
Preferred Languages: en
--- Videos starting from 208th in this file ---
========================================

--- Video 208 ---
Video ID: eIxVfln02Ss
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eIxVfln02Ss
Title: How Psilocybin Can Rewire Our Brain, Its Therapeutic Benefits & Its Risks | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-05-08 12:00:24 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss what psilocybin is (chemically) and how it works at the cellular and neural circuit level to trigger neuroplasticity, which is our brain’s ability to rewire itself in ways that lead to long-lasting shifts in our emotional, cognitive and behavioral patterns and abilities. I discuss the emerging clinical trial evidence for the use of psilocybin in the treatment of depression, addictions and other psychiatric challenges. I explain the typical duration and phases of a psilocybin journey, the different categories of dosages often used and I explain the importance of set, setting and support when using psychedelics. I explain which groups of people place themselves at great risk by taking psilocybin as well as groups that could benefit, and I highlight the rapidly changing legal and medical landscape around psilocybin. This episode is a thorough exploration of psilocybin from the scientific and clinical literature perspective and ought to be of interest to anyone curious about psilocybin, mental health, neuroplasticity and/or psychedelics more generally.

#HubermanLab #Science 

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman 
HVMN: https://hvmn.com code: “Huberman”
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
The neural basis of psychedelic action: https://go.nature.com/3VInMlE
The effects of psilocybin and MDMA on between-network resting state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers: https://bit.ly/3VW8iL7
Increased low-frequency brain responses to music after psilocybin therapy for depression: https://bit.ly/3LKj6XK
Quality of Acute Psychedelic Experience Predicts Therapeutic Efficacy of Psilocybin for Treatment-Resistant Depression: https://bit.ly/42c7y6x
Brief structured respiration practices enhance mood and reduce physiological arousal: https://bit.ly/3wEvGRf
Therapeutic use of psilocybin: Practical considerations for dosing and administration: https://bit.ly/3HPHLZM
Psilocybin induces rapid and persistent growth of dendritic spines in frontal cortex in vivo: https://bit.ly/3HQ8J3z
Psychedelics and Neuroplasticity: A Systematic Review Unraveling the Biological Underpinnings of Psychedelics: https://bit.ly/44Gpwjx
Single-Dose Psilocybin for a Treatment-Resistant Episode of Major Depression: https://bit.ly/3pjvu9N
Effects of Psilocybin-Assisted Therapy on Major Depressive Disorder: https://bit.ly/3sFSGMM
The costs and benefits of psychedelics on cognition and mood: https://bit.ly/3NNyEwI

Other Resources
The Physiological Sigh: https://youtu.be/rBdhqBGqiMc
Dr. Matthew Johnson: Psychedelic Medicine: https://hubermanlab.com/dr-matthew-johnson-psychedelic-medicine

Timestamps
00:00:00 Psilocybin, Legal Considerations
00:08:32 Sponsors: Eight Sleep, ROKA, HVMN 
00:12:00 Psilocybin Becomes Psilocin in the Gut, Serotonin 
00:17:00 The Serotonin 2A Receptor, Therapeutic Outcomes SSRIs vs. Psilocybin
00:21:40 Serotonin Receptor Expression; Visual Hallucinations & Eyes Closed
00:27:21 Safety & Cautions for Specific Patient Populations
00:29:13 Sponsor: AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:30:28 Psilocybin, “Magic Mushrooms” Dosing, Micro-Dosing, “Heroic Doses”
00:36:21 Psychedelic Journey: Set, Setting & Support
00:43:43 Music & the Psilocybin Journey; Duration of Effects
00:48:58 Psilocybin & the Brain: Subjective Experiences, Perception
00:58:36 Sponsor: LMNT
00:59:48 Brain Networks & Therapeutic Outcomes
01:05:23 Creativity; Music, Emotionality & Psychedelic Journeys
01:12:39 Depression & Psychedelics as Neuroplasticity “Wedge”
01:16:53 Positive Psychedelic Journeys, Unity, “Oceanic Boundlessness”
01:25:23 “Bad Trips”, Anxiety & Physiological Sighs
01:32:57 Therapeutic Use of Psilocybin
01:36:11 Neuroplasticity, Structural Brain Changes & Psilocybin
01:48:08 Psychedelics: Therapeutic Breakthroughs & Depression 
01:56:37 Combining Psilocybin Therapy & Talk Therapy, Antidepressant Effects
02:03:11 Psilocybin Experience & Mental Health
02:06:42 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous, Neural Network Newsletter, Social Media

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are discussing psilocybin. Psilocybin is a psychedelic, meaning it modifies the psyche. And in doing so, it changes our level of consciousness. Psychedelics, such as psilocybin changed the way that we perceive the outside world and our internal world, our memories, our thoughts, our feelings, et cetera. Not just while one is under the influence of psilocybin, but it can also fundamentally change all of those things afterwards and for a very long period of time afterwards as well, which is one of the reasons why there's growing excitement about the application of psilocybin and other psychedelics for the treatment of various mental health issues, such as depression, alcohol abuse disorder, and addictions of various kinds, as well as things like OCD and eating disorders. Today, we will discuss psilocybin, talking about what it is. In fact, you may be surprised to learn that psilocybin basically is serotonin. Now, for those of you that are familiar with psilocybin and serotonin, you might think, wait, that's not true. But, in fact, psilocybin main effect is to mimic serotonin. But it does it in a very specific way because it activates a subset of serotonin receptors in a very strong fashion leading to neuroplasticity at the level of the neural circuits, that is the brain areas and the connections that serve things like memory and perception. So if any of that is confusing at this point, I promise to make it all clear in just a few minutes. Psilocybin is one of many psychedelics, of course. There are things like LSD, DMT, 5-MeO-DMT. Even MDMA while not considered a classic psychedelic is considered a psychedelic in the general sense. Today's episode is going to focus on psilocybin in particular. I will tell you what psilocybin is, how it works at the molecular and cellular level. I'll talk about how it changes brain circuitry. I'll talk about the clinical effects what's been demonstrated in controlled laboratory studies. I'll talk about dosages and translating from psilocybin mushrooms to actual psilocybin, and the compound that actually exerts the effects of psilocybin which it turns out is not psilocybin, but something called psilocin. Psilocin is the actual compound that goes into the brain to create all the changes in consciousness and all the rewiring effects that we associate with psilocybin. So understanding how psilocybin is converted to psilocin has tremendous impact on the duration of a psilocybin journey, whether or not that psilocybin journey is going to lead to a short or longer window for neuroplasticity. In fact, many people don't realize this. But much of the positive changes that are possible with proper-- and I do want to underscore proper psilocybin therapeutic approaches, takes place after the session in which one feels all typical or typically associated effects of psilocybin like hallucinations and changes in thought patterns, et cetera. So today, we are going to talk a little bit about chemistry. But I promise to make it accessible to anyone and everyone, regardless of whether or not you have a background in chemistry or biology. We're going to talk about some cell biology, the actual neuronal changes that occur when one takes psilocybin. And we're going to talk about how neural circuits change over time and how all of that impacts the changes that most people are interested in when they go on a psilocybin journey. Things such as long standing improvements in mood, things such as tremendous insight into themselves and to others, into their past, their present, and their future, and even changes in their levels of creativity, or their ability to experience joy from music or their ability to dissociate in a positive way from things that formerly were depressing or triggers for depression. In fact, we're going to talk quite a lot about the conditions inside of a psilocybin journey that make it actually positive and therapeutic. This is a very important point that I'll make several times throughout today's episode, which is that just because something invokes neuroplasticity changes in brain circuitry does not mean that it's therapeutic, or I should say, does not necessarily mean that it's therapeutic. For neuroplasticity to be therapeutic, it has to be adaptive, it has to allow someone to function better in life than they did previously. So today, we will talk about how the conditions of a psilocybin journey, including whether or not it's done with eyes closed or eyes open, or whether or not people alternate between eyes closed and eyes open phases of that journey, as well as whether or not music is played during that journey, and even what types of music are played will dictate whether or not somebody will feel better or worse in the days and weeks and years following that psilocybin journey, as well as the dosage level. Because as you'll soon learn as well, there are clinical studies showing that just one psilocybin journey can improve mood in a long-standing way. But most clinical trials involve two dosages spaced in very precise ways from one another with appropriate follow up. But in both of those particular journeys, the structure of the journey who's present, who's not present, eyes open or eyes closed, the particular music that's played. All of those features make up part of a larger neuroplasticity trigger of which psilocybin is critical. But psilocybin is not the only variable. So whether or not you're interested in participating in a clinical study, or whether or not you're interested in psilocybin for other reasons, this is critical information to understand. So today, we're going to talk about nearly every feature of psilocybin possible, including what psilocybin is, how it works at the level of chemistry cell biology, and neural networks, and neuroplasticity. We'll talk about the clinical studies. We'll talk about dosages. We will talk about conditions of clinical studies, and we will talk about the post psilocybin journey period in which neuroplasticity and the various activities, including therapy or perhaps not therapy can contribute to positive therapeutic changes from psilocybin. Now, as we go into this discussion, I do want to underscore the fact that at the time of recording this episode, meaning now, May 2023, psilocybin is still a Schedule I drug. It is considered illegal in the United States. There's perhaps just one exception to that, maybe a few others. But the main exception is in the state of Oregon, psilocybin has been approved in particular therapeutic settings for use in particular conditions namely depression and some forms of addiction. So in Oregon, it's more or less in the domain of a decriminalized as opposed to actually legal. In other areas of the country, including Oakland, California, there are some areas in which it has been decriminalized. And perhaps there are a few others that I'm not aware of. But, in general, psilocybin and other psychedelics are still considered illegal. And this is very important. Not just saying this to protect me, I'm saying this to protect you. Possessing or certainly selling psilocybin, except for rare instances, such as clinical studies and these decriminalized areas that I talked about a moment ago is still very much not allowed under the law. Today, I'll also discuss safety issues. I'll talk about whether or not young people, meaning people 25 or younger should consider psilocybin given that their brain is still in a rampant period of naturally occurring neuroplasticity. I will also talk about dosages as it relates to people who have formerly been on or may currently be on different forms of antidepressants. And I will talk about people who are at risk for psychotic episodes either because they know they themselves have a propensity for psychosis or they have close family members who have psychosis, which includes things like schizophrenia, bipolar depression, as well as things like borderline personality, and some related psychiatric conditions. So today's episode really will be a deep dive into psilocybin. So whether or not you think you're already familiar with psilocybin and its effects, or whether or not you're just curious about them, I do encourage if you're willing to try and ratchet through some of the understanding of how psilocybin works and what it is, leading up to some of the therapeutic applications and different patterns of dosing spacing of different sessions, et cetera. Because I do believe that with that knowledge in hand, you will be able to make far better, much more informed decisions about whether or not psilocybin is right for you. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. Now sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. Everything goes far better when we are sleeping well on a consistent basis. Now, one of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. In fact, your body temperature has to drop by 1 to 3 degrees in order to fall asleep and stay deeply asleep. And waking up involves a heating up of your body by about 1 to 3 degrees. With Eight Sleep, you can program your mattress to be a specific temperature at the beginning, middle, and towards the end of your sleep night. Ever since I started sleeping on an eight sleep mattress, I've slept far better than I ever have. So it's an all around great tool that has tremendous functionality, not just for measuring, but for improving your sleep. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman and save $150 off their pod three cover. Eight Sleep currently ships in the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. Now, I've spent a lifetime working on the biology of the visual system. And I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges in order to make sure that you can see clearly under any conditions. ROKA understands all of that and is designed their eyeglasses and sunglasses so that regardless of whether or not you're in a very brightly lit area or a more shady area or you go from brightly lit to shady areas, you can always see with tremendous clarity. Now, even though they were initially designed for sport, ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses come in a tremendous number of different aesthetics. So they have the what I call cyborg versions that most people associate with triathlon glasses and sports-related glasses. But they also have a tremendous number of frames that you feel perfectly comfortable wearing to work or out to dinner, et cetera. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses, you can go to ROKA, that's roka.com. And enter the code huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA, roka.com and enter the code huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by HVMN Ketone-IQ. Ketone-IQ is a ketone supplement that increases blood ketones. Now, I know most people are familiar or at least have heard of the so-called ketogenic diet, which is essentially a very low carbohydrate diet. It's designed to get your brain and body functioning off ketones, which are a great source of fuel for the body and brain. However, most people, including myself are not ketogenic. That is I'm not in a ketose state, pretty much ever as far as I know. Nonetheless, with Ketone-IQ, you can increase your blood ketones and thereby improve things like cognition and physical performance. I find that when taking Ketone-IQ, even if I'm eating a standard omnivore diet, which is the diet that I follow, by taking Ketone-IQ prior to workouts, sometimes on an empty stomach, and especially prior to doing any kind of cognitive work so researching podcasts, or doing work related to my lab, or teaching, et cetera, that I can maintain mental clarity for a longer period of time. And it does seem to enhance my mental clarity as well. If you'd like to try Ketone-IQ, you can go to hvmn.com and use the code Huberman to get 20%. Off, again, that's hvmn.com, and use the code huberman to get 20% off. Let's talk about psilocybin. And, again, today we're going to focus specifically on psilocybin. And we're going to set aside all the other psychedelics for future episodes. Psilocybin is what's called a tryptamine. That refers to its chemical composition, not to the so-called psychedelic trip. In fact, it's spelled differently. Tryptamine is T-R-Y-P. Trip, T-R-I-P, of course. Tryptamines include psilocybin, but also things like DMT and 5-MeO-DMT. The tryptamine psychedelics very closely resemble serotonin itself. That's right. Most of you have probably heard of the chemical serotonin. And serotonin is what's called a neuromodulator, which means your brain and body naturally make it, and that it modifies or changes the activity of other neurons and neural circuits. And it does that generally by either increasing or decreasing the activity of those neural circuits. If I were to show you a picture of the chemical structure of psilocybin or its active derivative psilocin, and I were to also put right alongside it an image of the chemical structure of serotonin, provided that you weren't a chemist who really likes to focus on the detailed differences between things, you would say those look very similar. And indeed, psilocybin in its active form psilocin are very similar structurally and chemically to serotonin itself. Now, as I mentioned before, serotonin is something that you naturally make. And yes, it's true that about 90% of the serotonin in your brain and body is manufactured in your gut. However, contrary to popular belief, the serotonin in your brain is not manufactured from the serotonin in your gut. You have separate independent sources of serotonin. That is you have particular neurons that make serotonin in your brain. You also have serotonin in your gut and those work more or less in parallel separately. Now, what does serotonin do. This is really important to understand because of the similarity between psilocybin in its active form psilocin and serotonin. Serotonin in that it's a neuromodulator changes the activity of other neurons and the net effects of those changes are things that you're familiar with. For instance, satiety or the feeling that we've had enough of various things, such as food, or a social interaction, or sex, or pleasure of any kind. Serotonin is involved in all of that. And an enormous number of other things, such as mood regulation such as our sense of pleasure itself, or lack of pleasure, such as whether or not we feel motivated or not motivated. It works in concert with other neuromodulators, such as dopamine and epinephrine and norepinephrine. In fact, if this were an episode about serotonin, which it is not. You would soon realize that serotonin is involved in so many different functions that impact our daily life. And that is one reason why certain antidepressant medications which alter either increase or decrease the amount of serotonin transmission in the brain will often have a lot of side effects related to things like mood, libido, appetite, sleep, et cetera. It's because serotonin is involved in so many different things. And serotonin is involved in so many different things because there are a lot of different so-called serotonin receptors. Serotonin is a chemical that we call a ligand. And the chemical ligand is simply the thing that plugs into the receptor for that chemical or ligand. The receptors, in this case, serotonin receptors, have the opportunity to do all sorts of different things. They can change the activity of neurons making them more active or less active. They can cause growth factors to be released making sure that those neurons reinforce or even build up stronger connections so that they're more likely to be active in the future. Serotonin binding to particular receptors can even change the gene expression in particular cells making those cells proliferate. So make more of them. Making those cells more robust, making those cells interact with new elements of the brain and body. Basically, serotonin and all these different receptors that it binds to has dozens, if not hundreds, and maybe even thousands of different functions. So the fact that psilocybin so closely resembles serotonin leads to a very important question that we should all be asking ourselves, which is, why is it that psilocybin, which looks so much like serotonin when one takes it in the form of magic mushrooms, or some other form, maybe the synthetic form of psilocybin itself, which nowadays is manufactured in laboratories and placed in different psilocybin containing foods and pills, et cetera. Why that leads to complex yet fairly circumscribed sets of experience like visual and auditory hallucinations, changes in particular thought patterns, and neuroplasticity that, in many cases, in the clinical setting provided things are done correctly. Improvements in mood, relief from depression, relief from various compulsive disorders, et cetera. All right. This is really what you need to understand if you want to understand psilocybin, and how it works, and how to make it work optimally for a given condition or goal. You have to understand what it's actually doing and what allows psilocybin to do fairly specific things in comparison to serotonin. Even though psilocybin and serotonin are so similar is that psilocybin mainly binds to and activates the so-called serotonin to a receptor. The serotonin to receptors is one of, again, many different serotonin receptors. But serotonin 2A is expressed in particular areas of the brain and even on particular areas of neurons in the brain that allow for very specific types of changes in neural circuitry to take place, not just when one is under the influence of psilocybin, but afterwards as well. So really in order to have a useful discussion about psilocybin, we need to talk a lot about the serotonin to a receptor. But fortunately for you, unless you're somebody really interested in structural biology or cell biology, that discussion is not going to be about the binding pocket for serotonin on serotonin 2A receptor, or a lot of the downstream signaling of the serotonin to a receptor. We'll talk a little bit about that where it's relevant. But more importantly, at least for sake of today's discussion, we're going to talk about how the serotonin 2A receptors really the one responsible for triggering all the changes in neural circuitry that lead to the changes, that is the improvements in mood, the relief from compulsive disorders in many cases, but really it's the serotonin 2A receptor selectivity of psilocybin that is leading to all the excitement that you hear about in terms of psilocybin as a therapeutic tool. Let me say that from a slightly different angle. There are data that I'll talk about today, which show that one, although in most cases, two psilocybin journeys done with particular dosages of psilocybin lead to maximal binding or occupancy of those serotonin 2A receptors in ways that lead to significant and unprecedented relief for major depression. In fact, you'll soon learn that the clinical trials for psilocybin are outperforming standard therapy and outperforming so-called SSRIs and various other antidepressants in terms of providing depression relief in ways that are frankly staggering not just to me, but to the psychiatric community at large. And this is where so much of the excitement is coming from. Now that statement could be taken one way, which is to just say, OK, well, here's a compound psilocybin that outperforms SSRIs. And, therefore, all the attention should be on psilocybin. But SSRI stands for Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor. In other words, the SSRIs of which there is now a lot of controversy things like Prozac, Zoloft, et cetera-- I'm sure you've heard some of this controversy. There are people who are very pro SSRIs although there are a growing number of people who really feel that the SSRIs are probably most appropriate for things like obsessive compulsive disorder where they, in fact, can be very beneficial. But there is a lot of leaning back from SSRIs as the be all end all for the treatment of depression nowadays because of the side effect profiles. And the fact that it's not even really clear that serotonin deficiencies are the major cause of depression in the first place. Now, again, we're talking about psilocybin not about SSRIs, but you should be thinking, wait, how is it that two molecules psilocybin and some particular SSRI both of which look like and/or increase serotonin transmission in the brain are leading to either incredibly positive and interesting outcomes or to troubling side effect riddled outcomes? And, again, it all boils back down to the selectivity of psilocybin to bind that serotonin to a receptor. And so in order to understand how psilocybin works and in order to understand proper dosing profiles and spacing of sessions a.k.a. journeys, we really need to talk a little bit more about the serotonin to a receptor, where it is in the brain, what sorts of things happen when psilocybin binds the serotonin to a receptor, and how those things set in motion, the various changes, the neuroplasticity that allows people to feel better in terms of their mood, and as you'll soon learn, can experience more pleasure and joy from things like music and enhanced creativity. All the things that I do believe whether or not people are thinking about or maybe even exploring psilocybin for recreational or therapeutic purposes, all the things that people want and are really talking about and perhaps even doing psilocybin in order to obtain. So before going any further, I just want to place an image in your mind. You can place an image in your mind whereby when serotonin is released in the brain naturally not having taken any compound, any drug, anything. It's getting released a lot of different sites binding to a lot of different serotonin receptors, doing a lot of different things. When somebody takes an SSRI, the net effect of that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor is that there's more serotonin around to exert its effects. Because it's a reuptake inhibitor at the synapse, the connections between neurons, the serotonin can do its thing more extensively and for longer periods of time. But it's doing it non-specifically. So when you think about standard antidepressant treatments, at least for sake of this discussion, you think of a sprinkling or a spraying of serotonin at different locations in the brain and binding to lots of different receptors. Whereas when you think about psilocybin, even though the subjective effects are pretty diverse, we'll talk about those in a few moments, what you're really talking about is a molecule of psilocybin that looks a lot like serotonin that is selectively and very strongly binding to and activating that serotonin to a receptor. So that's the image I'd like you to embed in your mind. And then the next image I'd like you to embed in your mind is where these serotonin 2A receptors are located in the brain. Now, the serotonin 2A receptors are located in multiple brain regions. But they have a tremendous amount of expression in the so-called neocortex, the outside of the brain that includes things like our prefrontal cortex, which is involved in understanding context, which behaviors, thoughts, and speech patterns are appropriate for certain circumstances, how to switch context and category switch when you go from playing sports, to hanging out with friends, to being in a professional setting. You change your behavior in the way that you speak and perhaps even the way that you think. You might think some things that are out of context. But you probably keep those to yourself. And your ability to keep those to yourself are dependent on a functional prefrontal cortex. There are a lot of 5-HT2A. And by the way 5-HT is the abbreviation for serotonin. So there are a lot of serotonin 2 receptors in the prefrontal cortex, also in other areas of the cortex that are associated with sensation and perception. That is hearing of sounds, that is seeing of particular things. And in particular, there is a very, very, very high expression of serotonin 2A receptors in the visual cortex. And that is one of the reasons why psilocybin triggers visual hallucinations. And provided psilocybin is present at sufficient enough concentration that is taken at a sufficient dosage, one will experience profound visual hallucinations regardless of whether or not their eyes are open or their eyes are closed. Now, that's an important fact because it explains one of the major effects of psilocybin that people experience while they are on the drug. Now, as I'll talk about a little bit later in terms of what constitutes a useful psilocybin session, useful meaning that it's leading to adaptive improvements in mood, adaptive improvements in creativity, in cognition, et cetera, is that people not have their eyes open for at least the majority of the psilocybin session, this is something I've discussed with several experts who are running clinical studies on psilocybin in their laboratories, some of whom are going to be guests on the Huberman Lab podcast in upcoming episodes, Again, I can't underscore this enough. Because your visual cortex contains so many of these serotonin 2A receptors, and because psilocybin binds so strongly to that serotonin to a receptor, you're going to experience a lot of visual hallucinations when you are under the influence of psilocybin. There's no surprise there. This has been known for hundreds, if not, thousands of years. It's one of the main reasons why people take psilocybin. However, as I mentioned earlier, these hallucinations occur even when the eyes are closed. And it's now fairly well-established that if people are to take psilocybin and have their eyes open, much of their cognition, much of their thinking, much of the time spent in that psilocybin journey is focused on the altered perceptions of things in the outside environment. Sometimes this looks like a fracturing of the outside world into geometric shapes. Sometimes it appears as a melting of things in the visual environment, including people's faces or a morphing of people's faces. All of that has a strong let's just call it a draw for a lot of people who are looking for a highly unusual experience inside of the psilocybin journey. But I think if one's goal is to derive long-lasting benefit from the psilocybin experience, it's very clear that having an eye mask or some other eye covering or something that ensures that one's eyes are closed for the majority, if not, the entire psilocybin session is going to be very useful because it's going to limit the extent to which one is focused on those outside changes in visual perception a.k.a. hallucinations and rather will allow the person to go inward to combine whatever it is that they happen to be seeing in their mind's eye with the different thoughts and memories and changes in their emotions that are occurring. And that going inward by staying in the eye mask, at least for the majority of the time, seems to be a very, if not, the critical feature of making the psilocybin journey effective in the therapeutic sense. Now once again, I want to cue to some of the safety precautions here. I'm going to say this at least three times throughout today's episode. As I'm talking now and various other times throughout today's episode, you may get the impression that I'm all for everybody doing psilocybin. And that is simply not the case. In order for a psilocybin journey to be therapeutically useful, it does require certain conditions and supports. And there are certain people for which psilocybin use is going to be contraindicated, meaning they should not do psilocybin. In particular, people who have existing or have a predisposition to psychotic episodes or bipolar episodes, even having a first relative who has bipolar, or schizophrenic, or schizotypal issues can be a rule out condition, that is can get someone eliminated from a clinical study on psilocybin for fear of triggering psychotic episodes, not just during the psilocybin journey, but potentially in a long standing way. So, again, that's really critical. The other thing is that everything I'm talking about today unless I say otherwise is really focused on adults, meaning people who are 25 years old or older. That is their basic wiring and rewiring of the brain that we call developmental neuroplasticity is completed. All right. Most of the studies today that I'll talk about involve subjects ranging from 25 years of age out to about 70 years of age, but no one younger. So, again, psilocybin and its use is certainly not for everybody. It's still illegal, it's being used in the clinical setting and research setting. There are these pockets of decriminalized areas, and potentially soon legalization of psilocybin, but again only in the proper clinical setting. OK. Again, I say that not just to protect myself, but I say that also to protect all of you. Psilocybin is a powerful, powerful drug. Not just to be under the influence of, but also in terms of its long-standing changes after the effects of psilocybin have worn off. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens now called AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens, once or usually twice a day, is that it gets me the probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important. It's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health. And those probiotics and Athletic Greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health. In addition, Athletic Greens contains a number of adaptogens, vitamins, and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met. And it tastes great. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, et cetera. And they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Let's talk a little bit about dosing of psilocybin and also about microdosing of psilocybin. Now, this is an area that I wouldn't say is controversial, but that there's how should we say this. There's a lot of loose thinking around this in the non-clinical non-research communities. But within the clinical and research communities, there is a lot of data that's come out indicating what effective and safe doses provided all other things are considered safe. Safe doses of psilocybin actually are. And here, we really can go back to our discussion of psilocybin as quote-unquote magic mushrooms or mushrooms. And if one were to translate from the mushroom form of psilocybin to the psilocybin that's actually used in various studies-- because frankly, in these studies, people aren't eating mushrooms. They're typically taking synthetic psilocybin either intravenously injected into a vein or orally. And that's how the researchers are able to tightly control the amount of psilocybin. And the typical dosage that's used in clinical studies ranges from 1 milligram often given repeatedly from day-to-day over long periods of time, so-called microdosing. And really that 1 milligram per day or even up to 3 milligrams per day repeatedly over time is what people generally think of as microdosing. As compared to say a 10-milligram dose given once, maybe twice in two separate sessions, or a 25 to 30 milligram dosage that's given once or twice. Now, those amounts of 1 to 3 milligrams or 10 milligrams, or 25 to 30 milligrams might not mean much to those of you that don't think about these things in the research terms. Perhaps, you've heard of microdosing and you've also heard of macro or quote-unquote heroic dosing. OK. That's common or I should say popular nomenclature for psychedelics. And I'll circle back to that in a few minutes. But I think one of the questions that I hear a lot is, how much psilocybin is present in a given amount of mushrooms? And so the way this typically works is that mushrooms are often discussed in terms of grams, or ounces. So an 1/8 of mushrooms refers to an 1/8 of an ounce of mushrooms, or x number of grams of mushrooms. The breakdown is actually quite simple. 1000 milligrams equals 1 gram. And the concentration of psilocybin in most so-called magic mushrooms is about 1%. So 1 gram of mushrooms being 1000 milligrams means that it contains approximately. And, again, it's approximately 10 milligrams of psilocybin. And in most of the clinical studies, it's been shown that the dosage of 25 to 30mg given-- or I should say, taken once or twice-- and we'll talk about the spacing of sessions a little bit later, taken once or twice is what's leading to the most pronounced therapeutic outcomes. But, of course, with enhanced therapeutic outcomes, one also observes enhanced side effect profiles or what are called adverse events. So there's an important nuanced conversation that has to take place. But right now, we're talking about the conversion of grams of mushrooms to psilocybin. So 1 gram of mushrooms being 1000 milligrams containing 1% psilocybin means that it contains 10 milligrams of psilocybin. Now, the so-called heroic doses that you've heard about. And this is something that's discussed. More with the let's call them traditional or classic Psychonauts. These are people that may have an advanced degree, but typically are not running laboratories exploring the effects of psilocybin in controlled clinical trials. These are people who have been long time explorers, and often writers, and people who have been spokespeople for psilocybin and other psychedelics. And they will often refer to the so-called heroic doses. It's a little bit hard to translate from that informal community to the scientific data. But in discussing that topic with various researchers who run laboratories at major universities focused on psychedelic therapies, what I was told is that the quote-unquote heroic dose that's often discussed really refers to a 5-gram or so dose of mushrooms. So what that translates to is 50 milligrams of psilocybin. So when you hear someone talk about a quote-unquote heroic dose, they're probably referring to ingestion of 50 milligrams or so of psilocybin, but in its mushroom form. So about 5 grams of mushrooms. And, again, it's important to point out that the concentration of psilocybin in different strains of mushrooms and in different batches, and depending on the age of those mushrooms, and how they've been stored, et cetera, can vary tremendously from batch to batch. In fact, there are some laboratories that have explored the range of psilocybin concentration in different mushroom strains and different so-called magic mushrooms. And that range is pretty broad. It's anywhere from 1/2% all the way up to 2%. What that means is that someone might get a hold of 1 gram of mushrooms thinking that they're taking 10 milligrams of psilocybin in those mushrooms when, in fact, they're actually taking 20. Or somebody could take 3 grams of mushrooms thinking they're taking 30 grams of psilocybin and in fact they're only taking 10 or 15 milligrams of psilocybin. So the sourcing is really key obviously as things become more legal, and more regulated, and more used in the therapeutic setting. And this is what's happening more and more. Or as people start to rely on synthetically made psilocybin as opposed to using mushrooms to ingest psilocybin. Then certainly, the dosage thing is going to be more consistent from batch to batch because we're not talking about batches of mushrooms, we're talking about batches of psilocybin itself. So now, I'd like to take a step back from all this chemistry and cell biology and talk a little bit about the structure of a psilocybin journey itself and relate that to what we now know about what's happening in the brain during the psilocybin journey. And then a little bit later, we will return to that serotonin to a receptor. When we talk about some of the more lasting changes in brain chemistry and brain wiring, that occur after the psilocybin journey is over. So let's take a couple of minutes and just discuss the various components of an effective therapeutic psilocybin journey. And here I'm not detailing a menu of things that people should do in order to pretend that they are a psilocybin assisted therapy coach, or to do self-administered psilocybin therapy. That is not what I'm doing. What I am trying to do is to share with you the consistent components that are present in the clinical trials that have demonstrated the effectiveness of psilocybin for the treatment of depression and for other compulsive and addictive disorders. And those data, meaning the specific data related to those trials and the references themselves, we'll get into a little bit later. But we can't really have a conversation about psilocybin and what it does without talking about the so-called set and setting as it's often referred to. That is known to at least bias the probability of the journey being beneficial and not a so-called bad trip. So what are the variables that make up an effective and safe psilocybin journey? And, again, when we say safe we're referring to people who are not prone to psychotic episodes, that don't even have a first relative that's prone to psychotic episodes. We're talking about people that are 25 years or older. We're talking about people that, for instance, are not taking antidepressants that impact the serotonin system. This is very important to understand. I think a lot of people don't know this. But as far as I know, all of the studies that have explored psilocybin for its ability to positively impact brain chemistry and mood and function have required that people either not be on or abstain from antidepressants in the weeks leading up to the psilocybin journey. Now, that is not to say that if you are currently taking SSRIs or something similar that you should cease taking them and do psilocybin, I'm absolutely not saying that could be very, very, very dangerous if not catastrophic. Anytime you're going to take anything or stop taking anything for that matter, you do need to consult with your physician. In this case, a psychiatrist as well. So let's talk about psilocybin journeys from the subjective side and from the structural side. And when I say the structural side, what I mean is what is a psychedelic journey actually include? And here are the words set and setting become extremely important. Some of you may have heard that set and setting are the foundation of a well done or even therapeutically beneficial psychedelic journey. And all of that really hinges on safety and outcomes. So set refers to mindset. The mindset of the person taking the psychedelic. And setting refers to-- as the name suggests, the setting in which they're taking it in and the people that are present there. So let's talk about setting first. The setting for a psychedelic journey needs to be one in which the person under the influence of the psilocybin or other psychedelic is safe. That means no windows they can jump out of, that means no streets of moving cars, they can run out into. That means no opportunity for getting lost. That means no opportunity for getting into bodies of water. In other words, it requires that there be at least one, and perhaps even two or more other individuals who are not also taking psychedelics who are not also taking psychedelics present in that setting to ensure that the person taking the psilocybin is not going to harm themselves or others. I say this not to sound like a school teacher, even though technically I'm a school teacher, but because, of course, I don't want anyone to get harmed. And I'm also aware that there's a lot of interest nowadays in psychedelics, such as psilocybin becoming legal or decriminalized for their therapeutic applications. And if we look back to the late 1960s and early 1970s when the Controlled Substances Act was invoked to make psychedelics like psilocybin illegal, one of the bases for that was not just the geopolitical unrest at the time and things like the Vietnam War, but also some highlighted instances in which people did not take set and setting into consideration, took things like LSD, stared at the sun, went blind. Or took psilocybin, went out, and harmed somebody else. Again, these are very, very isolated instances. But these are the exact instances that lead to criminalization or the fact that things like psilocybin, and LSD, and MDMA for that matter are considered illegal. Again, I completely acknowledge that there are a number of different factors making them illegal. We could have a whole discussion about that. We talk about the drug trade, the war on drugs. But right now, it's such a critical time in the history and the use of psychedelics for therapeutic and other reasons. And getting setting correct, meaning making it absolutely as safe as possible for the person taking the psychedelic is absolutely key. And one of the best ways to ensure that it's safe is to have responsible individuals who are not under the influence of psychedelics present in that environment. So that's one component of setting. The other component of setting that we talked about earlier, which turns out to be very important is the opportunity and perhaps even the bias toward the person on the psychedelic being seated or ideally lying down and being in the eye mask or at least having their eyes covered so that they can combine any spontaneous visual hallucinations that occur with the various thought processes that are occurring while under the influence of psychedelics. This is far and away different than quote-unquote taking mushrooms and going into the woods or taking mushrooms and going to the beach. What we're talking about today is the use of psychedelics for particular brain rewiring outcomes that yes can involve things like changing one's relationship to nature, or changing one's relationship to somebody else by interacting with nature or somebody else. And while I'm not trying to diminish the potential value of those sorts of psychedelic journeys, if we look at the scientific data, the vast majority of it, not just in the clinical setting, but in terms of understanding the safety, and efficacy, and positive rewiring of brain circuitry, that allows people to feel better to understand themselves better and to interact with life in more adaptive ways going forward out of the psychedelic journey involve these very, let's say, subdued settings that are typically in one room, a closed environment with one or two other individuals acting as guides or helping the individual by talking to them from time to time if they feel like they have to sort through a particular aspect of the psychedelic journey that's creating anxiety. And we'll talk about the contour of the psychedelic journey that almost everyone who takes psilocybin at somewhere between 20 and 30 milligram dosages tends to experience. But the setting that I'm describing is not just a list of things to make sure you're safe, but they're really the list of things that also ensure that one can get the maximum benefit out of the psilocybin journey. Now, other things included in setting that are known, again, from scientific literature to be very influential in terms of the experience that one has and to bias things towards a positive experience are, again, safety, eye mask, but also the presence of music. Now, when I first heard about this from one of the Premier researchers on psilocybin and other psychedelics which is Robin Carhart-Harris, he's a professor at University of California San Francisco, who's one of the major pioneers in the studies of psychedelics. And when he first started telling me about the critical role that music plays, I thought, OK, that makes sense you know. Music can impact our emotion, impact the way that we think, and could, therefore, impact what one experiences during the psychedelic journey. But he really underscored for me the extent to which music is not just an incidental feature of the setting in psychedelic set and setting, but that it is one of the major drivers of the actual cognitive and emotional experience that somebody has on something like psilocybin that allows the psilocybin journey to be looked at or viewed, not just as beneficial, but, and this is quoted in the scientific literature as one of the most profound and important positive experiences that one ever experienced in their life. So let's talk about the sorts of music that have been used in these clinical studies. Well, first of all, we need to think about how long the psilocybin journey itself is going to be. And the typical duration of the psilocybin journey is anywhere from 4 to 6 hours. It's going to depend somewhat on dose. It's going to depend somewhat on variability in people's liver metabolism, and it's also going to depend somewhat on how much food people have in their gut. In all the clinical studies that I read, it was advised that people not have any food in their gut at the time in which they ingest or are injected with the psilocybin. That's particularly true if people are going to be taking psilocybin, mushrooms, in order to get their psilocybin. And that has been done in a few studies. Most studies however use synthetic psilocybin taken orally. Again, that's converted to psilocin in the gut by the acidity of the gut. And the acidity of the gut is going to be impacted by the various foods that people eat. And so that's one of the major reasons why people are advised to not eat for at least four hours prior to the psilocybin journey. So here we've got this 6 hour, what we're calling, journey because that's what everyone calls it or trip. That people start experiencing about 30 to 45 minutes after ingesting psilocybin or taking psilocybin. There's a peak component in which there's a maximal intensity of emotion and often that's also associated with anxiety. And this is very important to understand. The anxiety component is part of what in the therapeutic setting, they refer to as ego dissolution. And that anxiety around the peak-- and I think most people would probably hear peak experience and think, oh, we're talking about a peak positive experience. But no, we're referring to a peak experience and anxiety that people stay with and then come down from gradually as one goes from the second or third hour after taking psilocybin. And that tapers off slowly toward the 6-hour mark what, sometimes people refer to as parachuting back in. Of course, hopefully, I would very much hope people aren't actually parachuting back in while on psilocybin. But I think you get the idea. The music that's typically played in the clinical studies using psilocybin for the treatment of depression, or for compulsive disorders, or addiction tends to have a particular contour that matches with and can also drive that contour of the psilocybin journey that I just described. Again, we're talking about people wearing an eye mask with guides present. So people who are not taking psilocybin there as well to ensure that the person feels supported and is safe. The person is typically lying down, sometimes sitting down, but more often than not lying down, wearing an eye mask-- and the music that's played at the beginning of the psilocybin session tends to be music that doesn't have a lot of vocalizations, it tends to be things like classical music, it tends to be fairly low volume. But then transitions into music that has a lot of percussion. So often drums that tends to be higher volume, that has a lot of intensity. At about the time that one would be experiencing the peak in emotion and perception, that so-called peak of the journey. That intense music tends to be played for about 45 minutes to 90 minutes, depending on the study one looks at. And then tends to transition into softer music, again. Sometimes choral type or more melodic music, often female voices in particular, and then transition into nature sounds and things that more or less mimic the outside natural world and less so synthetic things like drums, or instruments, and vocalizations, and things of that sort. So why would it be so important that music match and even contribute to the subjective experience that people have on psychedelics? And here, we should probably take a couple of moments, and just talk about what those subjective experiences are like. So for people that haven't done psilocybin or any psychedelics, it's a little hard to describe. But one way to describe it is that there's a lot of so-called perceptual blending. So, for instance, people in the eye mask will report seeing some geometric shapes and colors. But perhaps the music they're listening to will then start to change the intensity or the movement of whatever it is that they're seeing, hallucinating inside of the eye mask in ways that are linked. This is referred to as synesthesia or the merging of different senses that are not ordinarily merged. In addition, people under the influence of psilocybin or other psychedelics for that matter often will report that their pattern of breathing becomes linked to the perceptions of things that they are hearing, or seeing, or feeling. So, for instance, if they take a big deep breath in and then a long exhale out, they may find that during a long exhale out, that the notes of music that they're hearing in those moments are also drawn out for the duration of the breath in they'll inhale and that they're getting at least what they perceive as control over the music which, of course, they are not actually controlling by using their breath. And that perhaps their visual perceptions are also being merged with that. So those are just a couple of examples of how perceptual blending a.k.a. synesthesia can occur while under the influence of psilocybin. And this really is highly individual from one person to the next. Some people, for instance, will find that if they take their fingertips and rub them across the couch or the chair that they happen to be lying down or sitting on, that they will experience a change in the music. Maybe even if they move their hand up, they hear an increase in frequency of sound. They move their hand down, they hear a decrease in frequency of sound. And all of this is linked to their emotional state at the same time and vice versa. So we're talking about a lot of perceptual and emotional blending and some sense of control over one's perceptions and emotions in a way that's very unordinary, even extraordinary. We can step back from all of this very subjective description of the psychedelic journey and ask, what is going on that would allow these sorts of things to occur? And there you are already equipped with an understanding of the cell biology and the chemistry that makes all of this possible. And that is that when psilocybin is ingested and then converted to psilocin, it's the psilocin that crosses the blood brain barrier, and then even though psilocin looks a lot like serotonin, psilocin has this incredible ability to predominantly activate the serotonin to a receptor. Well, we can understand much of what's happening at a subjective level during the psychedelic journey, even right down to the sorts of emotions, and perceptual blending, the synesthesia. We can understand a lot of that by understanding where the serotonin 2A receptors are expressed on neurons, and what those particular neurons are doing. And the simplest way to describe this is that there's a category of neurons that we call pyramidal neurons. Pyramidal neurons are found lots of places in the brain. But they're called pyramidal neurons because they're sort of shaped like a pyramid. They have a cell body, which is the part of the cell that has the DNA in it and a lot of other important things like the organelles, mitochondria, et cetera. And then they also have what are called dendrites. Dendrites are the little branches or processes that reach out both from the bottom of these cells. And then these pyramidal cells are interesting because they also grow a branch up, up, up, up, up into layers of neural tissue above them. And they have what's called an apical branch. That's the part that grows up. And then they fan out at the top. And that fanning out at the top allows them to communicate with other neurons in their environment. So if you're not getting a good picture of this in your mind from my description, I apologize. But simply think about putting your arms out to the side. And by doing that, you're able to interact with things that are some distance from your body, an obvious thing in that case. These cells are effectively doing the same thing by extending little processes out into layers above them and to the sides. And this is really important because much of the serotonin to receptors that are present on neurons in the brain are present in those apical dendrites, those branches of these pyramidal neurons that are above and that extend out to the side of those neurons. And so when somebody is under the influence of psilocybin, that means that psilocin has bound to the receptors on those apical dendrites. And it's increasing lateral communication across brain areas. In fact, this is perhaps one of the most well-documented effects of psilocybin and other psychedelics, which is that there's a shift from the brain being more modular, meaning more segmented like auditory neurons are communicating electrically and chemically largely with other auditory neurons. Of course, they'll communicate with other types of neurons, too, right? When I hear something off to my right, like a snap of a finger is off to the right, I'll turn my head. And my ability to do that depends on my auditory neurons being linked up with things like my motor system and my visual system. But the key thing to understand is that when there is psilocybin present in one system, that the communication of any of these pyramidal neurons, the ones involved in hearing, the ones involved in thinking, the ones involved in memory, the ones involved in visual perception or in the generation of visual hallucinations with eyes closed, those are all talking to many, many more other neurons more extensively. So what happens effectively is that there's a reduction in the modularity, the separateness of function in the brain, and an increase in what's called integration of communication across what would otherwise be disparate brain regions. We can say that really simply by saying psilocybin increases communication across the brain. Now, in addition to that, there's a reduction in what's called the hierarchical organization of the brain. Typically sensory information comes in from the outside environment. So we hear something, we see something, we taste something, we smell something. And in what's called a bottom up fashion meaning bottom from the periphery up, meaning it propagates up through the eyes, through the nose, through the ears through the skin, or the senses in those regions, I should say, up into areas of the brain that sit deep to the cortex like the thalamus. And then the thalamus is a way station, it's like a switchboard that sends visual stuff to the visual centers, and auditory stuff to the auditory centers, and touch stuff to the touch centers, and things that maybe trigger a memory off to the memory centers of the brain, et cetera. That's the typical organization. It's hierarchical because it goes from the periphery up to the more complex processing regions of the brain that make decisions, that link all of that stuff to prior experience, maybe plans about the future. When psilocybin is present in the system, there's a broadening of the flow of that information from the bottom up as well. And that has to do with what's called thalamic gating. The thalamus is a very interesting structure. We probably don't want to go into it in too much detail right now. But it really is like a switchboard in a way station saying, hey, pay attention to the visual stuff, pay attention to the auditory stuff, or just to the visual and auditory stuff, and ignore touch sensation for the time being or vice versa. When psilocybin is present in the system, and when serotonin 2A receptors are activated very strongly, there's a tremendous broadening of the flow of information up and through the thalamus. So not only is there more communication of so-called higher order brain centers, we refer to them as higher order because they're involved in thinking, and decision making, and emotion, et cetera. But there's also a shift in the flow of sensory information into the brain that can generally be described as broader and including more blending of the different senses. And when I say blending of the senses, I'm also referring to blending of the sense of interoception of our sense of our body and what's happening inside of our body. And this without question, at least partially explains when under the influence of psilocybin, one's breathing can be linked to a sound, and then suddenly the sound one thinks is being controlled by one's breathing, or that the sound itself can be linked to something that we see in our mind's eye while in the eye mask. Essentially, what I'm describing here is that serotonin to a receptor activation allows for more broad, less precise, and less hierarchical activation of brain circuitry. And when I say hierarchical, what I mean is that normally things go from periphery, from eyes, to thalamus, to visual cortex. However, when under the influence of psilocybin, as I mentioned before, even in the eye mask, the visual cortex is going to be very activated even in the absence of any visual input. So then if one hears a sound, perhaps from music, a particular motif or voice, and that's linked to a particular emotional state, that is now being blended with visual phenomenon occurring within the brain that have no external stimulus. And so while the patterns of activation in the brain while under the influence of psilocybin aren't random, they are far less channeled, far less modular, and far less hierarchical than would ever be the case when not under the influence of psilocybin I'd like to just take a brief break and thank one of our sponsors, which is LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means plenty of salt, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, the so-called electrolytes and no sugar. Salt, magnesium, and potassium, are critical to the function of all the cells in your body, in particular, to the function of your nerve cells, also called neurons. And we now know that even slight reductions in electrolyte concentrations or dehydration of the body can lead to deficits in cognitive and physical performance. LMNT contains a science backed electrolyte ratio of 1000 milligrams. That's 1 gram of sodium, 200 milligrams of potassium and 60 milligrams of magnesium. I typically drink LMNT first thing in the morning when I wake up in order to hydrate my body and make sure I have enough electrolytes. And while I do any physical training and after physical training as well, especially if I've been sweating a lot, and certainly, I drink element in my water when I'm in the sauna and after going in the sauna because that causes quite a lot of sweating. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drink LMNT, that's L-M-N-T.com/Huberman to claim a free LMNT sample pack with your purchase. Again, that's drink LMNT, L-M-N-T.com/Huberman. Now in all fairness to the scientific literature, there are not one, not two, not three, but four prominent theories of which brain networks are most activated during a psilocybin or other psychedelic journey. And so for those of you that are interested in those different models, first of all, please know that they are not competing models. While some of them disagree about some of the details. It's very likely that all of these models are true. They include things like changes in the so-called default mode network. There's a lot of interest in this. I've talked about it before on this podcast. The default mode network is the network in the brain that's thought to be responsible for spontaneous imagination, for daydreaming, and that reflects the base activation state of the brain when there's no drugs in our system. And the default mode network is one of the systems or networks rather that is thought to be required under conditions of psilocybin or other psychedelics. Again, if you're interested in these models and comparing and contrasting them, there's a very nice review from Brian Roth's Lab at Duke entitled, The Neural Basis of Psychedelic Action. We'll provide a link to this in the show note captions. And, again, I just want to emphasize that all of these models have been shown to be true in different studies. And what they all point to is more extensive communication between areas of the brain that normally are not as active at the same time while under the influence of psychedelics, such as psilocybin. The controversy in the field relates to which of these networks is the one that changes the most to explain the therapeutic outcomes that have been discovered in recent years. So, again, check out that review if you're interested and that sort of thing. In the meantime, we can cut a broad swath through all of those models, and just say that psilocybin expands the functional connectivity of the brain while one is under the influence of psilocybin. And it does seem that some of that expanded functional connectivity persists after the effects of psilocybin have worn off. And that statement about the functional connectivity of the brain being more expanded, not just during the psilocybin session, but after as well, has been substantiated in a number of papers. But one of the key papers in this area is one that I recommend people check out if they're interested in this sort of thing, is entitled, The Effects of Psilocybin and MDMA on Between Network Resting State Functional Connectivity in Healthy Volunteers. And I like this paper for a number of reasons. First of all, it's a very high-quality paper carried out in the laboratory of Robin Carhart-Harris at UCSF. Again, one of the Premier researchers in this area of psychedelics and their function, what they do in the brain, and also their therapeutic applications, but also because it focused on healthy volunteers. They explored using brain imaging. What brain areas are active in a resting state? So things like default mode network. Then they had people take psilocybin or MDMA. And then they looked at the connectivity between those brain areas in those same individuals when they were not under the influence of these drugs and found more extensive connectivity. All of which pointed to an enhanced lateral connectivity, less hierarchical organization effectively more interconnection and communication between different brain areas. I think not only is the fact that they looked at healthy volunteers very interesting and important, but also that they looked at this resting state of the brain. They weren't providing a particular auditory or visual stimulus for people to hear or look at while they were in the brain imaging scanner as it's called rather, they were simply looking at how the brain was behaving at rest. And so it's very clear that for people that do two or even just one of these psilocybin journeys at a particular dose, that the brain is actually getting rewired. We hear this a lot. Psilocybin or other psychedelics lead to plasticity. They rewire your brain. Let's go back to what we said at the beginning. Rewiring of the brain is not the goal. Adaptive rewiring of the brain is the goal, right? Rewiring that leads to new ideas that are interesting, that are accessible after the psychedelic journey. New ideas and new ways of thinking or feeling that allow people to function better in their lives. That's the goal of effective psychedelic therapies. Not simply rewiring of the brain. A brain injury for that matter will lead to rewiring of the brain. But that's maladaptive rewiring. The use of things like amphetamines or methamphetamines, in particular, will lead to rewiring of the brain. But that is strongly maladaptive rewiring So now, there are really dozens of studies conducted in humans using brain imaging and other techniques have evaluated how things like psilocybin change connectivity in the brain. And I think the take home message is it expands that connectivity. However, it seems to do so in ways that still allow people to function in their daily lives. And one of the key things that I gleaned from the literature on the therapeutic use of psilocybin for the treatment of depression is that very seldom, do people who take psilocybin experience long-term issues with memory. Why is that so critical? Well, you could imagine that increasing connectivity in the brain reducing modularity, reducing hierarchical organization of the brain would lead to disruptions in memory, right? It's as if you're shuffling books on the bookshelf so to speak. But that doesn't seem to be the case. Rather it seems that the increase in connectivity is leading provided set and setting are correct, provided safety protocols are followed to positive rewiring or adaptive rewiring of neural tissue. So that's one of the things that makes psychedelics and psilocybin, in particular, very exciting from the therapeutic standpoint. And of course, we have to acknowledge it's also it has a lot of people excited about psychedelics, not just for the treatment of depression, but for expanding the brain's capabilities more generally. So along those lines, I want to touch on the issues of creativity and the experience of life outside of psychedelic journeys is impacted by psychedelic journeys. And here this relates to a question that I heard a lot. When I put the call out on social media that I was going to do this episode, and I asked people, what do you want to know about psilocybin? And one of the more common questions that I got was, does it increase creativity? Does it increase our experience of life in ways that are beneficial aside from its now documented positive effects in treating depression and compulsive disorders and addiction? And the short answer to this is yes. But that the positive effects of psychedelics, psilocybin, in particular, on creativity, and our experience of life have only been explored in a fairly narrow set of dimensions. However, where it's been explored, there's some really interesting findings. So one of the more interesting findings I think is a paper entitled increased low frequency brain responses to music after psilocybin therapy for depression. I think this is a really interesting paper. Because what the authors did is they took advantage of the fact that in these therapeutic psilocybin sessions that were carried out for the treatment of depression, music is being played. And there are prior studies showing that when music is played, you activate different brain areas depending on what music is being played. It's somewhat obvious perhaps. Sad music versus intense. You can think about heavy metal, versus choir music, versus Gregorian chants, versus punk rock music, and on, and on. It makes sense that different brain areas would be activated when different patterns of music are played. However, there do seem to be some universal features of brain activation in response to music. This should probably be the topic of an entire episode of the Huberman Lab podcast. And indeed it will be. For instance, there are areas of the auditory cortex that are activated. No surprise there. And areas of the brain's reward circuitry, the so-called ventral striatum and the so-called mesolimbic reward pathway. I talked a lot about these in the episodes about dopamine that I've done previously. These are brain areas that lead to the release of dopamine in other brain areas, and that reinforce certain experiences, and that tend to give us the subjective feeling of, yes, I like this. I want more. So in this particular paper, what the authors did is they took advantage of the fact that people are in the clinic, they're on psilocybin, they're listening to music. And as you recall, the music played at different stages of the psilocybin journey are different. They have a different emotional component. And music is a really nice stimulus in the laboratory as we say. Because like with visual stimuli, you can break it down into high frequency, low frequency. Sounds like dum, dum, or ah, ah. These kinds of things that was my attempt at low frequency versus high frequency auditory stimuli. Or at the spatial frequency, or what in the auditory domain would be called the temporal frequency is it boom, boom, boom. Or is it boom, boom, boom, boom. All we've changed there is the temporal frequency. The sound was somewhat the same, but the distance between those sounds was different. You get the idea. So they have access to these people and these different conditions. And they can put them in the brain scanner. And they can do that before and after having taken psilocybin. And the long and short of this study is that psilocybin changes one's experience of music, not just during the psilocybin journey itself, but thereafter. And, in fact, it changes one's emotional response to music in very interesting ways. For instance, one of the more common features of major depression is that people don't derive as much pleasure from different types of experiences, whether or not it's food, or sex, or social experiences to the point where sometimes they just stop trying to seek out those experiences. People with depression often feel as if music no longer has the same impact. It just doesn't really lift them up very much. This study found that people who have taken psilocybin, according to the parameters we talked about earlier, can get a return of the elevated emotionality, the positive emotions associated with music that formerly made them feel good. In other words, they can feel music again. They can feel good in response to music again. Now, this is interesting because, in theory, it could be that psilocybin simply allowed them to access the emotions around music, again, more generally. But that's actually not what this paper and some other papers that have been published report. Rather, it seems that taking psilocybin can increase one's positive perception of music that one likes and can tone down or reduce the depressiveness or the sadness of music that tends to make one sad, even after the psilocybin has worn off and for a long period of time afterwards. Maybe even forever. Although no study, of course, can be carried out forever because forever is forever. What we do know, however, is that psilocybin can rewire the connections between the emotion centers in the brain and the networks that control auditory perception of music. And leads to this condition in which people who felt like, I was depressed, or I couldn't feel the music, I just wasn't getting the same lift and joy from it again, they can start to experience more joy from that music again. And that music that made them feel sad and depressed has a diminished capacity to make them feel sad and depressed. And there's a lot of neuroimaging data in this paper that point to the specific brain areas that include areas like the ventral tegmental area that can explain why these sorts of effects would occur. So this isn't just subjective reports of people saying, oh, yeah, I was depressed. And music didn't feel really good and now it feels great. Or that used to make me feel so sad. And now, I feel like I have a capacity to listen to that without being crushed by feelings of sadness. The paper included some subjective reports of that sort. But then was able to link those to changes in brain circuitry and brain activation in response to music using neuroimaging. So in that way, it really points to both the subjective, and structural, and functional changes that psilocybin can bring about through that expanded connectivity between brain areas. Because remember during the psilocybin session, it's not as if music or the perception of music is specifically being looked at or focused on in these studies, rather music is playing. People are in the eye mask, they're feeling all sorts of things, they're breathing, they're hearing their touch. It's all happening all at once. There's a peak. It's long. There's a long taper. The music's changing. OK. All of that took place in this study as well. But it is after the session when comparing brain activation states to music of a particular type, sad or happy. And comparing that to the patterns of brain activation that occurred before the psilocybin journey that they discover that people's brains have rewired during the psilocybin session in a way that allows them to experience joy in response to music again. So that's one of the more rigorous studies I was able to find. That addresses this question of whether or not psilocybin really does rewire the brain in ways that allows us to be more creative and experienced life differently after the psilocybin session. Now, that paper didn't focus specifically on creativity. I did an entire episode on creativity that talked about different types of meditation, like open monitoring meditation, it talked about different patterns of thinking that one can actually practice to increase creativity. We had arguably one of the most creative people on the planet. Rick Rubin came on this podcast talked about the creative process from the perspective of music and his role in producing music. So you can check out those episodes if you're interested in the neural circuitry related to creativity. At least at the time of recording this episode. There haven't been a lot of studies looking specifically at the brain networks that we think are involved in creativity and how those change in response to psilocybin and other psychedelics. I imagine those studies are either happening now or will happen in the future. But the studies I just described referring to the changes in emotionality and responses to music, I think provide a nice template for what's likely happening both during psilocybin journeys and after those psilocybin journeys. When we talk about less hierarchical organization, more connectivity between brain areas, what it's pointing to is the fact that during the psilocybin journey, people have the opportunity to learn new relationships between different sensory and emotional states. And those new relationships seem to persist long after the psychedelic journey has been finished. And a lot of people researching psilocybin in the clinical setting think that that's one of the major reasons why psilocybin and other psychedelics can rewire our relationship to things more broadly. It allows for new learning, new contingencies. And when we look at depression, we often think diminished mood, people don't have an appetite, they're not interested in social relationships, or romantic relationships. They're really struggling. And all of that, of course, is true. But another lens to look at depression through is that a lot of that thinking and a lot of those emotional states that are negative are somewhat habitual. They relate to implicit understanding and living out of the idea that A leads to B leads to C. You seek out a relationship, it doesn't work out. Try a new job, you don't get the job. You get the job, it's no good. All these negative outcomes of if A, then B, then C. And it does seem that psilocybin can have this effect of invoking new patterns of learning. New considerations about what might be possible. And indeed, may even lead to actual rewiring of the emotion centers in the brain with these other brain areas and vice versa in ways that eject people from the psilocybin session thinking, oh, yeah, I used to feel this way about something, work, relationships, myself, et cetera. But I'm willing to consider this other possibility. Or this other possibility seems at least partially true to the extent that I'm willing to go out and evaluate that. Now, here I'm speaking very subjectively. But remember, we have to tie back the subjective experiences and changes of things like music, and emotion, and our relationship to life, and jobs, and relationships back to the cell biology and chemistry of psilocybin. Because, ultimately, it really is just a chemical activating receptors. Those receptors changing networks in the brain. And the journey itself seems to be the time when all of those changes are put in motion. It's like a boulder that gets rolling. In fact, I think the best way to think about psilocybin and other psychedelics is that they initiate the neuroplasticity process, but they are not the neuroplasticity process itself. And the journey itself is not where all the neuroplasticity occurs. We know that for sure. In fact, if you want to imagine how psilocybin and other psychedelics work to change the brain, think about them as a wedge that gets underneath the boulder, that is the neuroplasticity that gets rolling forward. And then think about whether or not the plasticity is adaptive or maladaptive, whether or not it actually serves you in your life on a daily basis, or not, depending on whether or not you're using your conscious brain to move that Boulder in a particular direction. Not just bulldozing through things and destroying them, but clearing a path through old ineffective maybe, even destructive patterns of thoughts, or emotions, et cetera. I give you that analogy because I think it more accurately captures what psychedelics like psilocybin are doing. Rather than the typical discussion around psychedelics that we tend to hear which is that, oh, it creates plasticity. And plasticity is what you want. For the next couple of minutes, I'd like to focus on some of the key and stereotype that is characteristic experiences that people tend to have during a psilocybin journey. Because there's some really interesting research on this. These are phrases that perhaps you've heard before. Things like letting go, ego dissolution, feelings of connectedness. Well, all of that is very subjective on the one hand. Those words are heard often enough and repeatedly enough in psilocybin sessions and after psilocybin sessions, along with this description of the psilocybin experience as one of the most profound of one's life, or one of the most positive in the ideal case of one's life that they are worth exploring. We should also, of course, explore the so-called bad trip, the possibility that someone will have a not good time or even very frightening time while under the influence of psilocybin. So there have been some scientific studies that have explored what sorts of subjective experiences. That is thoughts, and feelings, insights that people have, that relate to positive therapeutic outcomes, and more generally with the sense that the psilocybin journey was positive or maybe even tremendously positive in one's life. So while there's a century or more of writings about psychedelics that describe things like enhanced feelings of connectedness, or dissolution of the ego, the loss of one sense of self, and then the regaining of one's sense of self, and so on. There's a particular paper that describes some of those things in terms of rating scales, that is the sorts of tests that people can take in which they answer particular questions, and that link back to things like feelings of connectedness and ego dissolution, that allows us to put some numbers to those m and to look at some of the statistics associated with those experiences. And this is really what's important about scientific studies, whether or not a measure is subjective. So if someone's self-reporting, how they felt or feel, or whether or not it's measure of blood pressure, or of a chemical in the bloodstream, et cetera. It's the use of numbers and statistics that allows comparison between different groups. And that can be compared between studies that allows us to make some firm conclusions about what sorts of things psilocybin may or may not be doing when it's effective or not. So the paper I'd like to highlight is entitled quality of acute psychedelic experience predicts therapeutic efficacy of psilocybin for treatment resistant depression. I'll put a link to this paper in the show note captions. But the basic contour of this paper is that they looked at subjects that underwent two different psilocybin sessions. One, at a relatively low ish dose of 10 milligrams of psilocybin. And that would be equivalent to about 1 gram of psychedelic mushrooms more or less. And a second session involving subjects taking 25 milligrams of psilocybin, or what's roughly equivalent to somebody taking 2.5 grams of psilocybin mushrooms. Those people then answered what's called the altered states of consciousness questionnaire, which allowed them to address. And here I'm paraphrasing the quality of experiences in the 25 milligrams psilocybin session. So without going into too much detail, it's often the case in these two session studies that subjects will take a slightly lower dose of psilocybin, to familiarize themselves with the experience. And then the higher dose that leads to the more intense experience. Intense meaning a bigger, more intense peak, a longer session overall, greater distortions in emotionality, and perceptual experience, all the stuff we talked about before. So what this study found is that one of the key features, if not, the key feature of a positive quote-unquote psychedelic experience is this sense of oceanic boundlessness occurring at some point during the psychedelic journey. Now, oceanic boundlessness doesn't necessarily mean anything to any of us. It probably means different things to different people. Is this idea that one is experiencing something extremely unusual, even mystical beyond this world and one's normal experience. But that it's not aligned with any specific outcome in the moment. It's not directly attached to any one feeling, or memory, or thought process. It's a little bit tough to describe because I can guarantee you. I'm not on psilocybin or any psychedelics right now. And I can only imagine that you're not. Although some of you might be. I can't even imagine what this podcast would be like for somebody on psilocybin at this moment. But in any case, oceanic boundlessness, a feeling of the experience being mystical, and not really heading in any one particular direction. Just a feeling of massive connectedness with one's environment both in the room and session. Perhaps with the guides with oneself, with one's past, with one's present, people outside the room with the entire world, maybe even the universe, that sort of thing. The intensity of that experience of oceanic boundlessness, the mystical experience seems to be positively correlated with positive therapeutic outcomes. That is relief from major depression. Now, during the psychedelic journey, as we talked about before, there are a number of steps that one typically goes through. So there's the build up to first experiencing the effects of the drug about maybe 20 to 45 minutes into the journey or trip. Then the peak. And it is during that peak that people often feel the sense of oceanic boundlessness. However, it's also often the case that it is during the peak or the maximum intensity of emotion. And we know based on direct measurements also increases in blood pressure and heart rate often very significant increases in anxiety and fear as well, that people will experience things like ego dissolution. And the guide's role at that point is, of course, to keep the person safe, make sure they don't run out of the room, jump out of a window, run into traffic. Sadly, these are things that have happened outside of a strong, healthy, safe set and setting. But the guide's role is to keep the person safe, but also to encourage them to let go and move through that experience to experience the anxiety, allow it to peak, allow them to see that they're not going to die from that anxiety, they're not going to dissolve. They won't lose their sense of self completely, or they may temporarily feel as if they lose their sense of self. But then they feel it restored at various intervals during the peak or as they exit that peak and move toward the say second, third, fourth, fifth hour of the session. So when exactly these feelings of oceanic boundlessness and ego dissolution occur? It varies from person to person. But typically, it's during the peak that the ego dissolution, the fear, and the need to quote-unquote let go is most typical. I think perhaps the best way to describe the data in this paper in a way that's meaningful to everybody is to refer you to figure 2, which if you're not looking at the paper, won't mean anything to you. But I'll describe it. And if you do want to take a look at figure 2 again, you can access the paper in the show note captions. What they did is they looked at a number of different subjective measures, things like experience of unity, the feeling that one is connected to others and to the world. Things like spirituality, whether or not the whole thing felt like a spiritual experience, whether or not it was a blissful state, whether or not there were insights, whether or not somebody felt disembodied out of body, whether or not somebody had a lot of anxiety, whether or not they had these synesthesia, these blending of visual, auditory, touch, and breathing, and things of that sort. And they addressed, which of those measures related to the positive clinical outcomes that were observed later after the psilocybin wore off. And while I'm not going to go point by point through each one of these measures, there's a general feature to emerge from the study, which is that the experience of unity, the sense that the psilocybin journey was spiritual, an experience of bliss at some point inside of the psilocybin journey. The sense that there were insights, that there were learnings about one's life and one's self. When those things were experienced very strongly, that correlated with the person being what was called a responder to the psilocybin treatment, meaning they got relief from their depression. Whereas people who felt less of that-- OK, so the non-responders as they're called, the people who do not benefit so much in the long run from the psilocybin treatment tended to report less of an experience of unity, less of a spiritual experience, less of a blissful state, less insightfulness, and so on. Whereas there were very few differences between the people that derived benefit from the psilocybin treatment and those did not along the dimensions of synesthesia, this blending of different perceptions that ordinarily doesn't occur for most people. Or complex imagery, right? Put simply everyone who took psilocybin in this study at 25 milligrams saw a complex imagery, they saw a lot of hallucinations. But just seeing hallucinations did not lead to the positive clinical outcomes in terms of mood. Anxiety was a very interesting measure here. Because ordinarily, we think of the ego dissolution, the letting go is such a key component of the psychedelic journey in terms of the positive therapeutic outcomes. This has been discussed quite a lot. And in full disclosure, Robin Carhart-Harris has already come on to record an episode of The Huberman Lab podcast. That episode hasn't been released yet, but it will be released soon. And he talks about the importance of this letting go in terms of the positive clinical outcomes of the psilocybin journey. And indeed that is true. And I should also mention that Dr. Matthew Johnson from Johns Hopkins who also runs a laboratory exploring psychedelics and their role in treating things like eating disorders, and depression, et cetera. Also, doing incredible work. Also talked about the importance of letting go during the psilocybin journey. This ego dissolution, this ability to move through the anxiety. And, again, I can't underscore this enough because it's been told to me over and over again by the top researchers in this area. That people head into that peaking phase of the psilocybin journey, and oftentimes it is not pleasant for them, they're feeling like it's uncomfortable, it's scary, and their heart rate is up, and their blood pressure is up, and they're having a hard time calming down, and they want to calm down. But it does seem that while the guides should not ramp them up and get them more stressed, that the ability to move through that stressful period to somewhat guide oneself or to be encouraged to guide oneself through that peak. And that anxiety and the fear of losing oneself and the so-called ego dissolution that occurs is an important feature for an effective therapeutic session. In this study, anxiety itself was inversely correlated with a positive therapeutic outcome. So this is important and somewhat nuanced. On the one hand, I'm telling you that the letting go, the ego dissolution does seem to be important in terms of reporting a psychedelic experience as effective as having accomplished something. And perhaps even explaining some of the long-term positive effects to emerge from that psychedelic journey. In this case, psilocybin journey. However, non-responders, that is people who did psilocybin, but did not have a positive therapeutic outcome in comparison to the responders, those non-responders tended to have higher subjective ratings of anxiety than did the responders. So this is important. And what it speaks to is the fact that while yes letting go during the session, experiencing some anxiety, perhaps even ego dissolution, and the dissolving of self, and then the return of self is important. It is also important it seems that anxiety not be so, so high or subjectively experienced as so high. That one does not experience the positive neuronal rewiring that leads to a more pervasive elevated mood. So I'm definitely saying two things at once because I'm trying to capture the data accurately. It would not be fair for me to say, just let go, experience as much anxiety as is possible. And that's part of the process. Yes. Letting go-- again, in air quote seems to be important for one's experience of the psychedelic journey, in particular, around the peak. That occurs about two hours in or so. However, extreme levels of anxiety seem inversely correlated or negatively correlated would be the better way to put it with the positive therapeutic outcome or relief from depression. So this takes us back to all of the things we've been talking about thus far. Not just the chemistry and biological action of psilocybin, but the key importance of getting dosage right, the key importance of making sure that you're in a safe environment, but also one in which the guides really know what they're doing. I think this is one of the biggest and most important reasons for having well-trained guides who really understand the contour of the psychedelic journey, but are also trained in how to help somebody with their anxiety in real-time while they're under the effects of psilocybin. And, of course, to help people integrate those feelings of high anxiety and maybe guide them back down to a calmer state during the psychedelic session itself. And here I can just mention some unpublished data and studies. And, again, these are very preliminary. But through discussions with Dr. Matthew Johnson who's running these psilocybin and other sorts of psychedelic trials at Johns Hopkins, he and I discussed the importance of having a real-time tool to adjust to anxiety while under the influence of psychedelics like psilocybin. And there he asked, and they've started to incorporate, as my understanding, some of the real-time respiration tools that is breathing tools that we know based on work in my laboratory, Dr. David Spiegel's laboratory, can reduce anxiety very quickly in real-time. And that involves the use of the so-called physiological sigh. I've talked a lot about this before on previous podcasts. So rather than explain it to you again here now, we'll put a link to the physiological sigh. I do a demonstration of it in the show note captions. I'll also link to a recent paper that we published in Cell Reports Medicine. This was a collaborative work that my laboratory did with Dr. David Spiegel's laboratory at Stanford School of Medicine. Showing that the physiological size among the different deliberate respiration techniques, one of the fastest and most effective ways to reduce levels of autonomic arousal a.k.a. anxiety or stress. And Dr. Matthew Johnson's laboratory has started to incorporate physiological size within these psychedelic sessions as a tool that the guides can refer people to before the session begins, teaching it to them. So they realize they can calm themselves down if necessary in real-time. It works the first time, it works every time. This is not because it's some magic breathing technique that I created. It certainly is not. This is a naturally occurring pattern of breathing that occurs in sleep and in waking. But that when done deliberately, leads a very rapid and quite significant decreases in stress and anxiety. And then when people are inside of the psychedelic session, if they feel their anxiety levels are going too high, they're heading toward what might be called a quote-unquote bad trip. They're starting to panic or really think they're going to have a panic attack or die. Again, the subjective experience is going to be layered on top of the physiological experience of one's heart rate being really elevated, saw a stress and agitation. By using the physiological sigh inside of the psychedelic session, Dr. Johnson's laboratory. And I believe, at least one other laboratory are starting to use breathing techniques such as the physiological sigh as a way for these people who are under the influence of psilocybin to self-direct their own calm. And to bring that level of anxiety down so that they can continue to move through the peak and move through the other phases of the psychedelic journey in ways that could be most beneficial for them. So to close out the description of this really wonderful study-- and by the way, it's another one from the Carhart-Harris laboratory, about the subjective experience of ego dissolution or oceanic boundlessness, this mystical state as so key as a component of a positive psilocybin journey. I'll just read for you the final sentence of this paper because it captures it so well. Quote, it seems vital that appropriate consideration is paid to the importance of promoting a certain experience as the quality of that experience may be the critical determinant of therapeutic success. Now, before we move into what will be a very brief description of some of the other rewiring phenomena, that psilocybin can induce, and then into some of the therapeutic applications of psilocybin as they relate to these recent really exciting clinical trials for depression, and addictive disorders, and things of that sort. I just want to cue everybody to a paper that I think many people will want to take a look at in thinking about psilocybin. And I'll provide a link to this paper as well in the show note captions. This paper is entitled therapeutic use of psilocybin, practical considerations for dosing and administration. And this is a wonderful paper because it really goes step by step through the pharmacology of psilocybin of which you now understand a bit. But it goes into a bit more detail. But then it also really nicely describes the contour of a psilocybin session and what's happening at the level of chemistry early, middle, peak, and toward the end of the psilocybin session. And then also importantly, it gets into issues of dosage and translating from mushrooms, to psilocybin itself, to psilocybin, things I talked about earlier. But in a bit more detail, if you'd like to see that detail. And then perhaps most importantly, there's a section on contraindications where it points out that of course, women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, people who have a predisposition to psychosis, those people should really avoid the use of psilocybin and other psychedelics entirely. It also talks about where the evidence is strong, moderate, and weak for the use of psilocybin for treatment of various disorders. And I can just summarize that very quickly because it's where we're going to head in a few minutes, which is that the most evidence for positive therapeutic outcomes in response to psilocybin taken and conducted in the manner that we've been describing today in terms of dosage, and journey set, and setting is for cancer-related depression, cancer-related anxiety, and treatment resistant depression. That's where most of the evidence resides. There's also some evidence for the use of psilocybin journeys. And, again, this is typically one or two psilocybin journeys spaced in the cases of two journeys anywhere from one to two weeks apart. And, again, with all of the same contour of supports and set and setting that we've been talking about today. And there there's some evidence for improvement in terms of outcomes in alcohol use disorder, and dependence, and tobacco addiction. And then finally, there's the least amount of evidence. Although there is clinical trial support for relief or partial relief for obsessive compulsive disorder, cluster headaches and migraines, and demoralization due to AIDS diagnosis. So this paper has a lot of really interesting information in terms of different conditions, in terms of dosage, and again, contraindications, and what's called adverse events, what sorts of bad things can and do happen as a consequence of psilocybin and other types of psychedelic journeys both during and after those psilocybin or psychedelic sessions. And we'll talk a bit more about this when we go into some of those clinical studies. Because adverse reactions is always a key measure in any clinical study. So very soon, we'll get into the more recent clinical studies related to psilocybin for the use of treating depression and some other conditions. But before we do that, I'd be remiss if I didn't talk about how psilocybin does and does not change the brain, what is and what is not known about that. In fact, when I put out the call for questions about psilocybin, many of the questions related to these issues. The first thing to understand is that a psilocybin journey is really a way to try and put that wedge under the boulder as I described it to try and invoke neuroplasticity of a particular kind. And in that way, it's remarkable, if you think about it, that everyone has different lives different experiences. Psychedelics, in this case, psilocybin are activating these brain networks that each of us has more broadly than they would normally be activated. These are very abnormal patterns of thinking, and perceiving, and experiencing our emotional and physical life, et cetera. And yet so often, the outcomes are positive. Not always, but the outcomes are positive. The experience is positive, even though it might have these anxiety moments or components within them. It's very important to understand that psilocybin and the journey while important are not really what all of this is about. It's really about neuroplasticity. So researchers, in particular, neuroscientists are very intensely interested in understanding what sorts of neuroplasticity psilocybin creates. Because it turns out there are lots of different types or processes involved with neuroplasticity. For instance, brain networks, behavior, thinking, emotion, et cetera can change because of the addition of new neurons. That's one form of neuroplasticity that's referred to as neurogenesis, the production of new neurons, most typically in the so-called dentate gyrus or other subregions of the hippocampus, a brain area involved in learning and memory. Neurogenesis in other regions of the adult human brain are exceedingly rare. And to be honest, may not occur at all. This is a debated area. We could do an entire episode about this. But for the most part, neuroscientists don't really believe that your neocortex, your striatum, your cerebellum has that much neurogenesis that's related to learning and memory of new things, or new experiences. And we don't actually think that occurs as a consequence of taking psilocybin either. Now, some of you who are familiar with, for instance, the cerebellum. You might be saying, wait, what about granular cell proliferation in the cerebellum? Or what about the rostral migratory stream from the subventricular zone where there are neuroblasts spitting out little new neurons that migrate in through the nose to replenish the olfactory neuron population? Yes, that's all true. That does occur. It's been observed in mice, it's been observed in monkeys. And to some extent, it's been observed in humans. But, again, I repeat it is not a prominent feature of learning and acquisition of new skills, new ideas, or new emotional states. Perhaps the best supported evidence for neurogenesis underlying new thoughts, experiences, abilities, emotions, et cetera is the production of new neurons in that dentate gyrus subregion of the hippocampus. And that probably does occur in humans. But neurogenesis is not really the dominant mode of changing neural circuitry in adult humans. It might be a player in adolescence, in young childhood. It is certainly a player before we are born when we are still in utero. But then the brain is being wired up in many different ways, including the addition of new neurons and changing of connections. All of this is to say that while neurogenesis is a really sticky idea and it makes great headlines, the addition of new neurons is not really the way that the brain changes under psilocybin, other psychedelics, or just generally. It's perhaps responsible for maybe 1% to 2%, and I'm being generous there, of the rewiring events that are going to be most important for all of us. So we need to set that down and cement that there. Until further evidence comes out to the contrary, that's certainly where I and here I feel comfortable speaking for the majority of neuroscientists out there, professional neuroscientists. That is the paper showing adult neurogenesis are interesting, but they don't really explain most of the plasticity that occurs in the adult human brain. So if neurogenesis ain't it, what is? Well, it's very clear that psilocybin, other psychedelics and any behavioral or drug intervention that can induce neuroplasticity does so largely through the addition or strengthening of new neural connections or through the elimination or weakening of other neural connections. And if you look at the data exploring the mechanistic basis for psilocybin induced neuroplasticity, it's mostly focused on animal brains, animal models, mice and rats, in particular. A little bit on primates, but mostly mice and rats because that's where the interventions can be done of knock out animals, of imaging the brain in real-time. Of course, there are the beautiful studies of Robin Carhart-Harris and others exploring neuroplasticity at the level of brain imaging, at the level of ultrasound measurements, of how active are certain brain areas in humans, how extensive is the modularity or not extensive is the modularity, et cetera, the stuff we talked about earlier. So in other words, there are neuroplasticity studies, the effects of psilocybin in humans. But in terms of underlying mechanisms of neuroplasticity, I think the predominant theory is that psilocybin induces neuroplasticity through the addition of novel connections in those pyramidal neurons of the frontal cortex, elsewhere in the cortex, and certainly also in the visual cortex. Probably also subcortical as well below the cerebral cortex in areas like the thalamus, maybe even in the brain stem as well. And that those neuroplasticity events are structural and functional. And they involve a couple of basic events. The most prominent of which is the growth of dendrites. Dendrites are those little branches or processes that come out of the neurons, not just the pyramidal neurons, but other neurons as well. But since we're talking mainly about pyramidal neurons today. Both the apical, those ones that top. They're called the apical tufts. They're the ones that reach laterally to connect with other neurons, communicate with other neurons that we talked about before. As well as the dendrites that come out of the base of those pyramidal neurons. Those processes grow in response to psilocybin, as well as the addition of what are called dendritic spines. So the dendrites are the branches. The spines are these little protrusions that grow out. Actually, here, I don't know if this is coincidence or not. Again, I always say I wasn't consulted at the design phase. But these little protrusions actually look like little mushrooms. They have a little stalk and they have a little head, a little spine, head. And those little spines-- so think of these as like little tiny mushroom appearing. OK. They aren't actual mushrooms. OK. The first person that puts in the comments, oh, my goodness. I learned today that mushrooms grow out of our neurons. When we take magic mushrooms, that is not what I'm saying. What I'm saying is that these little mushroom shaped protrusions that we're calling dendritic spines do in fact grow out of dendritic branches of neurons when animals ingest psilocybin or are injected with psilocybin. And that those little mushroom shaped protrusions are the sites of new excitatory connections, new locations for input from other neurons to activate those neurons that have those little mushroom-shaped protrusions. If you'd like to see examples of this, both movies and still shots, it's pretty remarkable. There's a paper that I'll provide a link to in the show note captions. This was published in the Journal Neuron, Cell Press Journal, Excellent Journal, entitled Psilocybin Induces Rapid and Persistent Growth of Dendritic Spines in the frontal Cortex In Vivo. So these measurements were done in the mouse equivalent more or less of the prefrontal cortex. There are some interesting details in this paper, for instance, that those new connections persist. So they don't just grow out during the psilocybin being active in the bloodstream and brain of the animal, they persist. OK. So this may again. May explain some of the persistent changes that occur in people after psilocybin journeys. They may too grow new spines. I should also mention that a reduction in the number of dendritic spines, these little mushroom shaped protrusions in the frontal cortex neurons of humans occurs in depressed patients. We know that from postmortem tissue. And that drugs that relieve depression or that treatments including behavioral treatments, that provide some relief from depression do seem to be correlated with increases in spine growth in frontal cortex neurons as well. So this raises a very interesting idea, which is perhaps it's the growth of new connections, these new dendritic spines in particular neurons. That's created by administration of psilocybin. That explains the relief from depression that people experience. So this is just one paper. But it's one paper of a growing body of work showing that, yes, indeed, psilocybin induces both structural and functional plasticity in the human and animal brain. It does that in the human brain at therapeutic doses of anywhere from 10 to 25, perhaps even 30 milligrams per session, one or two sessions. I should mention that the mouse studies tended to use quite high doses of psilocybin. I wasn't shocked, but I was somewhat wide eyed for a moment to realize that most of the studies looking at changes in plasticity in the mouse brain in response to psilocybin use the equivalent of 1 milligrams per kilogram of body weight, which is if you do the math, and you translate what we were talking about before in terms of dosages, I'll just spare you all the time, it's about double, the sorts of dosages that are typically used in humans. Maybe even triple in some cases. Now, it's often the case in animal studies because of the metabolism of animals being different, but also because seeing effects of drugs in animal studies can be difficult. They did use a dose response anywhere from 0 to 0.25 to 0.5 to 1 to 2 milligrams per kilogram of psilocybin in the study. So they had a dose response curve. But focused mainly on this 1 milligrams per kilogram dosage. In any event, the point is that many of the studies that describe these pretty dramatic structural changes in the animal brain, most typically the mouse brain in response to psilocybin use dosages of psilocybin that if translated to humans would be about double the human therapeutic dose. So that is something that we need to take into consideration. Nonetheless, it's very clear that in both animal studies and humans, psilocybin is inducing both structural and functional changes in brain circuitry. And that in humans, the network connectivity is being changed dramatically. We talked about those data earlier. And that the underlying basis for that might be, again, might be. We don't know for sure. The addition of new dendritic spines on these pyramidal neurons that we've been talking about repeatedly throughout today's episode. Although neurogenesis perhaps and other modes of neuroplasticity, such as the elimination of certain connections. Perhaps related to unhealthy maladaptive thoughts, or feeling that a particular sad song is overwhelmingly sad. It could be the case that those sorts of things change subjectively because of the removal of neural connections. If you're going to think like a neurobiologist or scientist for that matter, you don't ever want to think that one mechanism can explain all the effects of a given drug or a given experience. It's almost certainly likely to be the consequence of multiple mechanisms acting in parallel. And because I know there are people out there who would like to even more about the neuroplasticity induced by psychedelics, including psilocybin, there's a wonderful review that I provide a link to in the show note captions entitled, Psychedelics and Neuroplasticity: A Systematic Review Unraveling the Biological Underpinnings of Psychedelics. This review is great because it goes a step beyond just psilocybin and psilocin binding to the serotonin to a receptor, and things like brain derived neurotrophic factor. It actually talks a lot about the intracellular signaling and exactly how neurons change their excitability patterns based on this activation of the serotonin 2A receptor. It's probably more detail than most of you out there are interested in. But if you are interested in that level of detail, this is a wonderful open access review. So a few minutes ago, I talked about where there is strong, modest, and somewhat weak or rather, I should say, minimal evidence for the therapeutic use of psilocybin to treat various disorders. And across the board, it really appears that major depression and so-called intractable depression, in some cases, is where we're seeing the most exciting research to date. Now keep in mind that because of the Controlled Substances Act being invoked in 1970 in the United States, and because it was only just a few years ago really, only about five years ago, that psychedelics including psilocybin received what's called a breakthrough status at the FDA. That there are now a lot of clinical trials exploring how psilocybin can impact various things like mood disorders, addictive disorders, and so on. Prior to 2018, when that therapeutic breakthrough potential was established in the United States, I think a lot of people in the so-called psychedelics community had the sense, and really the belief that these drugs had enormous potential. But they just weren't being explored that extensively. So I do want to give a nod to the incredible researchers such as Robin Carhart-Harris, but also Matthew Johnson, Roland Griffiths, Nolan Williams, and many others. OK. I'm certainly not listing off everybody. That would take hours. But those researchers have really pioneered both the legal efforts, and the funding efforts, and most importantly, the research efforts defining the clinical data that I'm about to describe. And here, I'm going to summarize the clinical data in a bit of a top contour fashion just giving you the kind of highlights. We will, of course, provide links to the papers if you'd like to look into it further. But I'm only giving you the top contour because I've had the great fortune of having Matthew Johnson on this podcast before. You can find that episode at hubermanlab.com. Just simply put Matt's name or psychedelics into the search function. It'll take you to that episode in all formats or links to all formats rather. I've also had the great fortune of sitting down recently with Dr. Robin Carhart-Harris to talk about his work at University of California San Francisco on psilocybin, LSD, Ayahuasca, and DMT as it relates to depression and other disorders. And that episode, which also will be released at hubermanlab.com and on all platforms YouTube, Apple, Spotify. Really goes in depth into these clinical studies and what those studies really look like, who's in the room, whether or not people just get one dose or two doses, how far apart those are separated. All of that is covered in extensive detail in that what I found to be wonderful discussion with Dr. Robin Carhart-Harris. So if you're interested in all of the details as it relates to clinical application of psychedelics, stay tuned for that episode soon. Again, you can find that at hubermanlab.com and on all platforms. In the meantime, I would be remiss if I didn't include a bit of discussion about what has been observed in terms of using psilocybin journeys as a way to treat depression because the data are just oh, so exciting. Again, these data really started to surface as the consequence of studies that were initiated around 2006 in just a few select laboratories. And then really picked up in terms of the number of laboratories and number of studies between 2018 and now. So what you'll notice is that most of the papers I'm about to describe were published in, for instance, Phenomenal Journals, New England Journal of Medicine in 2021, and New England Journal of Medicine November 2022, Journal of the American Medical Association Psychiatry just very recently, 2021. So these are very recent papers. Essentially, all of these clinical studies involve either one or two psilocybin sessions. The dosages that were explored range from 0 milligrams. So placebo, if you will. 10 milligrams, in some cases, 25 milligrams, in some cases, 30 milligrams. And most typically, people received the same dosage for both sessions if indeed they did both sessions. However, there's at least one study looking at just one single episode of psilocybin administration. So this is the paper entitled. No surprise single dose psilocybin for treatment resistant episode of major depression. This was published in the New England Journal of Medicine in November of 2022. I'll just summarize the results of this single application study. They randomly assigned subjects who had treatment resistant depression. So they had resisted treatment to other things. To receive a single dose of a synthetic formulation of psilocybin. So they're not eating mushrooms, they're getting a synthetic dose of psilocybin. But the dose is known of either 25 milligrams, 10 milligrams, or 1 milligram, which was the control. And they receive psychological support. There were a number of different tests, subjective tests of depression taken before and after the psilocybin journey. They had about 75 to 79 participants in each group. Again, at the three different doses 25, 10, or 1 milligrams. And they looked at the changes in these scores, these depression related scores on these tests. There are many results from this paper one could summarize. But among the most important results I can summarize from the discussion and here I'm paraphrasing, that the change in baseline levels of depression that is at week three following the psilocybin session was significantly better. That is people experienced more relief or more people experienced more relief from the 25 milligram dose than from the 1 milligram dose. And this is important. There was no significant difference between the 10 milligram dose and the 1 milligram dose. This really points to the fact that the 25 to 30 milligram dose that's used in the largest numbers of studies exploring treatment resistant depression really seems to be, I don't want to say the best dose, but the most effective dose at least in this clinical context, in this set and setting and with this particular patient population. So we want to be careful to say that so that one doesn't just translate that 25 milligrams is better than 10 milligrams. Although in this study it was for sake of treatment resistant depression relief. There were a number of other key aspects of this paper. In particular, the exploration of so-called adverse events. So things like headaches, propensity for self-harm, actual self-harm, anxiety, and so on. It's worth mentioning that there were adverse events in essentially every group. The number of adverse events was highest in the 25-milligram dose group. This is observed in other studies as well. With higher dosages, there tends to be greater relief from depressive symptoms, but also a greater chance for adverse events. Some of those adverse events can be quite severe. So feelings of suicidal ideation, et cetera. Some of them one could consider a little less severe, mild headache, or severe headache that was transient, or anxiety that was transient. Again, highly individual responses. We could go line by line and table by table through this paper, which we won't because there's a lot of data. Again, we'll provide a link to this paper if you'd like to peruse it yourself. It's fairly straightforward to read. That's one thing that's nice about these clinical trials is they tend to be written in fairly non-technical language. Although there's a little bit of technical language. The important point is that a single dose of 25 milligrams of psilocybin provided significant relief from treatment resistant depression in this particular patient population. But it is not the case that 100% of the people who took 25 milligrams of psilocybin experienced that relief. However, the majority of them did. Now, when you say majority in science, you really need to look to numbers. And the reason I'm not telling you, oh, it was 75% or 60% or 50% is because it depends on which time point people were analyzed. People were asked about their level of depression relief immediately after one week after, two weeks after, or three weeks after. And the degree of relief tended to change over time. In fact, it tended to diminish over time. But it was also stable or remarkably stable, I should say, at least by my read in the 25-milligram dose group. And that is summarized nicely in figure 2 of the paper. Because they explored these people's levels of depression out to week 12. And they still saw a significant degree of depression relief 12 weeks after the single 25-milligram psilocybin dose session. So as I mentioned earlier, there are now about a dozen or so excellent studies, clinical trials exploring the use of single or two session psilocybin treatment in that 25 to 30-milligram range, which seems to be the most effective dose for long-lasting relief from depression. Each one of those studies explored something different as is important. Replication is also important, of course, in order to validate previous studies. But, for instance, there have been comparisons of psilocybin versus SSRIs or other antidepressants. There have been comparisons of psilocybin plus psychoanalysis or cognitive behavioral therapy, versus cognitive behavioral therapy alone, or psychoanalysis alone. And so there's a lot of evaluation now of the clinical outcomes. And the statistical outcomes of these subjective measures and even some objective measures of neurochemistry where that's possible in terms of trying to understand if and how psilocybin is effective for the treatment of depression. And the major takeaway is that, indeed, it does seem to be the case. And the numbers that I feel comfortable not throwing out there, but putting out to you reflect my conversation with Robin Carhart-Harris. Again, that will be released soon at hubermanlab.com, as well as takeaways from what I would say are the six broadest studies, meaning they have the widest range of age groups, the broadest demographic in terms of the subjects, their backgrounds, their levels of education, men, women, ethnicity, et cetera. And a lot of that can be summarized in the paper entitled, Effects of Psilocybin Assisted Therapy on Major Depressive Disorder. This was a particular randomized clinical trial. But in the discussion, I think they summarize it quite well, which is that if you look at the number of people who take this 25-milligram dose twice in sessions spaced about a week apart, what you will find is that anywhere from 60% to 75% of the people who have major depressive disorder who do these psilocybin sessions in the proper setting, report a good experience with it, have minimal adverse events coming out of those sessions and in the weeks following, those people experience substantial positive relief from major depression. In ways that other treatments that they had explored, including antidepressant drugs, cognitive behavioral therapy, and other types of therapy alone could not provide. Now, it's a general feature of these clinical trials focusing on psilocybin that people are asked to stop taking their antidepressants prior to participating in the trial. It's also a general feature of these trials that people are encouraged to not suddenly start their antidepressant treatment immediately afterwards because, of course, that could confound the results of the psilocybin treatment. However, and this is a very important thing to note all subjects were encouraged not to avoid taking those antidepressant medications if, in fact, their clinician felt that it was important for their immediate and long-term survival. So no one should be reckless in thinking about what to add or delete from their drug protocol when dealing with depression. All right. The outcomes could be very severe in that case. Nonetheless, we can paraphrase from the discussion of the paper I just mentioned. Because it really highlights the incredible results that psilocybin applied in these particular therapeutic settings are providing. And here, again, I'm paraphrasing. The present trial showed that psilocybin administered in the context of supportive psychotherapy consisting of approximately 11 hours of psychotherapy. So this is going to be two sessions of the psilocybin with proper therapeutic support. Produced large rapid and sustained antidepressant effects. The effect size is reported in this study were approximately 2.5 times greater than the effects sizes found in psychotherapy. And more than four times greater than the effect sizes found in psychopharmacologic depression treatment studies. In other words, four times the positive effect observed with typical SSRIs or other pharmacology of that sort. These findings are consistent with the literature that showed that combined pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy were more efficacious in the treatment of major depressive disorder than either intervention alone. So, again, this points to the fact that combining drug therapy with talk therapy as it's often called is going to be more effective than either treatment alone. Here are the drug therapy is psilocybin therapy. And, again, please don't take the fact that in these studies, they tended to ask people to not take their antidepressant medication heading into the study as a sign that one should stop taking their antidepressant medication. Rather I think this study and other studies like it, again, which we'll provide links to in the show note captions that are discussed extensively in the episode with Dr. Carhart-Harris soon to come, really point to the incredible role that psilocybin can have in creating an experience inside of the session the journey or the trip as it's called, as well as initiating neuroplastic events, perhaps the addition of dendritic spines. Maybe even some new neurons maybe. Although I don't think that's the predominant mode. But that leads to these more extensive connectivities in the brain, the so-called reduction in modular networks enhanced activity in brain areas that normally wouldn't be talking to one another. But not doing that in any kind of haphazard way. It really does seem that the one or two sessions of psilocybin that induce these feelings of ego dissolution, that induce these feelings of oceanic boundlessness, right? So mystical. And in many ways, it's what I find so incredible about psilocybin and other psychedelics is that despite the highly mystical, highly subjective, and still at this time somewhat top contour understanding of how they might exert their effects. You can highlight boldface and underline might there because it hasn't really been firmly established what the exact cell biological rewiring events are. But there is now what I would refer to as a center of mass of data that point to the fact that psilocybin when taken in the appropriate set and setting, at the appropriate dosages can invoke the sorts of neuroplasticity and changes in emotionality, in perceptual experience, not just during the psychedelic session, but for long periods of time after the psychedelic session. That can provide really remarkable relief from things like major depression and perhaps other psychiatric issues as well. And, of course, I realize that many of you are listening to and/or watching this episode. And you're not necessarily depressed or thinking about psychedelics like psilocybin in the context of depression. I hope today's discussion allowed you to better understand how psychedelics and psilocybin, in particular, because that's what we've been talking about, are able to exert these incredible effects that they seem to exert. This is not a call for everyone to run out and do psilocybin. It is absolutely not that. It is, however, my attempt to really put a magnifying lens on this incredible area of research that's happening not just in the context of clinical trials, but in the context of trying to understand how serotonin and how drugs like psilocybin, which in many ways mimic serotonin, and more particularly, the activation of particular receptors in the brain like the serotonin to a receptor. I mean, just sit back and think about that the selective activation of this receptor, which is, by the way, associated with the expansion of the neocortex across evolution. Didn't mention that before, but indeed it is. How that can lead to enhanced ways of thinking, changed ways of thinking, actual learning inside of this short 4-hour or 6-hour session that we call the Psilocybin Journey. So as is often the case, perhaps as is always the case here on the Huberman Lab podcast, we did a deep dive into a topic today into the topic of psilocybin. What it is, how it works, the different ways in which it changes brain circuitry, how it creates the experiences that we think of as the psilocybin journey, what the safety issues are, what the so-called set and setting are that can lend themselves to positive therapeutic outcomes. And in doing so, my goal was really to highlight several things. First of all, I am very excited about the potential for psychedelics such as psilocybin to provide relief for mental health issues that to date have been very hard for people to access. In addition to that, I'm just fundamentally interested in the brain and how it works and how it can change. This thing we call neuroplasticity. To me, neuroplasticity is the Holy Grail of the human nervous system. As far as we know, we are the animal that can have long-lasting neuroplasticity throughout the lifespan. And if it requires the use of compounds in a safe and controlled way, such as psilocybin in order to achieve maximal plasticity in a short amount of time, that's exciting. But, of course, that also needs to be considered with all of the safety precautions in mind that we talked about earlier, including the fact that people who have a predisposition or who have psychosis, or bipolar disorder, or a relative that has psychosis, or bipolar disorder. Younger people, meaning people 25 years of age and younger. And really anyone who's not working with a dedicated and highly trained physician needs to be very cautious about these compounds as well. They're very exciting. I think psilocybin is an exciting and super interesting compound for basic and clinical reasons and for other reasons as well. But they are sharp blades as we say. And with sharp blades, you can do incredible things, but you can also cut yourself very badly. So all those considerations need to be taken to mind. So I consider the science and use of psilocybin to be an exciting, but still preliminary area that I certainly am paying a lot of attention to. And I know there's a lot of excitement about. So stay tuned for the episode with Dr. Robin Carhart-Harris. And we will probably revisit psilocybin and we will certainly revisit the other psychedelics and non-classical psychedelics including LSD, DPT, 5-MeO-DMT, ketamine, MDMA, mescaline, and all the rest in future episodes as well. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's the best zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both Apple and Spotify. And on both Apple and Spotify, you can also leave us up to a five-star review. If you have questions for me, or comments about this, or any other podcasts, or talk picks that you'd like me to cover, or guess you would like me to interview on the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. Not so much during today's episode, but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people do derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing the quality and the duration of their sleep, for things like improving focus and for hormone augmentation and much more. The Huberman Lab podcast is proud to have partnered with momentous supplements. If you'd like to learn more about the supplements discussed on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to live momentous spelled O-U-S. So livemomentous.com/huberman. If you haven't already subscribed to our Huberman Lab podcast Neural Network newsletter, the Neural Network newsletter is a completely zero cost newsletter. That includes summaries of podcast episodes and summaries of protocols, things like a tool kit for improving your sleep, a tool kit for improving focus, toolkit for neuroplasticity, toolkit related to deliberate cold or deliberate heat exposure to fitness to flexibility. And much more. Again, all zero cost. Simply go to hubermanlab.com. Go to the menu, scroll down to newsletter, and provide your email. We do not share your email with anybody. And, again, the newsletter is completely zero cost. And to see previous newsletters, you can simply scroll down a bit further on that Neural Network newsletter page at hubermanlab.com, and you'll find downloadable PDFs. And you can just click on any of those PDFs. No sign up required. And if you're not already following me on social media, it's hubermanlab on Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those places, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content covered here on the Huberman Lab podcast. So, again, it's hubermanlab on Instagram, Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion all about psilocybin. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 209 ---
Video ID: cS7cNaBrkxo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cS7cNaBrkxo
Title: Dr. Noam Sobel: How Smells Influence Our Hormones, Health & Behavior | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-05-01 12:00:33 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Noam Sobel, PhD, professor of neurobiology in the department of brain sciences at the Weizmann Institute of Science. Dr. Sobel explains his lab’s research on the biological mechanisms of smell (“olfaction”) and how sensing odorants and chemicals in our environment impacts human behavior, cognition, social connections, and hormones. He explains how smell is a crucial component of “social sensing” and how we use olfaction when meeting new people to determine things about their physiology and psychology, and he explains how this impacts friendships and romantic partners. He explains how smell influences emotions, hormone levels, memories and the relationship between breathing and autonomic homeostasis. He describes how smell-based screening tests can aid disease diagnosis and explains his lab’s work on digitization of smell — which may soon allow online communication to include “sending of odors” via the internet. Dr. Sobel’s work illustrates how sensitive human olfaction is and how it drives much of our biology and behavior. 

#HubermanLab #Science #Smell

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman 
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman 
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Noam Sobel
Lab website: https://www.weizmann.ac.il/brain-sciences/worg
Lab Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/odorspaceWORG 
Publications: https://www.weizmann.ac.il/brain-sciences/worg/publications 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/LabWorg 

Articles
The Age of Olfactory Bulb Neurons in Humans: https://bit.ly/41NMjb6
The Privileged Brain Representation of First Olfactory Associations: https://bit.ly/3LGEePP
Mechanisms of scent-tracking in humans: https://go.nature.com/41Sm03w
Measuring and Characterizing the Human Nasal Cycle: https://bit.ly/44dqGmi
Human non-olfactory cognition phase-locked with inhalation: https://go.nature.com/44iPIQQ
A social chemosignaling function for human handshaking: https://bit.ly/3Lo5kK6
There is chemistry in social chemistry: https://bit.ly/41TVIhq
MHC-dependent mate preferences in humans: https://bit.ly/41SbgCc
An Exteroceptive Block to Pregnancy in the Mouse: https://go.nature.com/3VnxRnN
Fear-Related Chemosignals Modulate Recognition of Fear in Ambiguous Facial Expressions: https://bit.ly/3NqAPpD
Sniffing the human body volatile hexadecanal blocks aggression in men but triggers aggression in women: https://bit.ly/3oQ6NBv
Menstrual Synchrony and Suppression: https://go.nature.com/3LRF9xf
Regulation of ovulation by human pheromones: https://go.nature.com/44jODbt
Human Tears Contain a Chemosignal: https://bit.ly/41Qmkjr
Why Only Humans Shed Emotional Tears: https://bit.ly/41W71pl
Revisiting the revisit: added evidence for a social chemosignal in human emotional tears: https://bit.ly/44dygNJ
Increase of tear volume in dogs after reunion with owners is mediated by oxytocin: https://bit.ly/41W73gX
An olfactory self-test effectively screens for COVID-19: https://go.nature.com/3Vj6z1S

Other Resources
Joachim Löw video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EOstSv7SrRU 
Osmo: https://osmo.ai 
Odor Space: https://odorspace.weizmann.ac.il 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Noam Sobel
00:03:46 Sponsors: ROKA, Thesis, Helix Sleep
00:06:46 Olfaction Circuits (Smell)
00:14:49 Loss & Regeneration of Smell, Illness
00:21:39 Brain Processing of Smell
00:24:40 Smell & Memories
00:27:52 Sponsor: AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:29:07 Humans & Odor Tracking
00:39:25 The Alternating Nasal Cycle & Autonomic Nervous System
00:48:18 Cognitive Processing & Breathing
00:54:47 Neurodegenerative Diseases & Olfaction 
01:00:12 Congenital Anosmia
01:05:01 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:06:19 Handshaking, Sharing Chemicals & Social Sensing
01:15:07 Smelling Ourselves & Smelling Others 
01:22:02 Odors & Romantic Attraction
01:24:58 Vomeronasal Organ, “Bruce Effect” & Miscarriage
01:40:20 Social Chemo-Signals, Fear
01:50:26 Chemo-Signaling, Aggression & Offspring
02:03:57 Menstrual Cycle Synchronization
02:12:11 Sweat, Tears, Emotions & Testosterone
02:27:46 Science Politics 
02:37:54 Food Odors & Nutritional Value
02:45:34 Human Perception & Odorant Similarity 
02:52:12 Digitizing Smell, COVID-19 & Smell
03:05:50 Medical Diagnostic Future & Olfaction Digitization
03:10:55 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today my guest is Dr gome soel Dr gome soel is a professor of neurobiology in the department of brain Sciences at The wisman Institute of science his laboratory studies olfaction and chemo sensation olfaction is of course our sense of smell Cho sensation is our ability to respond to chemicals in our environment today you are going to learn some absolutely incredible facts about how you interact with the world and other people around you for instance you will learn that humans can smell things around them as well as dogs can in fact humans are incredibly good at sensing the chemical world around them you also learn for instance that every time you meet somebody you are taking chemicals from that person either from the chemical Cloud that surrounds them or directly from the surface of their body and you are actually applying it to your own body and you are processing information about that person's chemicals to determine many things about them including how stressed they are their hormone levels things that operate at a subconscious level on your brain and nervous system and that impact your emotions your decision-making and who you choose to relate to or not to relate to you will also learn that tears yes the tears of others are impacting your hormone levels in powerful ways you will also learn that every so often actually on a regular schedule there is an alternation of ease through which you can breathe through one nostril or the other and that alternation reflects an underlying Dynamic of your nervous system and has a lot to do with how alert or sleepy you happen to be the list of things that Dr Nom sobel's laboratory has discovered that relate to everyday life and that are going to make you say wow I can't believe that happen s but then go out into the real world and actually observe that that happens in ways that are incredibly interesting just goes on and on in fact his laboratory discovered that we are always sensing our own odors that's right even though you might not notice your own smell you are always sensing your own odor cloud and throughout the day you periodically smell yourself deliberately even though you might not realize it in order to change your cognition and behavior I first learned of Dr sobel's laboratory through a rather odd observance that observance took place when I was a graduate student many years ago at UC Berkeley at the time Nom soel was a professor at UC Berkeley as I mentioned before you since moved to the Weissman well I was walking through the Berkeley campus and I saw people on their hands and knees but with their head very close to the ground and their eyes were covered their hands were covered their mouths were covered and only their nose was exposed and what I was observing was an experiment being conducted by the soo laboratory in which humans were following a scent trail that scent Trail was actually buried some depth underneath the Earth and yet they could follow that scent trail with a high degree of fidelity it was from that experiment and other experiments done in Dr sobel's laboratory at Berkeley and at the wisman involving neuroimaging and a number of other tools and techniques that revealed the incredible power of human old faction and humans ability to follow scent Trails if they need to and that of course led to many other important discoveries some of which I alluded to a few moments ago but you are going to learn about many many other important discoveries in the realm of vaction and chemo Sensation that have been carried out by Dr so's laboratory through the course of today's episode and by the end of today's episode I assure you that you will never look at or smell the world around you the same way again before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is Roka roko makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality I've spent a lifetime working on the biology the visual system and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges in order for you to be able to see clearly Roa eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with the biology of the visual system in mind so no matter whether or not you're wearing them for sport whether or not you're wearing them for work or for socializing you can always see with Crystal Clarity their glasses are extreme extremely lightweight so most of the time you don't even realize that you're wearing them I wear Roa readers at night and sometimes when I drive at night and I wear Roa sunglasses throughout the day except of course I do not wear them for my morning sunlight viewing if you'd like to try Roa eyeglasses or sunglasses go to Roa that's r.com and enter the code huberman to save 20% off your first order again that's r.com and enter the code huberman at checkout today's episode is also brought To Us by thesis thesis makes custom neut tropics and neut Tropics is a word that I do not like because it means smart drugs as a neurobiologist I can tell you that there is no neural circuit in your brain for being smart there are neural circuits for Focus there are neural circuits for memory there are neural circuits for creativity and there are neural circuits for task switching thesis understands that there's a diversity of neural circuits that support different brain body States and therefore have designed New Tropics that are customized to achieve specific brain body States if you go to the thesis website and take a brief quiz they will design a neut tropic kit some of those neut Tropics that they'll send you are designed to enhance your focus others for clarity others for creativity and so on to get your own personalized neut Tropic starter kit you can go to taketh thesis. comom huberman and take a three-minute quiz and thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month that's take thesis. c/h huberman and use the code hubman at checkout to get 10% off your first order today's episode is also brought To Us by Helix sleep Helix sleep makes customized mattresses and pillows that allow you to get the the best possible night's sleep so if you go to the Helix website you can take a very brief quiz it only takes about 2 minutes and answer questions such as do you tend to sleep on your back or your side or your stomach do you tend to run hot or cold throughout the night maybe you don't know the answers to those questions but they'll match you to a mattress that's ideal for your sleep needs for me that was the dusk Duss mattress which is not too firm and not too soft and I've been sleeping on it for more than two years and it's the best sleep that I've ever had if you'd like to try a helix mattress go to helixsleep.com Hu take that two-minute quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress and you'll get up to $350 off any mattress order and two free pillows again if you're interested you can go to helixsleep.com huberman for up to $350 off and two free pillows and now for my discussion with Dr gnome soel Dr soble gnome welcome thank you must say I am extremely excited for this conversation I've been a huge fan of your work for more than a decade or two uh yes kind of frightening yeah yeah we overlapped at UC Berkeley some time ago although we did not meet and although we lived in the same apartment and we just learned that the amazing apartment that you moved out of was the apartment that my girlfriend and I at the time moved into in 2006 I believe so uh We've shared quite a few things um and today I'd love for you to share with us um All About The Amazing landscape of chemo sensation in particular olfaction our sense of smell and some related perceptual abilities or subconscious abilities including phermones Etc to get everybody on the same page I'd like to just start off by asking what are the major components of our ability to smell obviously where I like to think it involves the nose at some level it does to what extent is that mixed in with other senses like taste and perhaps more importantly what about the chemicals that we are sensing through this thing and for those of you listening I'm and not watching I'm tapping my nose that we are not aware of you know the the chemicals that are that we're inhaling and um making sense of without our awareness if you could just um give us the top Contour or even deep Contour if you like of the uh the parts list and the the various roles they play so you you've asked a lot of questions at once um you know I'll start with a little comment on the way you said smelling through our nose which we indeed do but we also smell through our mouth actually there's a process referred to as retronasal all faction where um odorants come up through our the back of our throat and out of our nose the reverse way and we smell things that way as well and in fact a big part of the contribution of all faction to food and taste comes from that from retro nasal Alf faction but uh uh primary Al faction is referred to as orthonasal Al faction that is through our nose we Sniff and sniffing is a big thing well I have a sense we might talk about that a lot today in all sorts of contexts so we sniff in through our nose and to answer your general question of the organization of the system um so molecules Airborne molecules travel up our nose a distance in the human of about six or seven cmers to about here where they interact with I will you use the word sheet of receptors but sheet is a bit misleading here it's not a sheet it's very convoluted we have about 7 million such receptors linning a structure known as the olfactory epithelium this is the sensory surface of the olfactory system the alaor epithelium again about probably about six or seven million receptors in the human in the human probably of about 350 different kinds so that's amazing that means a meaningful percentage of your genome is devoted just to this just to the kinds of olfactory receptor subtypes you have in your nose by the way I can share an amusing story I would imagine amusing stories are good for podcasts so that number of six or seven million receptors is probably not very well grounded uh it's hard to count uh but it's reasonably grounded and there was this thing roaming around in the literature about blood hounds having a billion receptors than their nose which is why they're so amazing and this number was you know it's sort of propagated through the literature and and our lab um has written over the years a few review chapters and and we were repeatedly writing the all faction chapter for a very large one of these large textbooks the gazan handbook of cognitive Neuroscience I think it's called um and and we had that in there as well somewhere and and one time when we were renewing the chapter for a new version of the book I told the graduate soon who was leading that at the time arah sharun she's now a professor at tviv University I told her check that check that reference out where in the world did that come from and we started going back and back and back and it turns out it comes from a textbook an Australian textbook and we found the author of The Textbook and and we wrote her and I said look there's this thing in in the literature of a billion receptors in In The Blood Hound where did that come from and and surprisingly she answered me and you know I was hoping to get a reference right but it wasn't reference and and this is where it really becomes funny for us because she said I I I was once um at a lecture of an allf faction geneticists geneticist by the name of donon Lancet uh and he said that in the lecture now this is really funny because she's in Australia this is all over the world this number and I'm writing her from Israel and Duron laned is in the building next to me okay he's in Whit Institute genetics I mean he used to be he's retired now uh and and he he had meaningful contributions in the history of wol action um so I picked up the internal phone and and I said hey Don you know did you say that there's a billion receptors in The Blood Hound knows and he said what's a blood hound so this was totally made up right it totally made up and it propagated I mean you can you can probably go into Google and type like a billion receptors in the BL hound and and you'll get a of hits but there was absolutely no evidence for that amazing and not just amazing in light of what it it tells us about old faction in blood hounds or otherwise but amazing because it sheds light on just how much of what is in textbooks scientific and medical is absolutely wrong things things propagate and and you know you sight yourself and right so we fix that in in that version of the of the and and so to finish the line so that so so odorant interact with these receptors um here in our epithelium uh where they undergo what is referred to as transduction that is the odorants are dock at a receptor and turn into a neural signal or or in force the receptor to respond in a neural signal and uh this neural signal in fact Action potentials not gradient potentials of any kind uh propagates uh via the olfactory nerve now this is a nerve that goes from our epithelium uh right here behind the forehead no well yeah yeah here uh through uh the thinnest part of our skull an area refer to as the CRI form plate which is preforated it has a lot of holes the nerve goes through those holes and synapses at the first Target in the brain uh which is the AL Factory bulb in humans uh that forms an interesting uh uh point of sensitivity um because a lot of people lose their sense of smell due to trauma uh because of that structure yeah a head hit type trauma well yes although uh you denoted hitting on the front of the head which is where all this real estate is but actually uh the more common cause for losing your sense of smell for trauma is the back of the head because of what's referred to as a contra injury so as your listeners probably know our brain is floating in liquid in CSF in cerebral spinal fluid inside our skull and when we get HD in the back of the head the brain has this forward and backward movement in the liquid in in the skull it sort of crashes it can crash against the front of the skull which is why you also have in a contrical injury you also often have frontal damage but what happens is that this generates a shearing motion on the cbor plate and the olfactory nerve is severed and if it's completely severed it's it's lost forever because my my understanding is that the olfactory Sensory neurons can are among the few central nervous system neurons in adult humans that can regenerate so or replenish themselves right so so I'll I'll again there are a few questions in so first of all we will spin many plates simultaneously it's completely severed completely then yes you're lost forever yeah if it's completely severed because even if you'll have regeneration at the basil cell level at the epithelium they won't manage to find their way back uh to the bulb if if you have partial or something left or something shows up in a short while after the injury then you have a good chance of recovery H because they grow along the trajectory of the other Axel so pioneering the way for them assumingly yeah and so so basically and and basically the time frame and you know it's funny I get a lot of emails on this although I'm not a medical doctor but but I get a lot of emails from people who have lost their sense of smell because it's very distressing and now more people know this because of covid that it's very distressing and and basically the rule of thumb is that if you don't get it back within a year a year and a half you'll never uh get it back my my understanding of the statistics on olfactory loss in covid and and and other viral type infections is that um first of all I had I experienced that when I got covid including total anosia for one day and not total it was just there was a remnant of an ability to to smell or or perceive the smell of a lemon and I was huffing as hard as I possibly could I actually there's an over-the-counter remedy and this is not uh pseudoscience because there's a number of papers published about this on PubMed that alpha lpoic acid can accelerate the recovery of of of smell and and so that's something that um it worked successfully for me I'm not saying that that's the only or rout you don't know if it works successfully for your if you would have recovered anyway I mean you didn't do a control true but I was not willing to do the control experimen uh exactly so yeah that let me say two things on this front first the dean on the alphalipoic acid is yeah it's not overwhelming but losing your sense of smell is overwhelming so so I think people feel desperate one word about the smelling the lemon and this is uh I'll take that opportunity to to uh share more information when we smell things it's the result of more uh sensory subsystems in the olfactory system alone so you have several chemosensory sensitive nerves in your nose a primary one beyond the olfactory nerve is the trigeminal nerve the fifth cranial nerve so the geminal nerve has sensory endings in your nose in your throat and in your eye it has three branches that's why an onion has a smell and burns your eyes and burns in your throat is that trigeminal yeah the tearing of of cutting an onion is Tri a trigeminal reflex amazing we talked about trigeminal in the context of headache during a headache episode it's a trigeminal reflex so the lemon you were smelling may have been a trigeminal sensation so smelling the lemon with my eyes is what you're saying well no with your nose but with your trigeminal receptors and not your allory receptors um so in within you know all faction researcher jargon uh there's what we refer to as pure olfactants these are odors that will stimulate your olfactory nerve alone they won't influence your trigeminal nerve at all and an example just to get a sense of what that might be would be uh uh the coffee right here uh is a pure alaant uh vanilla is a known pural faant these things have no trigeminal activation um as long as we're on this topic and we'll weave back and forth but I'm glad we are on this topic because a tremendous number of people wrote to me during the pandemic and continue to about olfactory uh loss um is the I I've heard of this olfactory training where whereby if you have a partial or even a complete loss of of primar faction right that um one is encouraged to smell a number of different smells I I grew up studying activity dependent wiring of the nervous system makes total sense to me why keeping neurons active keeps them alive so this is not fire together wire together type thing by the way that's a quote from Carla shats not Donal head folks or me um but this is about keeping neurons electrically active in this case Factory neurons in order to maintain their connections because otherwise they will die well all faction is a definite use it or lose it system and so that makes total sense and indeed there's very strong evidence for success of of uh the training programs more than the alphalipoic acid um and so that's a real thing and and what's cool about that is that you don't need to go out and buy expensive things although you can of course there are people who are capitalizing on this commercially already but you can just take things from your refrigerator or your or your you know makeup cabinet or whatever and smell them you know attentionally and constantly and sniff them and and that exposure will help you recover uh there's good data on that by now you made that uh point in passing about regeneration in the olfactory system and nether one one of the cool things so so in Al action you can you can study many things through Alf faction and indeed one of them is is an is neuro regeneration uh because the olfactory neurons are really the only neurons that do that systematically in the adult meleon brain and whether the human old factory system shows the same level of regeneration as it does in in uh in other mammals is and was somewhat questionable and I'm just bringing that up to share a really cool study that was published in neuron I think somewhere around 2014 um where to address this question I just really like the idea of doing that what the what the authors did um was look at in in postmortem they looked at levels of c14 in in adults who were exposed to atomic bomb experiments right so you have you can actually look at these at these neurons and and time them based on exposure to radiation um and that paper suggested that that there's not as much turnover in the human all Factory bulb as there is in other mammals uh other lines of data suggest otherwise so this is kind of a debated question as to what extent of neurog degeneration you have in in the human factory system as opposed to other uh uh mammals but but that was just a really cool paper I think of of of doing that fascinating no I I should I finish the the path just so we have so so we said so so information then synapses at the olfactory bulb from from uh uh uh the the olfactory epithelium and the pattern of that synapsing follows what's referred to as the most extreme case of convergence in the mamelon uh nervous system more specifically what happens is that all the receptors of a given subtype and remember in humans we said we have about 350 in the mouse we have about 1,200 probably um so all the receptors of one subtype converge to one location in the bulb and uh this location is referred to as a glus or an impl gleri and and that may be a slight oversimplification it's in fact two glomi there's a mirror sort of a mirror a cut line and so all the receptors of one subtype will converge to two miror gleri on the olfactory bulb so you end up having uh two gleri that reflect that one receptor subtype and so if and this is as far as I'm giving you now the textbook view of of how the system works but then I can I'll happily share with you things that pose a problem for the textbook view of how things work but the textbook view of how things work is that every such receptor subtype is responsive to a small subset of different molecular shapes what sometimes referred to as oopes the molecular aspects of the odorant so each receptor is responsive to a different subset of oopes let's say 10 and each otop will activate a different subset of receptors so potentially you have this insane common and Torx of this potentially 350 dimensional space in the human potentially but then because of this convergence you end up having on the bulb in a way a map reflecting o receptor identity so so let's say this coffee uh activates receptors of type 13 and 7 so the gloi of receptors 13 and 7 will light up quote unquote when I smell the coffee and if you could take a snapshot of that theoretically you would have the map of of coffee and and so on and so forth this this is sort of the textbook view of how the system works and and then information goes from the ball bulb to several Targets in the brain I mean what is referred to as primary Factory cortex is perform cortex and and enthorinal cortex this is on the ventral surface of the brain the lower portion of our temporal lobe um and information goes there directly but it also goes directly to the amigdala it probably goes directly to the hypothalamus it may go directly to the cerebellum uh it goes all over the brain so so information projects widely from there and as far as people understand the map that may exist on the bulb uh doesn't exist in the rest of the brain and the understanding of of how coding occurs in the rest of the brain is is murky commonly one hears that the memories that we have of odors are somehow more robust um than the memories of other perceptual events in our life I I don't know if this is true or not but um people will will say for instance I can still remember the smell of my grandmother's hands or the smell of cookies in her kitchen at a minimum it points to the fact that smell and memory are closely linked and you just mentioned a direct um you know multistation but nonetheless somewhat direct path from the nostrils to the hippocampus one of the primary encoding centers of meor yeah which is which is a remarkably short pathway considering that for instance uh just by example because some of our listeners won't be familiar with this but some will that sound waves that uh you know are transduced into neural signals at the level of the inner ear go through many stations before they arrive at the location in the brain where we make sense of those sound waves as voices or music Etc whereas olfaction is more of a direct route um to the to the uh memory centers um is there any uh just so story or real uh objective truth to the idea that olfactory memories are formed more easily or maintained longer or more robustly than other sorts of memories so so yes uh but first I I should I should say that I'm not an authority on all Factory memory it's sort of it Factory memory is a huge field of research and somehow our lab has never really um gone much into that although uh again the same student I happened to talk about before the Ari sharun who's again now A A Faculty at Tel Aviv uh um ran a study a paper we I think we published in current biology biology called the privileged representation of early Al Factory uh associations basically there's something about the first time you experience a smell that generates a particularly robust representation more than other sensory stimuli and and that's what she in fact compared so there's something about the first exposure to a smell um in terms of the brain encoding that that etches it into our uh being and and this is an effect that has you know it has Echo was of course in literature I mean you know the the the biggest cliche in this is to bring up the pr effect right so the pr effect is when he ate the meline and it immediately the taste and smell immediately reminded him uh of of an event in his childhood where where uh where the same meline U appeared uh um but but so so that's something very real there there's a lot of research on it uh not coming from our works so I'm not an authority but it does sound like there's something special about all faction um and that doesn't mean that there isn't something special about Vision or audition each one has its own uh unique uh I'm the last to argu that there's something special about all faction it's a my my students make fun of me because they say and there's some truth to that that I try to explain everything through the all factory system I mean for me everything is all Factory so so yes through the lens of the nose I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors athletic greens athletic greens now called ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs I've been taking athletic greens since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast the reason I started taking athletic greens and the reason I still take athletic greens once or usually twice a day is that it gets me the probiotics that I need for gut health our gut is very important it's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain the immune system and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health and those probiotics and athletic greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health in addition athletic greens contains a number of adaptogens vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met and it tastes great if you'd like to try athletic greens you can go to athletic greens.com huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road in the car on the plane Etc and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's athletic greens.com huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 when I was at Berkeley um I was walking across campus one day and I saw I think students but I saw people on their hands and knees with goggles on gloves on yeah and um I think their mouths were covered too um everything was covered was covered and they were walking well they were crawling along the ground um and I thought this was peculiar but then again uh it's UC Berkeley and the joke is if it to get noticed on the UC Berkeley campus you have to be naked and on fire right one or the other would not be sufficient please don't run this experiment anybody um It's that kind of place um yeah but nonetheless um a paper came out a few years later describing the results of what turned out to be your experiment that your laboratory was running which was having people follow an odor trail with their nose and um and my understanding is that people can improve their ability to track sense quite robustly especially if we deprive them of vision and some am of Sensation that is touch in some other um Sensations maybe you could just tell us a little bit about that study and um and for I think in our audience I'm suspecting that many people have a Keen Keen sense of smell very I have a family member who just like detect any negative you know putrid odor in the environment but also good odors um exquisitly well and I I have other family members whose sense of smell is quite poor um I'd love for all of those people to learn a bit about what is possible in terms of training up or improving our ability to smell and um perhaps in the context of that study if you will yes so so first before even talking about improving just off the bat humans have a remarkable sense of smell and this is something again in our lab we already s of you know yeah we know this this is old news but but to people who who come from different worlds we have to reiterate this sometimes when I give uh you know public lectures to to non-all faction audiences I reiterate this humans have an utterly remarkable sense of smell to to put that a bit into sort of you know things that you could that are tangible so so for example um mer capons which are added to cooking gas so that we smell it because otherwise it wouldn't have a smell so that the smell of gas it's not the smell of gas of propane it's an additive Captain yeah it's merap the sulfur like smell so so uh our detection threshold that is the level at which we can detect it is 0.2 parts per billion okay there's no machine that can really do that that effectively no gas chromatograph nothing now to give you another sense of of of making this again really tangible we're working with a odorant in our lab called estr Tetra enol that our participants can detect when we have it mixed at 10 to the -12 molar in the liquid phase to give you a real sense of that we did the math if you would take two olympic size swimming pools and you would pipet 1 ml one drop into one pool versus the other you could smell the difference between the pools in that's the detection threshold that you have with your nose people have an utterly amazing nose Okay so so that's just in terms of its detection abilities which are are just you know remarkable really up there in the Mamon World we're not a bad mammal at all faction um and and beyond that we can we can improve okay and and the example you're talking about actually started off uh as a lab bet okay we we were having a lab picnic so I guess I should hear fill in because I I'm I'm your guest from The whitesman Institute of Science in Israel but before going back to my home in Israel I was a uh um faculty at UC Berkeley in the Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute and this study was done during that time and we were on a lab picnic and we were having indeed one of these sort of lab discussions arguments on what humans can and can't do with their sense of smell and and I said that humans could truly even track odor like a dog and people there said no way and we ran this quick experiment uh which I have video of but I don't think we'll show it here uh but I actually have original the picnic video we have it and uh a graduate student by the name of Christina Zano a brilliant graduate student at that time who's now she's now a professor at Northwestern and she's really leading the field of of all faction Imaging today but she was the volunteer and we dragged a chocolate bar across the grass and blindfolded her and checked if she could track the track we made with the chocolate which she did very effectively right and as far did you place her at the starting point of the line or I think we did I don't exactly remember what we did on that sort of picnic uh uh tryy out but you know I assume she never practiced that in her life before right and yet you know she she did it really really well and and then this went on as a labed in a way that that I I said to my my students okay we we have to make this into an experiment put in an experimental setting and and and quantify what's going on uh and they all said that it would be uninteresting that was the BET and and I told them it would be in nature which is a bet I W in this case nature of course being one of the the a three Apex Journal science it was it was nature neural science to be fair but but uh so so then we we turned it into an experiment and and what the experiment was is that we brought in participants naive participants not not from our lab uh completely deprived them of any other sensory input so we blocked their eyes we blocked their ears we blocked everything we block they were wearing heavy gloves uh you know they they couldn't sense anything and we generated a a a consistent odor path in the grass which is what you saw uh we did that by burying twine under the grass and odor impregnated twine so that way we could generate a consistent uh odor Trail every time was it at the base of the grass or in the dirt it was buried it was buried under the grass really yeah yeah wow I did not know that it was buried under the grass and we uh conducted aerial photography and um participants also had the sensor pack that they were wearing where we um measured nasal air flow in each nostril in real time and uh they all we also use something called rtk GPS which is a way to lay uh radio frequency grid over the GPS grid so that you have millimeter resolution in space basically um it's used by surveyors mostly um so that we could track behavior and we found a few things doing this one is that people could just do this right off the bat um the second thing we found that is when we trained them up then within uh average of 4 days uh the rate limiting factor became the speed at which they could crawl so as fast as you could crawl you could send track of course you can't crawl as fast as a dog can run but you as fast as you can crawl you can sent track and then to to sort of add what made it really interesting from from a system as neurosin perspective is that we asked whether having two nostrils uh contributes to this so uh we built we constructed a nasal prosthesis if you will uh that had two versions one is that it it combined both nostrils into one big nostril centered and the other is that it it maintained two separated uh nostrils and we compared performance under these two conditions and people performed better uh with two nostrils over one centralized nostril although the flow remain the same so you're taking advantage of the information uh that comes from your two separate totally separate nostrils by the way the system I described before of your epithelium and bulb and and connection to Cortex um you have two of those right it's completely unilateral well almost completely unilateral system there's some very small exceptions to that but but so a representation on both sides of the brain much in the same way we have two eyes we're not a cyclops we can gain depth perception information we can perceive motion better as a consequence and and a number of AD depth especially stereopsis and we can locate sound because of the difference between our ears and how head blocks them between and amazing another question about the the mechanics and strategies that you observed because I think there's information about the system the brain as a consequence um were you in a position to measure sniffing frequency and the specific question I have is were people doing something along the lines of a quick sniffing or a like a you know a long um draw in inh you know we didn't so yes we were measuring sniffing and recording it and and we have all the data um there was nothing um very remarkable in that data in that study although it may reflect that we didn't analyze it carefully enough as well I mean it didn't it was it it wasn't a major component of our analysis although we did look at it uh to some extent again you're you're asking me about a paper from quite a few years ago so I I may be forgetting parts of it as well um but I'm sure if it was a a major component of it it would have risen to the top it definitely wasn't a major finding the sniffing behavior um in the paper although again we you know sniffing behavior is a huge portion of our our life in lab uh uh and and it's it's taking us to to places and and it's reemerging now in our work we're we're doing tons of sniffing work um I you know I can share with you some something that that I think will interest your your uh listeners and viewers as well and and we think is is really uh uh one of the most overlooked things in in Neuroscience uh I'll invite you I'll invite you to do the following experiment so olude one nostril by pressing on it from the side and sniff in and then olude the other and sniff in do you sense a difference in flow yes okay do you know why that is no and it was the next question on my list so don't feel badly about not knowing why that is um most people don't uh but that is a reflection of something referred to as the nasal cycle so in fact if you were to do that repeatedly you would find that your high flow nostril and low flow nostril alternate every two and a half hours on average in an absolute way or is it kind of like a sine wave like gradual shift to the one and then gradual shift back it can vary it can vary and we don't yet know the rules uh all the rules but but you have this Con Conant shift from side to side the shift becomes incredibly pronounced in sleep so we can measure the power of the difference and and in sleep you have this phase shift of power you have a huge like one closes and one opens totally and it turns out that this is linked to uh balance in the autonomic nervous system so as you and your listeners know we have an autonomic nervous system that has a sympathetic and parasympathetic component to it and and they're in balance or imbalance in many diseases for example and this interplay between the uh Auto between the the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system drives the switch from left to right nostril just to remind people um sympathetic nervous system has nothing to do with sympathy um has everything to do with generating patterns of alertness it's sometimes called the fight ORF flight system but any pattern of arousal positive or negative and then it's balanced in a coordinated way or at least in parallel with the parasympathetic nervous system which is sometimes called the rest and digest system but is associated with all sorts of things the sexual arousal response um and a number of other aspects of our physiology so think of it like a seesaw of alertness and calm yeah perfect so now imagine right imagine imagine you would walk around living your life right half of the time with one eye closed like this and the other half with one eye closed like this and you had this eye cycle right and that was linked to autonomic arousal I assure you you would go to pbed there would be 5 million papers on the ey cycle right and the eye cycle and every disease you can name and what it denotes and what it tells us and what we can do with it you have exactly this marker you're walking around with a marker on balance in your autonomic nervous system and we do nothing with it so we're in fact now doing a lot with it okay so we built we built a wearable device that uh is pasted to your body and measures air flow in each nostril separately and logs it for 24 hours and collecting these 24-hour recordings we're calling it the nasal halter so we measure with the nasal halter and and we're finding it as a disease marker um I can I can give you a nasal halter measurement as an adult and I can say this is worked by team nooka graduate soon our lab now uh I can so we can tell the difference between uh ADHD and non-adhd adults and we can tell just from the record in we can tell if the adults are on riddling or not so I can I can measure your nasal air flow and say if you are or are not with ADHD and if you are or are not on riddlin incredible I have a couple of questions about this is it the case that air flow through one nostril is reflective of a sympathetic nervous system dominance versus parasympathetic um or is it simply the case that this alternating Left Right nostril um periodicity um which you said I think is on the order of about every two hours and two and a half it switches to uh maximal on one side versus the other is that simply reflective of an overall balancing like let's maybe is it the hinge in the Seesaw or is it the tilt of the Seesaw so I don't have a good answer I don't have a good answer I mean you know I could give you sort of a you know I could say that to some extent uh uh right nostril more open um is more sympathetic and the left nostril more open is more parasympathetic but that that wouldn't be very correct I mean you know I'm sure that you know the yogis are going to be all over this cuz I get this my lab does do some stuff on on breathing and the the yogis are always saying okay you know because there's this thing I don't do yoga anymore but not for any particular but um where they'll have you breathe through one nostril or the other and I've I've probably been asked this question on social media 10,000 times okay wait I'm gonna become Public Enemy Number One of the yogis right now so listen we so we we come at you with yoga mats which are not very dangerous we really so so since we're so interested in this mechanism one of the things we'd really like to know how to do is is to gain control of it somehow and there's this world out there of yoga who claims to have control over this so we said okay let's bring like really serious yoga practitioners and see if they can shift their nasal cycle from left to right by by Will alone right not by manipulating themselves somehow and and if yes you know we'll learn from them how they do this and then we we might you know use this to to cure ADHD or or whatnot right so so we posted like on all lists of like the yoga teachers and had this parade of yoga teachers walking into our lab it this was one of the strangest Sandalwood odors and bare feet white white clothing and and so on and and so we we studied I actually know we studied 14 yoga teachers all 14 uh by you know by the conditions of enlistment for this uh came in saying that they they can control shifting from left to right uh nostril without plugging an nostr Yeah by by the power of thought Alone um and you know how many of 14 succeeded zero including including one you know the most extreme one was we we have this guy who who you know and we're recording and we know how to record this really well right and and he's sitting there saying yeah I'm switching now and I'm I'm it's switching and you know you're looking at the moderator and no it's not switching and and so no no yoga teacher that we found uh could uh willfully switch uh between left and right nostril flow and yet they're they are convinced that they are and I have to imagine they're not trying to you know there there's no incentive for them to lie right yeah no I even the opposite I mean you know this puts them in an awkward position once yeah I don't know what the deal is but but none of them can do it um given that the alternating flow through one or the other nostrils reflective of the autonomic nervous system has this two and a half hour periodicity if I suddenly enter a bout of stress for instance does it switch because that's reflective of the autonomic nervous system and the reason I'm asking this question is not because I think that's necessarily important as it relates to stress but I'm trying to understand the direction of causality in other words is the the unilateral smelling through or unilateral nostril smelling periodicity there when we named it something I named it the wrong thing I'm sure is that driving the shift in the autonomic nervous system or is it merely reflective of the the shift so you've you've very concisely now worded aim to of a grant that was probably just rejected but but basically we're trying to answer exactly uh that question and we're currently running experiments on that line so so we have one experiment where uh uh we're looking um so we're exposing participants to pain uh we're using uh cold water hand exposure it's a really cool Paradigm because it it there's huge individual differences we just started this we built the setup just now and you have a lot of meat to work with there because there's a lot of individual differences you're it's capped at 3 minutes so for safety reasons because you have you have participants putting their hand in in uh two degre Celsius water but there'll be participants who will pull it out at like 10 seconds 9 seconds and then you'll have you'll have 3 minutes as well so there's lots of lots of uh and and already so now I'm sharing pilot data with you so you know to to this might you know when it when this ends up being published it might be the opposite but so far it seems that that uh the exposure to cold generates a shift in the nasal FL in in nasal balance so autonomic arousal can drive the shift potentially um earlier you were describing the architecture of these um smelling systems and you mentioned these glami where the receptors converge right in the bulb and then later you mentioned that the system is unilateral but with a mirror representation on both sides of the brain so for those who don't think in terms of neuron Anatomy what Nom was describing is the fact that of course there are two nostrils and then a bunch of receptors they converge in these glar but you have a mirror representation of that on both sides of the brain and that most of that information is kept on one side of the brain or the other there isn't a lot of extensive intermixing at the first order of processing so the question I have is whether or not you believe I'm not asking for data first I just want to know what you believe that this alternating nostril airflow phenomenon has anything to do with preferential processing of olfactory information in terms of right brain left brain with the caveat that anytime we hear right brain left brain um we've covered this in a previous episode most of what people hear out there about right brain left brain emotionality logical stuff is completely wrong completely wrong doesn't exist it's a total fabrication um and we'd like to abolish that myth but with that aside or set aside rather what are your thoughts on why that information would switch from one side of the brain to the other at all yeah I don't think I don't think that that the nasal cycle is an all faction story um so so I I don't think that um that this was shaped by Thea system nor do I think this has major impact on all faction I think the nasal cycle story is a different story about brain function um so so you know we have we have this sort of pet Theory where are calling now the the sniffing brain approach where where basically we think that that nasal inhalation is timing and driving a a lot of aspects and patterns of of neural activity and cognitive processing and and this theory is is all faction inspired in its beginning that is I mean if if you think of the Maman brain right it's which which evolved from all faction it's sitting there and and in all faction because all faction depends on sniffing you have this situation where you have a you have a sniff you have information and then flat nothing right and then you have information and then nothing so information processing is is one toone linked to nasal inhalation and and we think that that this property evolved to to be meaningful in brain processing in general not only of of allory information but of any type of information because the brain evolved in this way in this way that it processes information on inhalation onset so a study led by off Perl from our our lab uh two 3 years ago um we looked at at something completely nonolfactory we looked at at visual spatial processing and we compared visual spatial processing on inhalation versus exhalation and the brain does this completely different on inhalation versus exhalation you're in in that particular task people performed significantly better on inhalation versus exhalation what was the task was it an old factory task no no it's a visual spatial task so this is a task where where uh the the specifics of the task were um that you see uh a shape and you have to determine if it's a shape that can or cannot exist in the real world so some of them were these like Usher shapes like you know where where one facet doesn't reach the other facet The Impossible figure yeah but but but but uh structural shapes not not and and so so a pure visual spatial task we we intentionally went for a task that is not considered a vental temporal task an old factory cortex task in any way and and people performed much better on inhalation versus exhalation at doing this task was there a both nostrils uded um version where people were forced to mouth breathe yes and in this particular task they also did better on mouth inhalation versus mouth exhalation but the difference wasn't as pronounced as it was with n inhalation versus exhalation so bet I'm a big proponent of nasal not mouth breathing whenever possible for um many health related Reasons I'm a big fan of the book Jaws a hidden epidemic uh written by colleagues of mine at Stanford familiar with it Y and this idea that people who mouth breathe um experience more colds more infections of various kinds it's not good aesthetically or for the dentist denure I never know the teeth the gums it's stuff folks sorry my uh dentist is going to come after me um need to go to the dentist anyway the um that nose breathing is great for your health relative to mouth so I think it's also good for your cognition not only for your your dental health uh I think that that uh news breathing shapes cognition and and there there are other labs uh who who are uh are finding the same uh again uh Christina Zano is doing work on this line she she had major contributions here and and Yan lunstrum is doing work on this line there there's lots of studies suggesting that um nasal inhalation is timing cognitive processing and and modulating it incredible um perhaps not surprising given what you've taught us about the old factory system I mean that these two holes in the front of our face these nostrils I mean are a pathway to the brain right I I love to tell people because I work on the visual system in my lab that you know your eyes are two pieces of brain extruded from the cranial vault which they are the retinas any anyhow and um and then you never look at anyone the same way again it's but the the olfactory Sensory neurons are right there at the top so those Caverns that we call nostrils and they are brain yeah definitely it's it's the only place where your brain meets the outside world because in your R now they're protected by by a lens and here here you have neurons in contact with with the world this this actually has been the source for some theories on a potential uh route for for neurodegenerative um um mechanisms so as as you may know um loss of the sense of smell is one of the if not the earliest sign of neurodegenerative disease so for example in Parkinson's disease there's uh uh loss in the sense of smell probably 10 years before any other symptom um but people have failed to make this a diagnostic tool because it's non-specific so it's not as if you could come to your doctor and say I'm losing my sense of smell and they'll say oh early sign of Parkinson's because you can have many reasons to lose your sense of smell and and and so on um but but all Factory loss again is is an early sign of of neurod degeneration and there's at least one Theory particularly about Alzheimer's disease suggesting that that Alzheimer's may be the result of of a a pathogen that enters the brain through the olfactory system um how interesting it's it's not of course a a a mainstream or widely accepted theory of any type but but it's just it just highlights this notion that that the nose is a path to our brain I think these non-invasive um readouts of potential neurod degeneration um such as uh visual tests because of the fact that the retinas are part of the brain and loss of neurons in the retina is often associated with other forms of central degeneration Alzheimer's um Parkinson Etc as it's a little more invasive than what you're describing I'm beginning to wonder why we don't um get have a old factory task every time we go to the doctor um that would allow tracking over time because of course as you mentioned someone can lose their sense of smell does that mean they're getting Alzheimer's not necessarily but if their sense of smell was terrific the year before and it's 50% worse the next year that's a really bad sign yeah that's a bad sign and so what we're talking about something completely non-invasive um and could be relatively Pleasant to innocuous depending on the odors used so yeah so so first I can answer that right and the reason that that's not happened and that might that that may be changing right now but the reason that has not happened is because all faction has not been effectively digitized right so if you need to generate you know really precise visual information you can buy a monitor for you know 100 bucks that is at the resolution of the visual system basically and if you want to generate auditory stimuli really precisely then you can buy an amplifier for you know maybe a bit more than 100 bucks but not that much more and you'll be at the resolution of the auditory system in our lab we build devices that generate odors uh we call them all feters which is a misnomer because they don't measure anything but that's what they've always been called so we call them all foms as well and we've already built at least one alcometer that cost a quarter of a million euro and it's pathetic right so it just it's pathetic it's it's slow it's contaminated it's nowhere near the resolution of your system so one of the reasons that's not happened is just the utterly poor control of the stimulus mind you to some extent it has happened and that there there are a standard clinical tests of vaction basically to that s out of control uh the world in this respect the older one is is a test called the upsit which stands for the University of Pennsylvania smell identification test it was developed by Richard Dodie and Penn and it's a test where you scratch and sniff and and it's a four alternative Force choice test with 40 odorant so you have these 40 pages that you page through and you sniff and smell and and um you know it's been normed on gazillions of tests um I I'm always amused by it because so so Richard Dodie made a ton of money uh on the upsit but he needed it because he has a habit he has a NASCAR so this every time we buy upsit in live I say there's another gallon of gas into Richard he races NASCAR not like NASCAR but like one lower than that like I don't know like some some sort of formula a or Formula Ford or something he races a car and so that's where all the ubit went so I always feel good about buying psit because I know they're going to that good cause but keeping him in in in the fast lane yeah but but so so that's one test that's out there and indeed you know has been shown as a you know so so there's reduced upsit in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's and in a host of other diseases and there's a European version called sniffing sticks uh that Thomas hum has developed and and it's it's basically the same sort of concept of that one isn't scratch and sniff it's it's like these pens that you open up and and sniff but but those exist but they're not as as convenient as as uh is delivering stimuli and vision and audition and that's why uh you don't have what you've just suggested interesting you know another thing another place where you don't have it which which I think is even more would have been even more meaningful is is you don't Al action it's not tested in in newborns right where vision and audition is you know there's this thing called congenital anosmia right which is being without the sense of smell from birth supposedly conal uh which is half a percent of the population it's not a trivial number not totally yeah but nobody knows if that really is true because here's an amazing factoid guess the average age at which congenital anosmia is diagnosed and this is this is a horrible statistic for me for the way I see the world but what do you think the average age of diagnosis is for congenital anosmia five years of age 14 incredible 14 so most people who are one half of a 1% of the human population presumably yeah is uh without the sense of smell and doesn't realize that until they're 14 years old well I don't know when they realized it first but but it's formally diagnosed at 14 on average which means some of them even later right and um and uh right it's a distribution what um do they suffer yes so so first of all they they suffer socially um and there's a host of of deleterious life events associated with conal anosia um the die younger um the so it's it's it's a it's this is work out of uh Elon Croy in Germany um and you know amongst the various things that are predicted by an osmia is shorter lifespan uh but things like you know reduced uh social contacts uh reduced um uh romantic social contacts um it's not a good thing um and and do they lack ol Factory bulbs I'm presuming they have noses and nostrils there is a condition I'm aware of where where children are born without noses very rare very rare we won't focus on that because it's it's exceedingly rare um they're born with noses and nostal um and here's the thing right we don't know if they're born with all Factory bulbs um most of them although not all of them but most of them don't have all Factory bulbs in adulthood or or I should rephrase that have remnants ol Factory bulbs really shriveled olfactory bulbs but you know nobody can say the cause and effect here before we talk about the role of the the uh requirement for olfactory bulbs for ol faction a very interesting topic in its own right I I'm curious as to whether or not their endocrine system is altered because as we'll soon talk about there's a lot of signaling through the nose from between individuals that uh triggers things everything from the onset of puberty to feelings of romantic attraction attachment these sorts of things um is it known whether or not and I should say excuse me for interrupting myself but as long as I'm interrupting you every five minutes I might as well interrupt myself too that um we are well aware of the proximity of the factory system to some of the hypothalamic systems that regulate the release of ganat tropins which control testosterone and estrogen production Etc so um are they uh hormonally normal so some are and some aren't and I'll I'll be specific so um there's a condition known as calman syndrome which is hypogenetic uh development um in in men and in cman syndrome uh they practically all anosmic so so to answer your question yes there's a direct link and and it materializes in calman syndrome that said not all congenitally anosmic uh individuals have calman syndrome and not all but almost all people who have common syndrome are anosmic so so common syndrome uh goes with uh anosmia I think so so there's a female equivalent of cmans or I don't remember its name uh it's not turn it's not a in the Turner syndrome family is I'm not sure and I think it's also associated with anosmia uh but I'm not confident of that but commmons is is associated with anosmia uh so so the answer is is yes and and you know we can maybe you know all faction and reproduction are are tightly linked and and they're tightly Linked In all mammals and we are big terrestrial mammals and all factions reproduction are linked in humans as well um yeah we will definitely get into that I'd like to just take a brief moment and thank one of our podcast sponsors which is insid tracker insid tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that blood work is the only way that you can monitor the markers such as hormone markers lipids metabolic factors Etc the impact your immediate and long-term Health one major challenge with blood work however is that most of the time it does not come back with any information about what to do in order to move the values for hormones metabolic factors lipids Etc into the ranges that you want with inside tracker changing those values becomes very straightforward because it has a personalized dashboard that you can use to address the nutrition-based behavior-based supplement based approaches that you can use in order to move those values into the ranges that are optimal for you Your vitality and your your longevity inside tracker now includes a measurement of APO lipoprotein B so-called apob in their ultimate plan apob is a key marker of cardiovascular health and therefore there's extreme value to knowing your apob levels if you'd like to try insid tracker you can go to insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off any of insid tracker's plans again that's insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off I have a a story slash question that I'd like to um tell you ask you as a segue to that um noting of course that that we'll get back to the requirement for old factory bulbs yes or no for old faction uh and um this relates to when I was growing up I grew up at the uh end of a street with a a lot of boys of my age who just by Winson had a lot of older sisters they were my sister my older sister's age it was fortunate so I had a lot of kids to play with we would hang out at each other's houses bike build jumps and do all these things like kids stuff for Stuff get into trouble or whatnot and oftentimes we would end up leaving our articles of clothing at each other's houses all the time like t-shirts and jackets and so my mom was constantly coming in and saying there's all there's this clothes like someone left us here I don't know who it was we were all more or less the same size and from the as far back as I could remember six seven years old and onward I could pick up a shirt or a jacket smell it and say oh well that's Eric eisenh Hart's shirt a friend of mine there I just gave his name or oh that's Scott madson's shirt I I could just smell the shirt and in a conscious way know who it belonged to having never I promise not that I would pretend if I had if I had um pretend I hadn't if I had but having never actually done the exercise of going and taking and smelling my friend intentionally right okay in fact if anything I had all the reasons in the world to avoid smelling the other young boys in my neighborhood Okay so yeah um that raises the question of whether or not we are consciously and or subconsciously coding identification of people that we interact with frequently or infrequently in terms of their smell a or some other aspect of their um chemistry yeah so yes um we're doing that all the time in my view and a a lot of this processing almost all of it uh is subconscious and I don't know why I'll already I'll already put that out there right I have no idea why why uh Human Nature has has uh or or nature or culture or whatnot has has has pushed this into the realm of of subconscious and something we're unaware of um but we do it all the time and and um and our lab has lots of studies on this front um one of them you may be familiar with that that had gained some notoriety because it's amusing um so so we we look at human behavior a lot we try to look at it through our nose and in the way we look at what people are doing you know we try to think you know if I was a dog what what would I think of this and and you know if you look at dogs right they they've you know when they interact they visibly sniff each other it's very obvious they walk up to each other and they sniff each other um and yet humans don't typically walk up to a stranger and carefully sniff them right I mean it's we're we're sort of obliged to sniff our our babies that's considered almost something you're supposed to do um and it's not culturally taboo to sniff our loved ones it sort of doesn't seem like an odd thing to do but we don't sniff strangers right well or do we so where finding more and more mechanisms where we do this and and the one I'm referring to now for one example is we started looking at handshaking handshaking is this really odd behavior and it's not only in the west by the way as some people think it's only a western thing it's not it's almost everywhere and and there's really poor understanding of how this Behavior evolved like where did where did this thing come from so if if you you know if you look for the Wikipedia version right then they'll tell you that it's to show that you're not holding a weapon in your hand but there's really no good evidence for that it's a bit like the trillion Blood Hound receptor story right I mean we tried to find it you know why do people say that and they just do and we started looking at people handshaking and and we noticed or it seemed to us that we're noticing that you know people will shake hands and then go like this and like this those of you listening not watching gnome um is taking his hand and and wiping it on his face touching these things these things that we do all the time after a handshake well so so first of all we do them all the time just period right the Baseline here is really high and we'll get to that in a second but but but these behaviors that you know you could easily not notice right and and so we we asked whether that's a real thing um and this was a study led by joh frine in our lab at the time um and what we did first and and if you want we can link so so this was published in E and one of the nice things about eif is that it has a very effective way to uh embed videos in the publication so if you want we can link this to your system later on the put it in the show note captions as a link on YouTube and the other for uh platforms Spotify Apple so so what we did is is um we we brought in participants to our lab and we sat them in the room uh experiment room and and told them the experiment would start soon and they should wait for us there they didn't know what they were coming from unbeknownst to them they were already being videoed of course later on they they had the opportunity to to not agree to us saving the video in which case we would delete it immediately or or letting us use it for science or some letting us use it for more than science for for the video that's now on E life and and we would walk into the room and say okay just wait here we'll be right back with you uh to set up our experiment and they would sit there for 3 minutes and during those 3 minutes we could later quantify how much indeed they just by Baseline how much they touch their nose or their forehead or their chin or how many times their hand uh uh reaches their face and by the way that Baseline is not low okay um and then three minutes later an experiment would walk into the room and uh would share a consistent text it would be you know we're still setting up our equipment in the other room uh and and so just wait here and we'll be right back with you but in the meantime just wait here and the experiment went through through this like 20 second fix text and in half of the cases it included a handshake this was a new experiment or not the one who put them in the room so it's the first time they met so it would' be hello I'm you know so and so they would put out their hand and shake their hand or not okay and we did all possible inactions in terms of gender so we matched male participants with male and female experimenters and female participants with female and male experimenters and so you had handshake and no handshake conditions and then you can quantify that behavior of the hand going to the nose after handshake and there was a remarkable increase in the hand going to the nose after handshake and this is one of the nice cases we the paper includes statistics but you don't need statistics here just look at the video it's un it's unreal the video is unreal so interesting so the hand goes to the nose now we did a few controls here to verify that this is an Alla Factory Behavior one is unbeknown thean to participants we measured nasal air flow and and people not only bring their hand to their nose they sniff fit so and this is perfectly time they go like this okay so they're sniffing their hands and in an additional control study we manipulated it so we built this little James Bond thing of a watch on the experimenter's hand that could emit an odor and the experimentor didn't know what odor they were emitting and they could emit either a pleasant or an unpleasant odor and we could drive the self sampling afterwards up or down so this was an all Factory Behavior no doubt about it I mean we're we're quite confident that so people in that case people must have sensing the odor on their own hand because they Shake shook the hand of the of the experimenter pleasant odor and they're more frequently bringing that hand to their nose versus unpleasant odor that would had been introduced to their own hand by the experimentor correct yeah but I but no I think I think they were sensing the the ambient odor that came in with the hand that That Shook and then that either drove them to sniff their hand more or less the odor cloud of the experiment yeah and and there's an interesting thing going on here too because people didn't only smell the hand that chook they also smelled the other hand and and we think that there's something going on here comparing self to other and we think a lot of self-sampling might might reflect that there's on this same line and again to to link to your childhood story of of of uh identifying your friends by by smell um study we published just last year by in Bal rebi in in our lab um where in came with this uh uh basic interest in this phenomenon that's Loosely referred to as click friendships so people you meet and you click right away right you immediately become close friends and this is a phenomena that that you know was poorly described or is poorly described in L literature as as as an entity and yet anybody will tell you they know what you're talking about right I mean if you tell you know somebody you click with right away you you become intimate within 5 minutes right everybody experienced this in their life you know to some extent and the question is what what was there right what was it was it because you look the same could be was it because you know you had the same sports team that you liked or is there something uh uh deeper here and and in's theory was that that um that a similarity in body order May contribute to this that people who smell the same will click in some way way and so to address that she she actually recruited uh um click friends from all over Israel she posted all over social media uh to identify uh pairs of friends so these are are same-sex non-romantic diets so these are friends men and women uh whose friendship started as a click where here this becomes sensitive because it has to be a mutual click right later on we discovered there could be one-sided clicks so somebody's sure they clicked with somebody else but the other person there's a name for that in neurology that our uh common friend the late Ben bars taught me which is there's a phrase that neurologists use okay called sticky these are people that come up to you and and start asking you questions and then won't leave you alone they're so-called sticky people that are and if you ask these sticky people um sticky in air quotes because they're not physically sticky um they may be what they could be um you know what do you think of the per this person they'll say oh they're great we're really good friends and so they've made a unilateral um click friendship and uh yes neurologists are talking about you if you're if you're one of these people neurologists are talking about you there's a an an informal diagnostic code uh sticky so so so uh she she recruited um um click friends and then she um sampled their body order and and we have a a protocol for this so they're given you know uh odal shampoo and soap to use for 3 weeks or something and then they sleep two nights in this t-shirt uh where they have to sleep alone and then we extract the body order from the t-shirt and so we have a way to extract a method to extract body order and then she she first asked um whether indeed click friends are more similar in their body order than you would expect by chance and she first tested this with with a device a machine we call an electronic nose so an electronic nose is sort of a very poor effort to mimic what the Mamon nose does basically it's a bunch of sensors that respond to Airborne molecules in this case sensors refer to as moers as metal oxide covered sensors um and so she used an electronic nose to sample these body orders and she found that click friends are indeed more similar to each other uh than you would expect uh by chance by random diads and and this was a significant difference and after she found that a device could do this she had other participants do this so so she had people smelling the click friends versus non- click friends and and they judge them as being more similar to each other uh than not now again you you might wonder is this causal or not right because maybe click friends go to the same restaurant together all the time or whatever live in the same neighborhood and and that's why they they they smell the same so to address causality she recruited ttal strangers and first smell them with the electronic nose and then engage them in a social interaction something called the mirror game so in the mirror game one person moves their hands and the other person is really close to them like right here so they can smell each other and has to move their hands with the other person and one one prediction there panned out uh but another didn't the one that didn't so she predicted that people would smell more uh similar to each other would be better at the mirror game that is they would follow each other better that did not pan out however she then also had the interaction was completely non-verbal they were not allowed to speak with each other and she did an entire round robin so everybody played with everybody else this was an insane experiment to run and she then at the end of the experiment each person rated each other person as to how much they think they would want to be their friends and also on a bunch of ratings how nice they think they are how affectionate they think a bunch of ratings okay all of this was predicted by the electronic so people who smell more similar to each other think that the other person is more likely to be their friend is more likely to be a nice person etc etc so we could actually predict friendship using the electronic nose so this is not a result of friendship it's it it plays into the causal elements of of building friendship so this is to relate to your childhood story uh there's something going on here we're we're constantly smelling ourselves constantly this constantly I mean if you want to L the reason I'm smiling I mean and your viewers or listeners will understand why I'm smiling I'll send you a video to link uh uh in in the in into your podcast here uh we thought of calling the fact that people constantly sniff themselves we thought of calling this the low effect and low so so in America this won't pass that effectively but in in in the rest of the normal world uh Yim L is the soccer the national soccer coach of the German soccer team so I mean I don't know who would be a very famous coach here but Steve Kerr I mean this is the you know this is a super super famous uh name all around the world where soccer is the primary sport that people watch um and and once people will see this video they'll understand why we thought of calling this the low effect uh it's very graphic uh but but people are constantly smelling themselves they're smelling themselves with their hands they're smelling themselves explicitly people are constantly smelling themselves constantly smelling others um I find this topic so interesting um and first of all confession I definitely smell myself multiple times per day and everybody does okay good well then I I um I would do it anyway um uh I think I like most people I either find my own smell to be neutral to Pleasant right I um occasionally I'll be like whoa I need to take a shower as long as we're talking about smelling oneself and um friendship kinship and its relationship to smell we have to talk about the relationship between smell and romantic attraction and bond so my understanding is that if for instance a mouse is given the option to mate with any number of other different mice they will bias their choice toward the mouse that has the immune composition the so-called MHC major hisst compatibility complex which reflects immune diversity the immune system that is most distant from theirs and the The evolutionary argument being that were they to um produce offspring that the array of immune genes would be much broader than if they were to select an animal very close to them and in addition to that that one of the most strongly selected against behaviors not just culturally but at the level of eliciting a sense of disgust maybe even from the activity of the hypothalamus is mating with very close kin AKA incest because that can potential we know produces a higher rate of mutations in other words whereas you describe the relationship between smell and choice of friends as you uh choose people who smell more like you my understanding is that in the context of uh choosing romantic Partners or sexual partners or both that you choose the person whose odor and therefore immune composition is most different right so the way you describe the animal literature is correct and there's evidence to similar mechanisms in humans our lab has not worked directly on this issue of of uh of romantic selection based on odor um there's a bunch of papers um wedin at Allen and the wedin lab and also Porter I'll I'll email these to you later on um that have have done a lot of this work and find exactly as you say that that um um romantic odor preferences in humans are influenced by body odor and that this is linked to uh MHC uh uh uh histo compatibility complex makeup of the the portion of our genome that that shapes our immune system uh to some extent um so so this effect um has been studied and reported on again extensively in mice and also uh in in humans um not work that that we've done um the one sort of tangent work we've done and and and and I'd like to maybe tell you about it relates to to an effect that that is one of the most remarkable effects in in mamelon Social chemo signaling so and and also related to to so it's it's not related to Romanticism in any way or or but but but it's related to reproduction and and indeed in our lab we've not looked at Romanticism we have looked at or are looking at reproduction they're not always the same um certainly but they can they can animal mamelon or or terrestrial mamelon reproductive behavior is is dominated by by the sense of smell um in in mammals and here remember initially when you started off I I noted that there are several subsystems in our nose that transduce odorant and and so primarily the the manal factory system which is cranial nerve number one and the trigeminal nerve which is cranial number five um most terrestrial mammals have another subsystem referred to as the the secondary olfactory system that has a separate sense organ in the nose this organ is known as the vulon nasal organ it's a small pit in the nasal passage of of most terrestrial mammals sometimes it's uh described as a communicated pit because sometimes it connects the nasal passage to the roof of the mouth sometimes it it connects both and so there's this sense organ with its specific receptor subtypes uh vnrs vermal receptors and uh this um um is linked to a to a sort of separate portion of the olfactory bulb not really the main olfactory bulb but it's refer to as the accessory olfactory bulb um and from there directly to the lyic system to the to the portions of the brain that control reproductive Behavior Uh and aggressive behavior and and in most um terrestrial mammals this subsystem processes odorant that are sometimes referred to as pheromones um although that's in many ways a problematic term but but odorants that are referred to as phermones namely odorant that are emitted by another member of the species to influence uh that member of the species she an alter Behavior or hormonal State and and and some of these hormonal effects are are utterly remarkable and in my view the most remarkable of all is an effect known as the Bruce effect uh this was an effect discovered by Margaret Bruce in 1959 she was a British uh scientist and in the Bruce effect when you expose a pregnant Mouse at an early critical stage of the pregnanc um I think up to about day three uh if you expose the pregnant Mouse uh to the order of what is referred to in technical terms is the non- stud male that is a male who did not father the pregnancy she will miscarry the pregnancy she will abort it now that that's an insane decision made by the female here right because she's invested quite a lot in this right and in in biological terms and in in forming this pregnancy and maintaining it and yet she drops it it on the basis of an odor um and this effect is remarkably robust and what do I mean by remarkably robust so this will occur on about 80% of exposures now as you know 80% is 100% in biology right I mean there's nothing that happens at more than 80% so it's a remarkably remarkably robust effect this this dropping of the pregnancy and we know it's mediated by chemo sensation through the nose for sure and we know in the following way so first it's enough to just bring the odor of the non- stud male you don't have to bring the male himself right so you just can bring bedding from a nons sudden male and then that will induce uh the Bruce effect but of course uh the most telling set of experiments is that if in the female Mouse you oblate the vul nasal organ you just burn this tiny structure in the nose then the effect disappears so the effect is completely dependent on the former nasal organ um and and and I find the s a remarkable effect right I mean because again because of the the extent of of cost that that the female takes on here uh based on on this information and smell now humans the the the sort of the going notion in all faction is that humans don't have a functional vulon nasal organ so we don't have that uh functional organ in our nose now I'll point out we we actually do have the pit so the the the structure or the outlining structure is there uh but the pit that we have is considered vestigial and non-functional and what about this thing I learned about at Berkeley uh in integrated biology class that we have something called Jacobson's organ this is the same organ so so Jacobson organs is the vulon nasal organ uh it's also called Jacobson because um I think Jacobson was a military physician in like the 1800s in Holland or something and he found it in in in a soldier he was operating on or something like that the the the story comes from something like that but but the Jacobson organ is another name for the vul noal organ these are one and the same the sensory organ of the accessorial factory system and again the going notion is that the human Jacobson organ or his organ is vestigial it's non-functional does that necessarily mean that we don't have these pheromone effects no it does not so first of all we know that lots of what are considered fonal effects namely social chemos signaling and rodents are mediated by the mol factory system we know that for sure um there are several examples for this in mice and rats and rabbits and so on and so forth so so a uh these can be mediated by by the mol factory system and and and I'll I'll come back to that in a second but first to finish the the Bruce effect effect um and and second and and I'm going out on a limb here uh but I'm willing to take that that uh risk I'm I'm for me the jury is still out on human vulon nasal organ um the the decision or the notion uh that it's nonfunctional relies on about one and a half papers postmortem uh looking for the nerve that connects this thing to the brain and failing to find it using staining and so on and so forth but staining postmortem studies in humans are are notoriously complicated um basically you know for many reasons one of them is that the material is just always has gone through you know it's it's not ideally uh uh set as it is when you sacrifice an animal and and and and study its its tissue um so so based on on really really aity of studies that fail to find uh this nerve the notion is that the structure is vestigial uh in humans I don't have any evidence that it's functional mind you but but I'm just not sure that it's not but um what we do have a suspicion is that humans may experience something similar to Bruce effect so first of all humans have an enormous um number or ratio of of uh of spontaneous miscarriage are they um occurring more often in the first trimester because you mentioned that in the Bruce effect in the mice is in the first three days or so Fallen pregnancy which in the mouse gestation as I recall is about 21 days in the mouse so you're talking about 17th of total gestation so I'm I'm not quick enough to to nor is it important to translate but this would be first trimester of hum yes which is indeed when most Carriage occurs now humans have again a huge number of miscarriages and and the numbers I I'll soon share them with you they they sound odd and the reason they sound odd is because if if you have what's sometimes simply referred to as failed implantation right this can occur you know in days one two nobody ever knows okay so so some papers talk about 90% of all human pregnancies end in miscarriage this is counting uh a failed implantation in day one two Etc more conservative studies talk about 50% nobody will argue 30% okay so a huge number a huge number of of uh human pregnancies end in miscarriage now out of these there's a portion that are are unexplained right so nobody knows why I mean there are portion that are explained but all sorts of genetic factors developmental factors and so on and so forth but there's also a proportion that are unexplained and and and so all I'm saying is that there's there's a statistical backdrop or setting if you will for something like a Remnant Bruce effect in humans now with that in mind we we approached the group um of of we we we enlisted a group of of of they're not really patients and participants in a study of people who couples who are experiencing what is referred to as is unexplained repeated pregnancy loss so formally if you have uh two consecutive uh unexplained miscarriages then uh that that is sufficient for the diagnosis of unexplained repeated pregnancy loss however in our cohort of 30 we had couples who experienc 12 consecutive unexplained repeated pregnancy losses so so the two the two is just the formal all of our cohort was like 12 five you know so so this is an emotional difficult place to be and and these are couples who who are losing uh their pregnancy for no apparent reason so they've gone through all the tests that you can imagine of you know genetic incompatibilities and all sorts of issues uh clotting all all the all the the known suspects for for pregnancy loss and the the medical establishment remains totally at a loss as to why these pregnancies aren't holding and so we hypothesized that that perhaps here there's something akin to to a Bruce type effect obviously it's not going to be the same as in mice but but something like a Bruce effect now of course at that stage we could not do anything causal to to test this right but what we could do is to see uh you know to to seek circumstantial evidence to see if if where there's fire maybe there's smoke and what we did was we tested uh all faction and more specifically the response to to male body odor uh in in the the couples experiencing um uh repeated pregnancy loss and we found a few things first of all if you think of the mechanisms behind the Bruce effect the Bruce effect implies that the female has to have a very clear memory of uh the fathering male because if she's going to miscarry in response to the non-fa she has to know father non-fa I mean that means that there's a pronounced all Factory memory at the moment of mating okay and in mice this has been very well characterized and and attributed to the anterior Factory nucleus uh structure in the brain um but you'd have to have this memory in order to make that decision now so to address that and here you're going to see that you in your childhood story from before stand out a bit as as a skill skillful is that the first thing we did was just behaviorally test uh whether um these women and control women could identify the smell of their uh [Music] spouse and you might be disappointed or you know we would all are probably a bit disappointed to learn that control women uh are very poor at this so so you would think that that women would be good at identifying the O body order of their spouse they're not uh they're not far from chance however um the uh women who experience uh repeated pregnancy loss are more than they're they're double uh their performance level so this is not a Nuance effect uh women who who who who experience repeated uh pregnancy loss can identify uh their husbands or their spouses uh by their body order with much greater Acuity than the typical person double a bit more than double and and way above chance yeah no I I sorry I posed it as a question but I meant yes with much greater Acuity uh and double is is a significant um Improvement are they much better at detecting any odor no they're not we did the controls and they're not and then um we also measured using fmri remeasured their their brain response to uh stranger male body order and they and and and this was quite remarkable because you know we approached so this was a full brain analysis so without a region of Interest analysis so it's not as if you're uh tweaking your statistics to look at one part of the brain you're just looking at the entire brain in the response to male body order and asking denovo is there a difference between these two groups of participants and there was one huge difference and it was in the hppo and so there was a difference in response to stranger male body order between the two groups um so so all faction is altered in spontaneous repeated spontaneous uh pregnancy loss we don't know this is causal right uh but but that was enough for us to approach the Ethics Committee um to run a causal experiment um and we're at the beginning of that now incredible I can't wait to hear the the results of that it's gonna take it'll probably take years um a fewc because the these are slow experiments to run uh um recruitment is complicated uh but basically we're we're blocking um we're blocking smell in in uh couples who are trying to maintain a pregnancy I want to touch on some other so-called pheromone effect effects and one thing I heard you say during a talk which I think really captures this whole issue of are there pherone effects in humans um very nicely as you said you know whether or not it's a classic for pheromone effect or whether or not it's olfaction or something else this is chemos sensory signaling between individuals um the reason this is important to me is a few years ago I did a social media post about pheromone effects in animals and some potential pheromone effects in humans and a couple of the um human uh Al factionist as um more from the the actually who work on animal models really came after me with um you know intense sniffing saying uh you know there is no evidence for human pheromone effects human pheromone organs and I think today you've beautifully Illustrated how regardless of the answer to that humans are contain and are emitting chemical signals that influence each other's physiology and behavior for sure for sure and and the the term pheromone is a problematic term in any case I mean the term the term was um put forth to describe insect Behavior right so you know if if you were given a hard time by the mouse people you could have given an them an equally hard time if you were an insect person right because really the place the term is is uh is accurate is you know so the first Fone that was discovered was bambol which is the ferone that has the male moth follow the the scent Trail of the female moth bambol is a pheromone um insect pheromone people will argue that this stuff that people talk about in mice and rats is not pheromones I see and and and it all becomes semantics sort of like nerdy inside ball it's all semantic so I don't I in in our Publications we don't use the term pheromone you know because it would not help me and it would probably only hurt us and so you know we talk about chemo signals and humans definitely emit chemo signals from their body and these chemo signals influence other humans and influence their behavior you know and and there there are several examples of this one of them I I'll point out first which is is thought of the most widely studied and and not mostly from our lab actually I mean the the the flavor of the month for the past 10 years in this field is what's referred to as the smell of fear right so um this is probably true of of many mammals and humans uh it's true of um we emit a specific body odor when we're in a state of fear uh this was first discovered in humans by Denise Chen um out of I think Brown I'm not sure I think that's right yep humans emit a particular body order when they're in a state of fear and this body order influences other humans in effect increasing uh their autonomic uh arousal their sympathetic State um so in effect you could say that fear is contagious a bit so the smell of fear is contagious by the way culturally uh we know for ages that dogs can smell fear in humans but actually that was only really shown about a year and a half ago in a study so it was always said but it wasn't really shown effectively it was shown about a year and a half ago in a study that dogs indeed can smell human fear um and humans can smell human fear so several Labs starting from Denise Chen and havin Jones and and then in our lab and in other labs um if if you collect body order from people in a state of fear uh and collect body order from the same people when they're not in a state of fear uh other people can determine which is is the state of fear and not and and this influences their behavior what about the smell of safety or is that simply the absence of the odor corresponding to fear and the reason I asked this is somewhat woven into our um prior discussion about mate Choice um again I'll ask the question in a form of of brief anecdotes um I'll use the I had a friend who uh approach here but um well one phenomenon that has nothing to do uh with me in particular I think this is a common phenomenon is um romantic Partners leaving articles of clothing at each other's homes now this could have other purposes to Mark territory but um visually marking territory but also um scent marking territory is very common in the animal kingdom um it's not uncommon uh for uh romantic Partners when one is traveling or away for the other partner to smell their AR of clothing in order to bring about positive uh connotations of the other partner very common Behavior if you're doing this folks other people are doing this too yeah um it raises questions for instance about whether or not the morning period part post breakup whether by decision by death or by um some other phenomenon that's forced the breakup um whether or not that morning period has something to do with an old factory unlearning of uh um and made and on and on and on with with all these insights I would offer you to be a postum say listen I have AAL coming up so I would love to do a it's going to kill me exactly you don't want me to work for you we talked about this earlier other reasons exactly there's a story there what n is referring to I'll just tell people because inside jokes on a podcast don't really work earlier I was just I was refering the fact that I've had three incredible scientific mentors uh undergraduate graduate and postdoc but um for reasons uh that are unclear to me um uh the first one died of suicide the second one cancer at 50 and the third one um pancreatic cancer in his early 60s and the last one before he died who was an MD and a common friend of gnomes and I turned to me and said you know Andrew you're the common denominator so um you know that the joke the joke in my business is you don't want me to work for you so nonetheless I would love to do a sabatical in your La no so so what I was trying to say in that roundabout way is that those are all really Keen observations and good ideas um for sure and and and they just highlight again you know that that we're incredibly all Factory animals you know I and and and you're you're even talking about the Nuance we're very old factory even not in the Nuance I mean you know I have this when people tell me that you know that we don't use our sense of smell and we don't need it and all that and and I I have to deal with this a lot right I have to deal a lot you study Vision nobody will tell you that vision is unimportant right I visually dependent I don't need a dog to take over my olfactory system if I lose olfaction but I'll tell you from having lost my sense of smell for one day I was in intense fear I into blue I love blueberries I'm like a driveby blueberry eater if they're there I just kind of pick them up like a grizzly bear and cram them in my mouth so keep them away from me if you don't want them eating but I can't I almost can't help myself um I bit into a blueberry or a handful of blueberries and they just it was the sensation of little bags of water and I immediately felt like tremend a tremendous grief I I'll tell you a sort of a a throw line that I use in this when when I talk with people you know I mean you know take the two most basic behaviors that sustain us right let's say I give you a choice between a beautiful looking layer cake with with with strawberries and blueberries and and uh and whip cream but that smells of sewage versus some gray brown mix that smells of cinnamon which do you eat oh simple the ladder right you eat the lad right now imagine I I offer you a mate choose the the gender of your liking right that looks like a Greek god or goddess right but smells of sewage or an ordinary looking individual that smells of sin itself who do you choose the latter right so in the two most basic behaviors we have we follow our nose not our eyes right definitely and not always in predictable ways because you offered an extreme example which is the best example but I for instance for reasons I don't know I've never liked the smell of perfume ever in fact I find it aversive but I do I confess I do like the smell of certain body odors very much and I'm very um particular about that and I know within an instant um and so uh this is a problem for any romantic partner uh who likes perfume for me but I know many people like perfum fumes and colognes and things of that sort and and In fairness I've also been told um that uh by someone that they couldn't spend time with me because they do not like my smell in fact they dislike it and I and fortunately for me there's at least one person on the planet who said the opposite so the um so I completely agree with what you're saying yeah um I can also say that um I imprinted on the smell of my I had a Bulldog Mastiff um when I raised from the time he was a puppy and I imprinted on I imprinted on his smell immediately and even though to other people he was a Bulldog Mastiff after all his smell was was rather aversive to me he he smelled delicious right and it made me it smelled like home and he was my best animal friend for a long time so and on and on and on right the smell of children as you said the backs we had a guest on this podcast who I'm sure you're familiar with Charles zooker yeah a professor of Columbia has done incredible work and vision and old faction thirst sensing and he and I talked a little bit about this that um there's something in the breath of romantic Partners um that's hopefully appetitive not aversive as well as in children he was talking about the smell of his grandchild's the back the nape of their the back of their neck and how he misses that smell because when he thinks about missing his grandchild or children it's that smell that that that's associated with that feeling hexadecanal hexanal yes is Charles zuer your grandchildren smell like hex a Dean now he's going to come after me now they do and and so this this is a study uh ran by uh Eva mishor uh who was a graduate student in our lab um and and Eva was interested in aggression she was really into aggression um and actually when she start and and and so when she started off we said okay let's do chemo signaling of aggression she actually was going to like MMA clubs and collect ing body oders uh and we we had all sorts of ideas going and and she she worked on that for quite a bit it never went anywhere really and then at the same time we had a colleague of ours uh from Germany I mean when I say colleague primarily a friend or acquaintance I met at conferences um Hines Brier um and and um he was studying his lab a molecule hexa Canal um that was a chemo signal in mice where in mice it was described as a chemo signal that promotes social buffering where social buffering as far as I understand it's not my field but as far as I understand it's basically a Feelgood together thing so when lots of mice are together they feel good about being in a group and that's social buffering and it's promoted by hexanal which they emit in n feces mice and in his work on hexadecanal um and and so so so Brier and his colleague stman they they discovered the receptor for this and then they went and discovered that the receptor is very highly conserved uh throughout Maman Evolution and therefore they hypothesized that maybe um this is a universal meleon signal now which is unusual because in in chemo signal in typically you you tend to think of things as being very species specific but here they hypothesize that maybe hexanal which promotes social buffering in mice may do something in all mammals again because this receptor is very highly conserved o 37b I think um so they so so he approached us and said look you got to study this stuff in humans right because he knows us as the human people right I mean we go to these all faction conferences where where lots of people study mice and and and zebra fish and whatnot and we're the the human group so and and eventually he just fedexed us hexad now and and so we had this thing sitting around and Eva was not going anywhere with her aggression studies with sweat from Human participants and yet she built the entire um Paradigm to study human aggression so they're standard paradigms this is a paradigm known as the tap the Tyler aggression Paradigm I'll soon describe it and so we said okay we have this hexad canal stuff here and it promotes social buffering social buffering sounds like it would make you less aggressive why don't you run your TAP experiment using hexad Canal what's the tap experiment so basically what you do is you bring in a participant to lab and you have them um thinking that they're going to be playing against another person in in this game and you can you can do something like have another person walk into the other room playing online so so connected so you can fool them into being quite convinced that this is what's happening and they go into their own room and in the initial game they play um on each round they're uh they're provided with a sum of money and this is real money that they'll receive at the end of the experiment and by turn each one of them decides how to divide the money up between the two right so they're playing against another person they think but that's actually a computer algorithm that they're playing against and the computer algorithm is is programmed to be in in scientific terminology a jerk right so that you know like let's say they have to divvy up a 100 checkel which is the Israeli currency so so the you know the other player would say okay you know um I'll keep 96 and you get four right and then if you can either accept it or not accept it and then neither of you get anything right so basically you're being shafted by by the other side all the time and this is called the provocation phase you're really getting angry at this person because they're they're really not nice right they're they're shafting you on every trial or almost and you play this game and and it goes to its end and then you you play a second game as far as you know against the same participant and the second game is a reaction time game so a Target shows up and the first to press it wins and on every trial where you win if you want you can blast the other participant with a loud noise and and it's a really loud noise so you're also wearing earphones it's 90 DB and it's it's a screeching horrible sound it's the most punishment that an IRB committee will let you uh endure on on a participant in an experiment unless you're in Stanford 70 years ago or whatever that was no was referring to the the classic prisoner experiment which took place in the building next door to where I work by the way so you can blast the other participant with verying levels of of sound and you have a selection box from something very low to something very high and what's nice about this is it then allows you to quantify aggression because the more volume you're blasting the opponent with the more aggressive you are towards your opponent and and so you have a a measure of aggression again the Tyler aggression Paradigm obviously invented by Tyler uh very well validated studied all over you know a a very standard protocol so uh we brought in participants and had them play uh the Tyler the tap uh either under exposure to hexadecanal or control now hexanal doesn't it's it's incredibly difficult to even detect hexad Canal but just in case uh uh because it's not very very it's considered a semivolatile it doesn't have a strong smell um but we buried it both the control and the hexad canal in a a control order that hid them in a mask and and she ran lots and lots and lots and lots of parts of men and women and I'll first tell you the result with men which is that hexanal consistently reduced aggression people were less aggressive under hexad Canal um the effect size was was uh uh quite meaningful and later on we learned because I'm I'm no specialist in the world of regression but compared to the effects seen in the aggression world in in research really really strong effects so unusually strong so hexad Canal lowered aggression in men and we were like cool this is you know sort of what we were hoping to to see consistent with the hypothesis uh and consistent what it seems to do in mice but then we looked at the data from women and hexad canile increased aggression equally significantly is this thought to be something related to maternal protectiveness we're getting there so you you got there really fast it took me a year but and and and EV got to it really I'll I'll tell you because remember we reaching the back of the head of your of of U who was it grandchildren Char Grand the charer one of the kingpins of the New York Neuroscience Mafia yes so um so this was really odd to me at that time so I didn't have the intuition you just had and I was like EV this there is some bug here I mean this this it makes no sense to me you know why would something increase aggression in women and decrease aggression in men this is really really strange strange and and I said okay I want to see this happen again before you know we go ahead with this so she went and did the entire experiment again and this time she did it within the fmri magnet so that we we can also uh track uh brain activity uh while this was happening and first of all it replicated again so once again uh hexadin men made men less aggressive and women more aggressive and and and the extent of more than the effect alone the dissociation was remarkable this has the it's it's almost like a chromosomal test I mean you you look at the data on the unit unit slope line and all all the men are below and all the women are above there's this figure in the paper then she also looked at at the brain data and and this is you know Although our lab does a ton of fmri it's one of the major tools we use to measure uh a brain activity I'm I'm I'm quite cognizant of the limitations of fmri and and this is I think sadly I think the only study in my career at least where where I actually managed to also get a mechanism out of FM not only an area that's involved in activity and and so here's what we saw that hexad deile Alon increased activity quite pronouncedly in an area of the brain known as the left angular gyrus now this is an area involved in what's referred to as social appraisal so that was kind of cool in that a social order activated the social brain not the all factory system per se and and very pronounced so on one hand that was cool but then what was uncool was that it did the same in men and women and this was in contrast to behavior which you don't like seeing right I mean because you would expect brain activity to reflect behavior and it increased activity in the left angr Ag gyus and both both men and women but then she did a follow-up analysis which was look at what's referred to as functional connectivity that is how does this region of the brain talk with the entire brain as it were under hexadecanal versus uh control and here the dissociation reemerged powerfully whereby the connectivity from the angular gyus was mostly to the classic neural substrates of aggression so the amigdala and the temporal pole and the connectivity went in opposite directions in men and women so hexanal increased functional connectivity in men and decreased it in women so in a way this is almost saying that the default brain reaction is aggression right the default is to aggress and in men hexanal increases the control that the left angulus is holding over your aggression and and keeping you back and in women it let it Ro free and they became more aggressive but I was still puzzled so so so I was convinced this this happened twice the M data provided not only a pattern but a mechanism which is unusual and yet I I was telling Eva you know but you know this makes no sense to me and then and then her Insight which of course afterwards is like duh I is no there's a place where this makes perfect sense and that is if you're a Maman Offspring because paternal aggression is often directed at you there's infanticide all over and sadly there's male aggression towards human children as well and maternal aggression is often protective so if you're an offspring if you have a molecule that will make your mother more aggressive and your daddy less aggressive both of those are good for you so you're winning so we remembered a recently published paper from a group in Japan that looked at the odors emanating from baby heads we now come full circle to sukur's grandchildren they used a method known as gcms gas chromatography Mass spectrometry uh to measure the volatiles from baby heads because baby head odor is a cultural thing across cultures even in Japan and so we quickly went to that paper and to see if one of the molecules that report is hexadecanal and we were very disappointed that it wasn't one of the molecules that reported in the paper and so we wrote to the authors who are since then our co-authors uh and we said look you know we're studying uh this molecule exal and we don't see in your results and and we were wondering maybe you had some results that you didn't publish or some supplementary materials or whatever and uh this lab which is a hardcore GC lab said no no hexad is a semivolatile which we knew uh and our previous paper was not directed to the semivolatile range but we can now do use what's called gcx GC double GC that uh is directed at semi volatiles and we can do this again just uh studied 11 babies and we can we can see if this is an issue so he said yeah please do uh the bottom line of all this is that hexanol is the most abundant semi volatile in baby hits It's tons of it coming out of baby hits so babies again speaking about if humans do or don't chemos signal babies are conducting chemical warfare right they're they're they're you know reducing aggression in their fathers or males around them and increasing aggression in their mothers or females around them and both of those things are good for them incredible this is somewhat different than what we're talking about um and yet similar in other ways uh because it's uh built off of anecdotal evidence but it's anecdotal evidence that you hear all the time and yet when you look in the scientific literature at least by my read the data are not clear maybe even contradictory and that relates to the cour coordination of menstrual cycles among co-housed women or women who are friends the you know many women listening to this and maybe some men who are aware of of this effect will say oh yeah absolutely when I spend time with my friends or go away camping or even spend a day with them our menstrual cycles become coordinated however my understanding is that the early literature Barbara mlin talk correct um discovered this phenomenon published a paper in science as an undergraduate 1971 nature amazing nature paper again one of the three Apex journals and as an undergrad fantastic so discover this describe this and probably women all over the world who became aware of this one way or another proba probably said yes absolutely this gives validation to what we've observed over and over again and yet as subsequent papers have been published this result has been called into question is uh is there any uh final word on whether or not menstrual cycles uh become coordinated among women who spend time together and if so is there any role of olfaction in this uh or chemos sensing through the nostrils or Andor mouth um to support this idea so so yeah so so I'll start off indeed to Echo uh the background is that this study was conducted by by Martha mclintoch when she was an undergraduate at Wesleyan College uh and she noticed that she thought her menstrual cycle and and her co-inhabitants in her dorm room um um were coordinated in time um and I should say that this comes on the basis of similar or related type effects in rodents now rodents don't have a menstrual cycle like humans do uh but but um there's an effect in rins referred to as the Whitten effect which um resembles uh this type of of of effect um and she published indeed that paper as an undergraduate in nature in 1971 and to answer your question she published a follow-up in 1998 also in nature uh with then her graduate student Chicago uh Stern so this is Stern and mclintoch 1998 and here's what they did they uh collected um sweat from donor women and deposited it on the upper lip of recipient women so this would be a fun experiment for you at least because you said you like body orders but for many others perhaps it would be daunting well I like certain body ERS from certain individuals um I don't I don't think I uniformly like all body orders although I do seem to uniformly not like the smell of perfume although I just to clarify because I put this out there and I learned the hard way in the comment section on YouTube some of those perfumes I find downright aversive yeah like it's a uh I think the great Marcus Meister who great neurobiologist once said there's basically three responses it's either yum yuck or me so some are truly yuck never heard that one kind like that one right in terms of animal behavior human behavior we're either move forward back or or or pause um so some are truly a yuck some many are meh zero to date are yum for me now body odors the distribution is shifted it could be any one of those three yum yuck or me so just to be clear but the the um yum category is definitely included thank you for for allowing me to do that so so uh um so so she did this study so so because right in the original mlto study you might suspect other uh drivers of the effect let's say you you accept the effect but still there might be other social drivers of the effect that are not body order right there might be some dominant woman who's dominant in some other way and this might be driving the coordination right so here there was no direct link between these women other than body order so if the effect reemerged um it definitely be an olfactory effect and what she found is that if she took sweat from the follicular or the ovulatory uh phase of the donors one extended the the cycle in recipients and one shortened the cycle in recipients I don't remember which was which but but basically uh uh definitely denoting uh a chemos signaling effect uh with with opposing uh uh effects on duration based on the time it was collected from uh again published in nature in 1998 that's it I I there there's a a quotation I think this is from from uh from from uh I'm not sure but but you know that that uh uh if something is published in nature or science that doesn't necessarily mean it's not true so uh with that in mind um the findings were since called into question quite widely um one reason is just statistics of cyclic events are surprisingly complicated so so It's Tricky it's once you have a cyclic event sta statistics become tricky and and so show Martha took a lot of heat on the statistics of of claiming an effect and I think there was at least one effort of replication that didn't really work out um if you ask me I'm on the fence so I'm I'm and but I may may be in a minority in my field I think uh a majority in the field uh is currently negative I'm not um and I've we've said in lab that we should do a planned replication um we will it's just again it's a horrible study to run it's tons of work and and and you have to run it for a really long time uh and and uh so it's it's just completely non-trivial uh but we have a graduate student now in lab interested in these exact things R WIS gross and and she's doing similar stuff and and I hope we'll we'll do that I hope we we'll try to to replicate this um very interesting result and I think uh interesting because it of its Real World um meaning outside the laborat of course or experiment analog but also because pheromone effects and olfactory effects in humans seem unique among uh neurobiological endocrine phenomena because there seems to be so many stories that we all have of the smell of our grandmother's hands or the recognizing the scent of of somebody or I knew from the moment that um I smelled their breath or you know or I just liked their smell kind of thing these kind of things that that inform the the Deep potential for a real biological phenomenon as opposed to the kind of thing like oh uh you know you just throw something out there oxytocin is bonding and and all of a sudden you know the the general public not at no to no fault of their own comes to think that every every aspect of bonding is is oxytocin and every defect in bonding is lack of oxytocin but the the general public provides a sort of a a rich um it's bodder for for exploring all these things and a lot of times they turn out to be true right when in the context of old action yeah know it's it's a very Primal system you know so so uh it's it's linked to the most you know lyic Primal mechanisms in our brain and it drives Primal Behavior it's it's an incredible system I I have a question about a particular study but I'm just going to queue it up and you'll know immediately what I'm I'm queuing up um and that is what is the relation ship between odors and hormones and in particular crying as I pointed out previously the the sort of flavor of the month in in human social chemo signaling research is the smell of fear and the the media of the month is Sweat Right so so um the the few maybe tens of labs in the world that study uh Human Social chemo signaling all collect sweat and and that's the media uh they look at is it always from the armpit or is there are there meaningful differences in terms of the sweat emitted from different locations on the body I already know the answer to that as I ask it but let's just stay above the waistline and um oh no no yeah or below the waistline I mean we're biologists after all we we just yeah so it's it's funny we we we have we're working on a paper on that right now on the smell of fear uh so so we have a nice Paradigm for uh generating fear we throw people out of airplanes it's a very effective way to generate fear have to come to your lab it sounds like the greatest lab in the world we we didn't invent that by the way uh the first to do that was uh um and I hope I'm pronouncing her name correctly I think it's mua perui um but but um that's our Paradigm for generating fear and we started that on our own but uh We've since entered into collaboration with the uh Israeli paratroopers Brigade and we now collect body odor from every firsttime jumper so um we we went that path because we like everybody El else in this field you know the Holy Grail there is is finding the molecules right I mean if you'll have the fear molecules that's a bonanza right because I mean you know you could think of many reasons why it would be a bonanza but for for me you know if you find the molecules you can then try and find The receptors and when you find The cogn receptors you can then develop blockers and you can imagine you know uh um uh um what's the term I'm looking for um I'm switching into Hebrew it's about midnight now right I'm sorry it's 2 in the morning you're doing incredibly well considering the in we would never know um no one traveled in today from Israel so he's he's a circadian inverted as we say uh um anxiety so so uh you can imagine developing like a nasal spray against anxiety right where where you would quell those receptors and kill the fear response right which rather than going the K path which is through neurotransmitters that then have effects all over the place you would be getting fear at its source right so so that would be why I would want that and and and we figure out that doing that you know collecting fear from like three four or five people um in an experiment you'll never be able to do analytical chemistry on that so we now have we have a a setting we call fear Bank uh which now has more than a thousand samples in it so we're trying to do uh uh analytics on that but but in doing that we've we've joined you know the the crowd everybody's doing fear and everybody's doing sweat and in one of our discussions in lab you know we were saying well there's got to be you know or there potentially definitely could be additional bodily media that are are playing into social chemo signaling uh now many of these you know you can't really study right I mean so you know just to throw right most terrestrial mammals communicate social information through urine um but you know starting doing experiments with humans with smelling urine it would be difficult you know both in IRB and in agreement and you know and and then we we we you know this is a rare case where we actually hypothesized what we s to do and you know then only claim in retrospect that it was hypothesis um is is tears um we we we started thinking about tears and looking into tears because tears are a bodily liquid emotional tears that that we emit in emotional situations where where these are situations where non-verbal communication is is critical and key and and tears are a liquid that that is puzzling Beyond ocular maintenance right and so so you know the the most influential text I think till this day in in in Emotion research is is Darwin's book uh uh the showing of the emotions in man and animals I think is the full name of the book and an entire chapter chapter six is devoted to tears an entire chapter of this book why with with no conclusion why because the book revolves around describing the functional anticipant of emotional Expressions so for example uh showing of the teeth is a sign of aggression right so so animals first bit with their teeth and and Darwin argued that through Evolution uh just uh showing the teeth alone became an aggressive sign because it started from biting or what I I find is is a beautiful example and this is work partly done by by Adam Anderson now at Corell um is is the uh emotional expression of disgust so disgust which comes from the line disgus distaste right is spitting something out of your mouth now what what Adam showed is is that the musculature patterns of activation and the temporal sequence of activation when you experience moral disgust are the same as when you spit a bitter taste out of your mouth right so again so there's a functional antient spinning something out and through Evolution the argument was that it became an expression of emotion and you express disgust just as if you're spitting something out of your mouth even though there you know in the case of moral disgust there's nothing you're spitting out of your mouth so so Daren systematically went through the expressions of emotions and for each one went to their functional anticipant and explained everything very nicely and then he got stuck with tears right because tears are an obvious emotional expression and he could not find a functional uh anciant so he ended up saying this is an epic phenomenon basically right I I don't know what all scientists do when they don't have a good explanation blame it on nature right right so so and but he bothered to write this entire chapter on on on the ocular sort of Maintenance you know function of tears and so on so forth but but nothing emotional so we thought well maybe the function is is a chemical signal and and you know so so with that in mind we we harvested emotional tears uh which was also an amusing event on its own right because we we uh we um we we posted um m messages on all sorts of boards that that uh we're seeking um experiment participants who cry with ease now this generated an unfortunate gender bias in our study right because we received about a 100 women volunteers and about one man and you know I think this is not a problem only in in Macho Israel right probably anywhere in the west this would I mean definitely in America would be the same I think my guess is that there are probably men out there who cry easily emotional tears easily going to show up yeah yeah that's what I'm saying it's a cultural thing it's not you know you're not going to come to a lab and say you know I cry all the time it's just not going to happen uh and then um we we what we did is uh for each one of these participants you know we would ask them you know is there a particular film event that you know of that you know a scene that that makes you cry and and interestingly in these effective criers there's always oh yes you know the scene in in so and so I always cry profusely from that you know they have can you give me an example of one of the more commonly named scenes yeah with e um the movie The Champ the champ dies he's a boxer and he dies and it literally in the hands of his about 8-year-old son and his son is standing next to his bed and you know saying champ champ and and he dies right it's a winner okay waterfalls yeah yeah got it so you know we're probably the neurobiology lab with most sad movie films on the Shelf in the world right we have a whole huge collection there is such a thing as Tears of Joy by the way so no no well we're going ahead of ourselves but say we tried to collect them and failed um even people who think they shed tears of joy and laughter their eyes water a bit but it's not the same thing it in in in the effective criers we end up screening so right we collect a full mL of Tears a full mL of Tears in about 15 minutes wow so so that's pouring right and that doesn't happen from laughter that we or we've never seen that we've never seen that happen from laughter we tried um so so um so we have we have all these sad films and by the way one of the amusing things is uh when we ultimately published this paper in in science um we were forced in retrospect to go out and actually buy the films right I mean you know originally we like downloaded them here and there but you can't because you're you'd be violating uh uh you know uh copyright law right so we have to buy like purchase all these films that the participants watch them so so we we actually have these in lab like DVDs you know that we actually purchased um but so so um nice coverage of potential legal Fallout there no no no no we did we did it was that so uh and yeah and and well we can touch on that later but but uh so um we so most of these uh uh volunteers who who come saying they can cry with ease actually don't meet the bill um and so out of the about hundred at least more women that we screened we ended up uh with about six who who could really come to lab week after week and poor tears there's a name for this in Psychiatry they call it um narrative distancing some people when they watch a film where someone's getting hit they they they they Flinch quite a lot they it's almost as if they're experiencing it it but it works in the opposite direction too I know someone like this um where if they watch a film that someone's experiencing something even mildly positive their mood elevates so they they can quickly Bridge yeah um and and it's not always adaptive as you can imagine so there's lack of narrative distancing right yeah what one you know issue you can bring up with this entire line of studies inab is is I don't know if there's something very unique about the donors right I mean we're assuming these are tiers and this is pretty common I think that the numbers I saw out there about five to eight% of exactly what we got about right about six so so so we collected um um tiers and and we we exposed uh participants uh to these tiers and and we found a few things first of all the tears are completely odorless you cannot detect them at all completely odorless um and yet when you sniff them you have a pronounced uh reduction in testosterone uh within about 20 minutes half an hour this is men and women smelling women's tears men swelling women's tears but not perceiving any odor nothing just sniffing them and you have uh about a 14% drop in free testosterone free okay so this is testosterone that's already been liberated from the testes free test we've done a few hormone aded that's either bound or Unbound is Unbound excuse me um from sex hormon binding globulin Etc and it's the active form so it's it's uh it's subject to very short time scale changes yeah and and this is you know people who who study testosterone which is not me but they tell me this is a really strong effect like it's it's hard to even pharmacologically get an effect like that that fast I mean know in Pharmacology yeah years ago I spent time studying endocrine effects of this sort um and that's a a tremendously sized effect so and so here I'll point out in passing uh that uh one of the concerns we had because of the uh effort to run this study is that nobody would ever try to replicate it and to our Joy about two years later an independent group from uh uh South Korea uh o Al who I don't know at all uh replicated the testosterone effect to a te I mean like same numbers so so um it it lowers testosterone and and and we then also looked uh using Mr at the the at the uh um effect on brain activity and saw pronounced uh if effect on activity a dampening a lowering of activity uh under under uh an arousing State a lowering of activity um both in the hypothalamus um and in the fusiform gyrus for whatever reason I don't know recognition area amongst other things yes um and we don't know why um but pronounced um and currently um Shenia gron in our lab is replicating this again and this time uh with a stronger behavioral component um and I can share with you uh unpublished uh data now under review um that's as you would expect given the effect on testosterone perhaps uh sniffing tears lowers aggression in men uh using again the tap the same experiment used by Eva in the uh hexadic experiment I'm going the tap I'm going to think of that as the the satus the the titration the sis titration aggression Paradigm so not on like the mgrm experiments of the of the 1950s which post um this was looking at sort of uh post Holocaust Behavior you know people basically Tor in American Laboratories thinking they were torturing other people yeah simply because they were told to and a lot of people did that even though most people would report that they would never torture someone yeah no humans are not a wonderful species or as we can say I think it was the the great Carl Young that said um we have all things inside of us but um uh the goal is not to experience them all certainly um it's an incredible study and it points again to the the the power of of um these chemo sensory systems and Pathways and uh obviously there's so much here um I don't know if you want me to to tell about this or not and I guess you can out but uh this is just you know sharing stories about the politics of Science and and so whereas the effect on testosterone was was replicated by by an independent group um in the original study in in science where we had we it had three components one was the effect on testosterone which was robust the second which was brain activity which was robust and there was a significant but weaker effect on behavior and I don't think we studied the right behavior in retrospect what we looked at then was uh ratings of arousal associated with pictures and there there was an effect it was significant but it was it was not what carried the story um now there's a lab in Holland um of a guy by the name of V I'm probably mispronouncing this but I think it's vinger Hotes for the non-dutch yeah Dutch names are always a little bit of a challenge but and I shouldn't say that being an Israeli I shouldn't go too much on that line but but uh that lab really didn't like our original tier story and the reason they didn't like it is because they've they've built a career uh on this notion um including a book with this title that emotional tears are uniquely human now here I should well I should share so one one of the things we really liked about the the the uh tier result is that partially before we did our work but more afterwards and and we like that because usually things so usually in our chemo signaling work like what I told you before about the Bruce effect we look at what happens in Ruins and we see if the same thing is happening in humans this was a rare case where after we did the this work um more or less identical effects were discovered in rodents so uh a paper published in nature two years later found that Mouse tear uh Mouse pup tiar lower aggression in in U male adult mice towards them in a in a smell dependent way yeah yeah so and and and they also actually found the actual component in tiers that so the tier pheromone that lowers aggression right so so you know this has us thinking of AG as tears is is as you can think of Tears as like a chemical blanket in a way that that you're covering yourself up again with you know to protect against aggression right and and so our finding you know which to me I mean this is consistent with how I think about behavior in general you know I don't think you know beyond language there are very few things definitely sensory things that are uniquely human you know I I I I'd be hard pressed but so so you know our went you know against their their story right because you know here we're saying no you know tears are this chemo singling mechanism like all animals and by the way I you know just after this entire debate about uh um six months ago there was a paper on K biology that dogs emit emotional tears and and it was uh the dogs emit emotional tears when they reunite with their owners and you were talking before about about um oxytocin so I think what they showed there is that not only that but that the the the view seeing the tears and the dog influences oxytocin in in the humans I hope I'm getting this right I absolutely believe this I mean I from the from the time I brought Costello home at8 weeks old costell is your dog he's my dog unfortunately passed away but having a long time actually the only time I can recall crying I listen I I've certainly cried before uh many times in my life um many many times um the only time I ever recall crying to the point where I wasn't sure that I could keep producing TI years but somehow did is when I had to put him down right is just like you know and if I talk about too long now I'll start crying you know it's one of those things and I think I think it's a healthy emotional state for sure but I recall when he was a puppy thinking this oxytocin thing must be real because I can recall being in faculty meetings which you know fair Fairly stated are not always that interesting but they could be pretty interesting and someone presenting data and my mind thinking I hope Costello is okay what's he doing down in my office this is when he was very little and also not needing to eat not being able to focus on anything else except my attachment to him for about the first two or three weeks that I had him then it was easy then I could focus off on other things and I think I think that dogs perhaps through oxytocin hijack the circuitry that's intended for child rear I really do otherwise why would people be so ridiculously attached to their dogs I me hence all the the post of everyone thinks their dog is the cutest dog the same way everyone thinks their children are the cutest children you know C by the way was a very handome Bulldog so so so yeah so so so again so there so even you know to put another nail in that story of of uh of tears are uniquely human so they're not dogs shed emotional tears um and and and so that group really didn't like this and they went ahead and and tried to replicate and to your listeners I'm showing double uh quotations on the replicate uh only the behavioral part the ratings of arousal um uh in women of women uh and and fail to replicate that I see now th this was you know just sharing on how science works and doesn't work in my in in my notion in this case so at the time um after they got this accepted in some Journal um not a field journal in a journal of memory of something um they contacted me for a a response and I I wrote to the authors and I said look you know uh this is very odd to me why don't you come you why don't we replicate this again together and see if it doesn't work if it doesn't work I'll publish it with you that it doesn't work but you know um and so I said why don't you send over graduate student or the lead author and we'll do it here and we'll show them how it's done because they they did it very wrongly in the paper um and so they replied that no they don't have money to send over graduate St to do it so I replied saying okay I'll fund the graduate student coming over and I'll fund the entire study and their stay and so on and so forth and let's do this together and they replied no they're not willing to to do that which you know I don't think is the way things should work um and and they published this sort of failed uh uh behavioral effect in in that paper um so I'm just sharing this you know that it's not only there there was that successful replication with the effect on testosterone but there was supposedly this failed replication on the effect in in behavior um and then I published a rebuttal on on that which I don't know if I should have done but I did well I think it's it's interesting I mean I I think um provided studies are done correctly I mean the the positive result um almost always trumps the the negative result and yet I think replication is key the problem as you pointed out is that replication is rarely pure replication of the exact this this one is not even roly but and I I published the detailed so actually they hid something in their data that did partially R so I I asked for the data and I reanalyzed it and that's what I published in the rebuttal but you know this is just sharing on how science works I I took advice so I'm it's not that that uh I'm friends with him but that time I was communicating a bit because we were on some board with with uh with uh Daniel conman who's who's Nobel L fast and slow right and so so uh I asked him how how should I deal with this you know give me some advice here I was really you know it was an emotionally not fun to be in that position and he said don't don't don't never publish a rebuttal don't do anything and I was you know how can I you know I have to do something he said no don't because once you do that then you know people don't go into the details they won't read the details of your rebuttal they'll be like well there's a group that says this and there's a group that says that so it's unclear well and yeah I mean I I appreciate that you're bringing it up today and I I do appreciate that you published the rebuttal and that you offered in a very magnam way to to do a collaboration that's what he then said that's so so so Common's advice after that was that well if you insist then just publish Write a response that you offered them to to come do it together they refused and there's nothing you can do about that it's a lot like um fight sports right people talk a lot of trash although in science you know I will say this you know as long as we're on the the sociology of science science is very different science is very different than podcasting or social media or other fields because in science people generally are very kind to your face and then they you get it in the you get it in the neck on Grant reviews or Anonymous reviews um I was on a grants review panel this morning I'm a nice reviewer meaning I judge things objectively but I I try to always um think from the perspective of the graduate student or author of the of the proposal listen I I think that um science is a is a game of of people who most of them are seeking facts however the the ego is strongly woven into it like any like anything else so I think it was uh very magnimous of you to offer the collaboration so I'm going to tell this lab whose name I can't pronounce um please accept the collaboration then we can invite everyone on here for a round table um I appreciate that you shared that story and I know a number of other people will um for a number of reasons I have a couple of more questions um and I realize and thank you by the way for your uh for your willingness and stamina because it is probably 1: am Israel time now um and you just arrived later I think um but you're doing terrifically well so I I um if you'll indulge us just a touch further there are two topics that um I want to touch on and if you want to cover these in shorter Thrift that's fine although don't feel any obligation to um the first one is I think most people are familiar with the scent of food or Foods as a signal of the nutrient contents of those Foods um you know an orange that smells great or the smell of something baking you know it it it suggests something about the the contents and quality of that food after all you and I both separately lived in the same apartment in Berkeley above the cheeseboard which the smell of cheese wafting up through the cheeseboard is something I will never forget and the breads never forget it um amazing uh red I mean I don't know if you've conveyed that clearly enough to listeners or Watchers the prob really just discovered that we lived in the same we've never met I mean like this before Y and we lived in the same AP are we click friends I had in a lingering way I guess absolutely through the through the the through the uh floorboards it had a great floor that place it had a great wooden floor it was an amazing place I lived there with my girlfriend a year and a half and then uh it was an amazing place um we won't give it out the address for out of respect for the people that live there now um but do check out the cheeseboard if you're ever in Berkeley their hours are weird but so you have to look online but that they're it's a unique place with with grap bread and cheese and um some good flavors of pizza um in any case um I'm wondering whether or not smell can signal things about the nutrient contents of foods in a way that's divorced from the smell that we are perceiving so for instance I could imagine based on what you've told us about smell today that um you know I I don't know I I I I smell a a a piece of meat cooking and it smells great to me and I think of it as oh that's so Savory and my mouth is watering and I love the smell of this and I'm thinking okay this is protein and fat and I love the taste of steak and a little bit of char but that Nature has co-opted that to get ensure or I should say increase the likelihood that I will ingest some other thing that's in stake for that has no odor but whose nutrient content is very important to me for instance amino acids right right I mean amino acids are essential to life and yet um we don't go around sniffing for amino acids we go around sniffing for savoriness Umami type uh uh tastes and and things of that sort so um I could imagine a million different examples of this in the same way I could imagine that the scent of somebody that we fall in love with or become romantically attached to or you know sexually attracted to is signaling all sorts of things about sure the potential for offspring of a particular immune status that's a longterm game but also um something about um uh pleasure and safety of a potential interaction so what I'm asking here is about that whether or not there are subconscious signals that the um olfactory system has uh learned to seek but learned to seek through um more overt signals sort of the tip of the iceberg phenomenon so you know I don't have a good answer for you although I think it's a really good question um or or or a good idea in fact so so whether whether the there's you know order cues on nutrient value is a really good idea more moreover it's probably good to the extent that somebody probably did it and I should know and don't um we haven't done anything on that line so I don't know I don't know if if the nutrient value of food is systematically encoded in odor um if that's not been done and I will check after our uh uh uh meeting today than it should be um it's a really good idea I mean one of the reasons I asked this is because um you know the Obesity crisis in the US is a huge issue and elsewhere and highly processed foods um you know have a lot of things that are problematic but one of the things that they don't have uh often is a direct relationship between the scent The Taste and the nut and the nutrient content and I don't mean macronutrient sugar fat excuse me uh carbohydrates fats and proteins but the the vitamins and micronutrients things that support the microbiome whereas foods that are not processed for instance meat or a piece of fruit um contain many micronutrients that are vital to aspects of our biology but we don't go around sniffing for probiotics I'll tell you one sort of factoid that may support your hypothesis here and that is that there appears to be potential all Factory perceptual similarity in metabolic products so something that's metabolized ized from something else has perceptual similarity across those those two things so so so metabolic Cascades play into the coding of all Factory space and and that is consistent with the direction you're you're you're implying but again I don't I don't know of a direct test of of uh of nutritional value in smell and and again the fact that I don't know doesn't mean of course that it doesn't exist and in this case I would suspect that it should exist um in scientific press and and if not there then with the companies that have vested interest in this which are many um share just just an an an amusing anecdote to share with you is that we've received two independent um um PE you know companies who have turned to our lab recently uh asking for help uh to to bring odor to engineered meat right that's a growing thing and all these you know meats that are not you had to bring it up this this audience is going to be very polarized along the along the lines of engineered meat um yeah you're not you're not pro you're not promoting oh no no no no I I'm agnostic but but uh but we've had two companies turn to us and say look you know we have this great product but it just doesn't smell like meat so help us make it smell like meat interesting uh the reason it's so polarizing is that anything related to nutrition on social media is a total barbed wire topic we've had experts on nutrition come on here we'll have more but I know nothing wor you're you're safe no don't worry no is not is not promoting uh he hasn't even said whether or not he's going to help them out no um we we're not actually not not because yeah it just never it didn't happen yeah no that the the whether or not those um engineered Meats are uh yum yuck or me is is a personal issue to people in terms of taste whether or not they are better for neutral or worse for you and the planet than given the ingredients that are required that's a whole world will avoid now I I will but you know I'll take that the opportunity to to to highlight something related maybe because on on what were you saying on the on the scale you know there's this you know I'll take the opportunity to dispel another misconception about all faction right there's this common notion that our sense of smell um is incredibly subjective right and that what you might like in the smell I will not like in the smell and that we all have our own you know totally subjective world of all faction I think I know the study you're going to tell me there are many the crosscultural similarity there are many that that is utterly untrue many not only from my lab there are many from many Labs uh please clarify for those that [Music] so um yeah so so humans are incredibly similar to one another in their all Factory perception and this is in contrast to which most people think so why why is there this misconception the misconception is there for two reasons first of all or for several reasons but two are send out first of all we're we're attracted by outliers because you know what I'll tell somebody look you know for example Factory pleasantness is highly correlated amongst humans and let's first put this in a num if you'll take a a bunch of humans and a bunch of odorant and have them rate pleasantness the correlation across uh the humans will be about 8 that's incredibly High incredibly High what do you think is Pleasant I think is Pleasant yeah now why why is that go against what culturally people think for two reasons first of all where we're attracted or or biased by outliers but that's particularly that shows in fact the result what do I mean so you'll tell somebody look people are very similar in their pleasantness estimates and they s you know that can't be I love cilantro and you know my girlfriend hates the smell of cilantro right or and there are a few classic examples there guava right you know is another uh uh polarizing order so there are a few polarizing orders right and and that's true right so that's true that you know half of the population loves the smell of cilantro and half hates it half loves guava half hates it that's true microwave popcorn however I assure you that you know you can come to our lab we have about a thousand odorant in our lab okay we won't smell the Thousand right but I assure you you know take a 100 odorant okay from our mixers and Labs right and we'll we'll smell them right and out of the 100 odors 90 will totally agre on right and including univer I mean you know nobody will say they like the smell of feces or fecal smells and everybody will say they like the smell of rose and Flowery smells there will be rare rare exceptions again the correlation about 08 across individuals so on 90 of 100 will really be in high agreement then five ordance will be in sort of intermediate agreement and yes there'll be the five ordance that we're in total disagreement on but I ask you you know if we agree on 95 and disagree on five are we the or are we different we're the same they're just outliers to this to this Rule and and and so one reason is this issue of of outliers attract how we think about things but no we're actually much more similar than than what we think and the second thing that that drives this cultural effect is the is our poor application of language to all faction right so so in other sensory systems we grow up with we we we're we're we develop with anchors right so since you're a little kid you know your mother shows you a cow and says what does a cow do moo right and we all know moo moo and what color is this it's well this is kind of an odd black but it's black right or or what color is that it's red right so you have these anchors but as you all know you know the red that I'm seeing is not necessarily the red that you're seeing we just both know to call that red and since you say red and I say red I think why we're seeing the same thing but no we're not seeing the same thing right and in in odor we don't have those anchors right we we don't from childhood you know our mom doesn't tell us oh what's this smell and what's that smell right and so we don't have these language anchors that make us think that we're perceiving the same thing now how can you quantify that the most important term in in measuring sensory systems is similarity right that's the measure right so what can you do let's say we take 10 odorants and I have you rate all the pairwise similarities right so you'd end up with 45 numbers right so you know how similar is 1 to 2 1: 3 1 to four and then two and all the possible pairwise similarities let's say you rate similarity from one which is totally dissimilar to 100 exactly the same right so now I have a similarity Matrix that describes Andrew's perception of smell right I have you know based on these 10 odorant that I selected now I can run my similarity Matrix and then I can see if the similarity Matrix are correlated right and then we've gotten rid of the issue of names and odors right it doesn't matter if I'll call this lemon and this Orange and you call this sweet potato and this marshmallow right it doesn't matter if I think that these two are highly similar and you agree and I think that these two are very different and you agree right we perceive the world in the same way if our similarity matrices are aligned right and what's nice about that is that then you can do that for vision audition and all action in a common group and you can see where we're more alike each other or not and we've done that for color vision all fact and tonal audition okay and we are most dissimilar in color vision okay we're in color vision the variance is about 100% amazing that's quite different and there's tons of literature on this tons of it tons of it right and in all faction and audition they're about the same so we're not different we're very similar we're just very poor at appreciating this and and mind you not that there's not variability there is variability and of course the system is malleable as all sensory systems are so you can learn to like an odor and and that will change you and learn to dislike an order right but just the way you can learn to like a sound or dislike a sound so you know this doesn't take away from the hardwired link of a structure to its perception that you can that they're malleable and and and we're we're not very variable we're we're actually kind of similar that's a perfect segue to the question I have next which is if in general people perceive certain odors similarly you could imagine that odors could be um manufactured co-opted uh Etc in order to elicit richer sensory experiences and drive Choice making um that's obvious at the level of the smell of a hot dog stand or freshly baked bread Etc but what I'm talking about here and I'd like to ask you about is doing this at scale and scientists Geeks like to say in silico in uh through computers so for a long time now there's been this idea that um there will soon be Google smell not to call out Google is the only search engine but duck ducko smell for those of you that don't want your smell DP chat GPT and on and on in other words you know Vision visual information is sent through uh computer interfaces as his auditory information not so much haptic samata sensory although it can you know we our lab uses VR it's it it can be done right um but it hasn't really taken hold um however smell being such a rich source of Behavioral and hormonal and other sorts of deep deep information that can drive people into yum yuck or me type decisionmaking yeah uh seems like an amazing candidate so what is your experience with um generating smells in silico in computers and here folks for those of you that aren't catching on to this and and I don't expect that everyone would because what we're really alluding to here um is the idea that you'll look at you'll uh put into a search engine um uh blueberry pancakes recipe and that not only will you get photos of those blueberry pancakes and a recipe but you will get the hopefully validated odor of those pancakes and that recipe coming at you in real time through the computer so I'll start off answering from uh from the uh the name you threw out there Google so about H probably about five years ago uh Google had an April Fool's spoof oh right and they put out this video of Google smell okay and and it had all these like classic like sales images of you know holding up your phone to a rose and it generating Rose and and and all these things right so Google is now trying to do that um and they just they just uh uh published I mean I I know they've been trying to do it for a while they visited our lab uh but they just sort of went public with this that really just like about a month ago or something that that um they have this offshoot startup um I think it's called osmo or something like that that started off with a ridiculous sum of money for a startup like I don't know tons of money there's a lot of money in that world yeah yeah in Google yeah um to to um you know to digitize uh smell and and um and there are other companies that are trying to do this as well um and we've been talking now for quite a while about our our Labs chemo signaling work but actually half of our lab is devoted to this question of of uh ultimately digitizing smell um and and so so this is a very very active field of research and and and I'll say um one thing that that dovet tales with what you were talking about before um in many ways covid is going to be one of the best things that ever happened to all faction research because suddenly all the world um is or all the world lots of people are are um very cognizant of the importance of smell and smell is like way up there in people's awareness because of covid and this is driving a Renaissance of of all faction research and and awareness to all faction is something that's worth paying attention to uh and and our lab has been involved in this way in this effort for a long time where where the initial part of this effort is in fact to develop a set of rules that link odor structure to odor perception that is the going thing was that that until recently at least there was no scientist or perfumer for that matter who could look at the structure of a novel molecular mixture and predict for you how it will smell or a smell something and tell you what it molecular structure could or should be um you know so in contrast let's say the trivial like color vision let's say so you know if if you know what the wavelength of the light is you more or less know what perceived color it's going to be of course there are exceptions to that and and all sorts of issues but as a rule you you would know or you know or the other way around you know you can generate a wavelength and you would know what color of light uh it's going to be perceived um so so that's an example of where the rules linking structure in this case measured by wavelength and perception in this case experienced as color the rules are well known in all faction we didn't have that um until recently um but over the past few years a bunch of labs have really um uh push this forward uh there's a bunch of work uh out of Leslie Vos Hall's Lab at Rockefeller and Andreas Keller working with Leslie um uh who who've done a lot of work on this front um also work from Joel mainlands La lab uh at monell um and fair Discovery Joel was a a graduate student in our lab um and and recently in our lab we've had and and I hope this doesn't come across as overly arrogant but we we've had a sort of mini breakthrough on this front to call something a mini breakthrough as far from arogant and and and this is a paper uh led by Aon ravia uh uh from our lab and Kobe snit also a major contributor there a paper published in nature uh about a year and a half ago in the height of a covid pandemic so nobody really or I won't say nobody but it it wasn't noticed in the way otherwise would have been it was it was publish in nature really on like a week where the whole world was like going berserk over covid um and in this paper we develop an algorithmic framework uh where we can predict the perceptual similarity of any two molecular mixtures with very very high accuracy so if you give me two molecular mixtures I can predict how similar you you will smell them to be okay now not only could we predict that but we could design it so we can generate um uh mixtures with no in similarities and the the the result was highlighted and you'll appreciate this coming from Vision um is that using our algorithmic solution we generated all Factory metamer so we measured mixtures completely non-overlapping in their molecular structure but they smell exactly the same okay now if you would come to a classic perfumer or most classic perfumers and tell them that you can generate two mixtures with zero molecules in common but smell exactly the same they would tell you no and yet we did and and anybody can recreate them this is simple actually um and and in the paper we do a few things like we generate a metamer for a chenel number five so you don't like perfumes so this one but but we we we take so we generate a Chanel Number five with no component from Chanel number five in it okay um and we actually have a publicly available website I'll give it to you for your links if you want that anybody can do this we built an an engine that you can generate these these metamer now once we did that in a way we've generated the the the infrastructure for digitizing smell because what again what we what our what our algorithm predicts our our framework predicts similarity but in a way that's enough for you why is that enough we have a map of 4,000 molecules uh for each one we know they're are perceived smell now you can make up any mixture you want for me I can project it into that map and measure its pairwise distance from all the points in the map if it falls on Lemon then what you generated smells like lemon and if it falls you know on tomato then what you generated smells like tomato so we we now solve that problem we can predict the odor of any molecular mixture we can say how it's going to smell what we can do is then find a set of components which we call odor primaries that can be used to mix any odor that you can perceive and that's what we're working on now um and about a month ago um so this is in collaboration with a lab of Jonathan Williams at Max plank in Munich um Jonathan Williams is an uh atmospheric chemist uh but he's really good at at using gcms these tools that measure molecules so uh Jonathan Williams measured odorant in Germany uh transmitted the information to us over IP uh we fed that into our algorithmic framework and recreated it from a device that mixes primaries uh and we tried to do four different odorants uh in our our proof of concept test uh one of them uh was Rose and we failed at recreating Rose we in fact recreated something that had a PRP but most people perceived it as bubble gum uh the second one we tried to do was an and we failed at recreating anise um and most people said it was Cherry which is not very far but it failed um the third was gasoline um and we were slightly but significantly better than chance at recreating Gasoline um and the fourth was was violets and 15 of 16 people and violets so the first odor ever transmitted over IP is violets and we did that last month um of course this is not anything near a practical solution uh the device uh uh that Jonathan was using to measure uh is a $1.5 million device bigger than this table uh that's right I remember when VCRs half the audience won't even know what that is VCRs were like this big so we're we're all good I'm all good with the uh with the prediction that things will come down in size and cost yeah I was just saying you know don't hold your breath for this to be on your table tomorrow um and and you know again even even you know all we have in hand is this very initial proof of concept you know it doesn't it's not even yet close to being a paper we are submitting because there's still lots of work to be done uh but we're on we're on the path uh we're on the path and you know Google will probably beat us to it uh they got a lot more I know you seem pretty dogged in there yeah but they have so much more resources that uh that um at this Stage IT and and they they've already published uh two papers from that effort that are good uh yeah you know if they definitely have a lot of dollars and a lot of people a lot of good uh neuroscience and other biology Engineering Graduate students and postt talk go there but but um the real question is are they getting the best people because as you and I both know in science the oftentimes it's small groups of of the very best and most creative people that can uh outrun and outgun large groups and and here I don't have anything against Google by the way um I I use it all the time I'm not a betting man but I would put my my money on Google on this race but I'll give I'll try and give them a a run for their you go well since I mostly just want to see the problem solved regardless of who gets there first what I'll say is you better get going Google cuz gnome being he's humble and he's dogged so um better better get cracking there we just costed the weekends of and uh and broke up the relationships of a bunch of scientists I remember when I was a graduate student at Berkeley I remember hearing there was a guy in in our common friend uh IR uh Irving zooker lab that worked 100 hours a week so I was like oh I'll work 102 hours a week which was not a good choice folks in any case it's it's uh it's abundantly clear that you're making progress here and and I and I go to some of the earlier discussions we had and I think we're not just talking about transferring recipes and smells of of of food uh gasoline from the people watching the the F1 race or something but um I'm thinking dating apps I'm thinking um you nowadays everyone knows that when you travel and you want to see your family your grandkids or kids you better to get on FaceTime and see them or Zoom um than to just hear their voice we're talking about being able to smell them I'll tell you more than that I'll tell you more than that I mean we're talking now of trying to achieve uh the old factory equivalent of Circa 1956 black and white TV okay basically right I me you know I'm not dreaming let's say of being able to transmit to you the difference between a Cabernet or armor low right but if I can generate something that's vely wine that will be an amazing success from my perspective right but Jump Ahead in your imag ination to to 4K odor transmission then medical Diagnostics is what you want to be talking about because in this is this is uh uh over uh extension but you can almost say that every disease will have an odor I mean every disease is a specific metabolic process metabolic process have metabolites metabolites have a smell all faction once it's digitized and and high resolution which again in our hands it's not going to be I mean we're talking you know in my retirement maybe I'll read about this one day if I'll still have Vision I mean this is not close but when when all faction digitization is brought to the equivalent of 4K uh uh vision and audition that you have now then it will be in medical diagnosis you'll have excuse me for the uh the imagery but you will have an electronic news in your bathroom uh each one of us will have in the toilet and it will be doing Diagnostics all the time and and uh that's that's where it's going to go but again not anywhere in the very close future well it's it's certainly an exciting proposition and I'm delighted that you and other groups um who are so strong are working on it I really am Nome I I want to say thank you for your time today first of all uh this was a tremendously interesting conversation I we touched on so many things hormone smells the architecture of the old factory system I know that people listening to this are realizing but I'm going to say it anyway uh what an Incredible Gift you've given us and um as a as a expert in this field giving us this tour of of the work that you and others uh who you credit so generously um have done to elucidate this incredible system that we callaction and chemo sensation also just for the incredibly pioneering work that you've done you know I I don't have many heroes in science I have Heroes outside of Science and a few in science but I'm gonna um I'm GNA uh purposely embarrass myself a little bit by saying that from the time I was at Berkeley and I then and saw that experiment being done of people foraging uh following scent trails and then when I was a until I was a junior Professor I used that in my teaching slides um um in a class that I taught that was sort of the early origins of this podcast in many way and over and over again when you laboratory publishes papers I find like this is super interesting super cool and I find myself telling everybody about it and that's really what I do for uh for a living is I I learn and then I blab about it to to the world so thank you so much for the work that you've done and the spirit that you bring to it whatever drives that Spirit as the great late Ben Baris used to say keep going because we are all benefiting tremendously and um and I also just want to say that you know for people listening to this the the spirit of science is one of as you mention there's complex politics and all these things but it's absolutely clear that you Delight in the work you do and um so I Delight in it I'm grateful for it I'm grateful for your time today and so on behalf of me and and the many many people listening to this I just want to extend a huge debt of gratitude thank you so much uh so I'm I'm the I'm blushing I don't know if this does come across on the on the radio Podcast but thank you so much for very warm words I mean you know we as you know when you work in your lab you don't there's these moments where you suddenly discover that somebody is like cares a bit about it and those are always very rewarding moments because usually you you function without that I mean I guess that's one of the things you need to be a scientist is to have the you know the drive to work without that because it it comes only rarely uh there's immense gratitude and appreciation for you and what you do from me and now I know from uh a large segment of the world as well so uh my only request is that you come back and tell us about uh the next results sometime not too long from now yeah well I'm I'm GNA catch you live now although you have the power to edit this so I guess that's not fair but first you come visit us in Israel and and tell us both about the science and the public science work you're doing and then I'll come again a good bargain and I accept delighted thank you so much yeah pleasure thank you for joining me for today's discussion about olfaction and chemo sensation with Dr gome soel if you'd like to learn more about the work in the soel laboratory or read some of the papers described during today's episode as well as learn about the current and future projects in the soo laboratory please go to the link provided in the show note caption if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to include in future huberman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast not so much on today's episode but on many previous episodes of The hubman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving their sleep their focus and hormone support the hubman Lab podcast is proud to have partnered with momentous supplements if you'd like to see the supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast please go to live momentus spelled o us so that's liv.com huberman if you're not already following the hubman Lab podcast on social media we are huberman lab on LinkedIn Facebook Twitter and Instagram and on all those accounts I include information some of which overlaps with content of the ubberman Lab podcast but often which is distinct from information covered on the hubman Lab podcast so again it's hubman lab on all social media platforms if you haven't already subscribed to our newsletter we have a zeroc cost monthly newsletter it's called the neural network newsletter and it includes podcast summaries and toolkits or protocols for things like enhancing sleep for exercise for meditation for dopamine for focus and many other topics to sign up you simply go to huberman lab.com go to the menu and click on newsletter and provide your email and I want to be clear that not only is the neural network newsletter zero cost we also do not share your email with anybody once again I'd like to thank you for joining me for today's discussion about olfaction and chemo sensation with Dr gome soel and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 210 ---
Video ID: uWV9a3zEaL4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uWV9a3zEaL4
Title: AMA #6: Eye Health, Why We Yawn & Increasing Motivation
Published: 2023-04-27 12:00:40 UTC
Description:
Welcome to a preview of the sixth Ask Me Anything (AMA) episode, part of the Huberman Lab Premium subscription.

The Huberman Lab Premium subscription was launched for two main reasons. First, it was launched in order to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel — which will continue to come out every Monday at zero-cost. Second, it was launched as a means to raise funds for important scientific research. A significant portion of proceeds from the Huberman Lab Premium subscription will fund human research (not animal models) selected by Dr. Huberman, with a dollar-for-dollar match from the Tiny Foundation.

Subscribe to Huberman Lab Premium at https://hubermanlab.com/premium

#HubermanLab #Science #AMA

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction
00:01:53 What Are the Best Eye Exercises, Supplements, Food, Protection Practices for the Eye?
00:33:55 Huberman Lab Premium

In the full AMA episode, we discuss:
- Why We Yawn and Don't Yawn During Sleep
- How to Stay Motivated and Overcome Lethargy in Learning

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Ask Me Anything episode, or AMA. This is part of our premium subscriber channel. Our premium subscriber channel was started in order to provide support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which comes out every Monday and is available at zero cost to everybody on all standard feeds, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, and elsewhere. We also started the premium channel as a way to generate support for exciting research being done at Stanford and elsewhere, research on human beings that leads to important discoveries that assist mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm also pleased to inform you that for every dollar of the Huberman Lab Premium channel generates for research studies, the tiny foundation has agreed to match that amount. So now we are able to double the total amount of funding given to studies of mental health, physical health, and human performance. If you'd like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. It is $10 a month to subscribe, or you can pay $100 all at once to get an entire 12-month subscription for a year. We also have a lifetime subscription model that is a one-time payment. And, again, you can find that option at hubermanlab.com/premium. For those of you that are already subscribers to the premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium subscription feed. And for those of you that are not Huberman Lab podcast premium subscribers, you can still hear the first 20 minutes of today's episode and determine whether or not becoming a premium subscriber is for you. And now without further ado, I will answer your questions. And as always, I will strive to be as thorough as possible, as clear as possible, and as concise as possible. The first question is about eye health, in particular eye health protocols for people that are aging but eye health protocols for people in general. The question is, I'm noticing that my vision, both close and far, is deteriorating. What are the best eye exercises, eye health behaviors, supplements, et cetera for the aging eye? So the answer I'm about to provide applies to everybody regardless of age, which is, you want to make sure that you view things both close up and far away across your day. Many, many people nowadays spend a lot of time looking at their smartphone, looking at the computer screen, looking at books and paper, in other words, looking at things somewhere between 9 inches away from their face and their eyes, maybe 2 and 1/2 feet away from their face and eyes. This is an unprecedented event in human history, as far as we know, because it wasn't until the advent of the smartphone that we've spent so much time looking at screens at close range relative to looking at things at further distances from our face throughout the day. In fact, it should come as no surprise that the incidence of myopia, of nearsightedness, is increasing dramatically around the world but is increasing particularly fast in children and in young adults and even in adults who are viewing things at very close range, so 2 and 1/2 feet or less. Now, I am not saying that viewing things at 2 and 1/2 feet or less is bad for your eyes, that is simply not the case. However, if you want your vision to be maintained or even improve, it's going to be very important for you to view things at a distance as well for ideally several hours per day. Now, I realize some people just simply won't accomplish this. In fact, I'd like everyone to just take a moment and do a rough estimation in your head of how much time during your daytime activities you are viewing things at, say, 2 and 1/2 feet or 3 feet or less, so smartphone, computer screen, paper, books, et cetera, versus viewing things that are 4 feet away, 8 feet away, so maybe conversation across the table with another human being. Remember those? Some of us are doing that more now that we seem to be emerging from this whole pandemic phase. However, many people are still mostly just viewing things within very close range. And, in fact, if you were to ask yourself, how much time do you spend looking at things at the distance of many hundreds of feet, or taking a walk where you're not looking at any screen and you're simply letting visual images or the visual imagery rather pass by on your eyes, I think for most of us that number is getting progressively smaller and smaller with each passing year. So this is an issue because the structure of the eye is such that the lens of the eye can move, but also that the length of the eyeball from front to back is actually impacted by how close or how far you happen to view things during the course of your day, especially during development. There's a classic experiment that I'd like to just briefly describe to you which has been performed in chickens. It's been performed in mice. It's also been performed on humans, where a visual occluder or a visual image. So an occluder is just a black screen or a piece of cardboard or an image, maybe some black and white checks or checkers, are placed at a certain distance from the eye, either up close or far away, and the impact of that on the length of the eyeball and on the structure of the lens and on the quality and acuity of vision is then measured. And to make a long story short, what these studies show is that, if during development, you or an animal exclusively looks at things that are up close, very close to the eye, and doesn't ever get long-range vision, the eyeball lengthens. And when that happens the lens, which, of course, is in the front of the eyeball, which focuses the light onto the back of the eyeball, which is where the so-called neural retina is, where the cells that sense light are, that visual image lands in front of as opposed to directly on the light-sensing portion of the eyeball that we call the neural retina. It lands too close or near the lens as opposed to on the back of the eyeball. And that's part of the reason what we call the consequence of that nearsighted myopia. In far sightedness, the opposite happens. The visual image is actually focused behind the retina. It doesn't land directly on the retina, which is what you want. It's focused too far behind the retina. And that's due to a shortening of the eyeball. So what I just described actually explains pretty well why kids who look at computer screens, or books up close often need glasses. When I was growing up, they called this nerd syndrome. Raising my hand for those of you that are listening. I read an awful lot, but I also spend time outside fortunately and running around on the soccer field and looking at things in the distance and playing in the neighborhood with my friends. Kids that spend the vast amount of their time looking at things up close, and particularly children who do that indoors for most of their waking time, well, those kids develop myopia. This is part of the reason why we have such an increase of the incidence of myopia nowadays. What's interesting, and I think most people don't realize, is that even as a young adult and adult, and perhaps even as an older adult, an elderly person, looking at things up close to much at the expense of getting some time viewing things at a distance, in particular outdoors, can be very problematic because it can exacerbate myopia. So the short, direct prescription here is to make sure that you're getting at least an hour or so each day, although ideally it would be more, of long viewing. And that could be done by walking outside and avoiding looking at your phone while walking. It doesn't require that you look at a particular object in the distance, although if you are scanning for and looking for objects in the distance, the way that you might on a hike or you're looking out toward or off a vista or you're looking for someone in the distance, all of that sort of visual scanning behavior is going to be very good for your eye health and for maintaining vision at a distance. If you're somebody who's far sighted and you have trouble seeing things up close, well, then you need to ask yourself whether or not you're spending too much time looking at things off in the distance, although I want to be very clear that nearsightedness and farsightedness aren't necessarily the consequence of this near, far viewing. There can be independent causes of nearsightedness and farsightedness. But for many people out there who are spending progressively more and more time just looking at things up close, you can get this lengthening of the eyeball or challenges in the way that the elasticity of the lens is controlled by the musculature in ways that make it hard to maintain sharp, crisp vision when you're looking at things at a distance or up close. So I can't, because there are simply no studies to support the idea that you need exactly two hours per day of outside long vision at a particular distance and/or that you want to cut off or have a threshold of four hours per day of looking at things up close, but we can say with a high degree of confidence that if you want to maintain or enhance your vision at all distances, that for every hour or so that you spend looking at things, say, a distance of 3 feet away or less, that you want to get at least one hour per day total, doesn't have to be all at once, of looking at things out in the distance or looking at things beyond 3 feet relative to the distance from your eye. So I think for some people who are already badly myopic, this isn't going to remedy that myopia. You're still going to need corrective lenses, but if you're somebody, similar to the person who asks the question, that they're quote unquote "noticing" their vision is deteriorating, really try and balance out the amount of viewing that you're doing at close distance and long distance. And, again, I would not obsess about the total numbers. It doesn't have to be three hours and three hours, but the more time that you can spend at viewing things that variable distance throughout the day, the better off you're going to be in maintaining and perhaps even enhancing your vision somewhat. Now, there's an additional behavioral tool that we can glean from the recent scientific literature exploring myopia which points to the fact that children who get two hours a day or more of time outside in sunlight-- one of my favorite topics. I know many people are probably rolling their eyes right now when they hear me say you really want to view morning sunlight, not through a window or windshield. Don't wear sunglasses for that, trying to get as much sunlight as you can in your eyes early in the day. Never stare at any light so bright it's painful, look at, et cetera. We've done a lot of episodes on this. We have a Light for Health episode, this Isn't All the Sleep episodes. It's just such a basic foundation of circadian rhythm and health that I just keep repeating it. However, there are also large-scale clinical trials involving thousands of subjects that have shown that people, children in particular, who get two hours or more of outside time every day have a much lower incidence of myopia. Now, what's really interesting about these studies is that, while some of those kids are looking at things further off in the distance than they would if they were indoors on their tablets or screens or with their nose in a book, it does not seem to be the case that they have to be looking at things in the distance in order to see this reduced incidence of myopia. What's probably happening instead is that the particular wavelengths of light that emanate from the sun, that photon energy in particular is triggering the activation of the so-called intrinsically sensitive melanopsin and retinal ganglion cells, which we know are important for setting circadian rhythm for enhancing mood focus and alertness during the day and enhancing the quality and duration of sleep at night. But those melanopsin and intrinsically photosensitive ganglion cells are also involved in networks within the eye that relate to blood flow, that relate to the ciliary body, which is a structure within the eye that controls the aperture and movement of some key components within the eye, that also relate to the crispness of vision, that is the acuity of vision, at both short and long range. So there are a lot of technical details there. In fact, I really hope to get the great Russell Van Gelder, or Dr. Russell Van Gelder, who's the chair of ophthalmology at the University of Washington in Seattle, who is a world expert in this and the various aspects, both molecular and structural of the ciliary body and the lens, and he's an expert in uveitis, a very interesting topic in its own, to come onto the podcast and talk more about eye health. And we will do that in the not too distant future. Meanwhile, if the first behavioral protocol for enhancing and maintaining eye health is to make sure that you're spending at least some time balancing out the near vision and far vision during the day, it also stands to reason that you want to get outside for at least two hours a day, which I know sounds like a lot, in order to prevent myopia, if you're a young person, and offset the progression of and maybe even reverse some myopia, we don't know yet based on the data, but there's some indication that's possible, by getting outside two hours a day. And the cool thing is, because many people, including myself, have a lot of work to do and we need to be on our phones quite a lot, or we choose to be on our phones quite a lot, this effect of getting sunlight outdoors during the daytime for two hours or more does not seem to require that you stay off your phone or tablet, or that you're looking at things far in the distance the entire time. What this means is, if you can get outside onto a patio or a deck or an outdoor table if you can, if weather and conditions permit, and do some of your phone time and computer time and reading, et cetera, outdoors. Now, if you're already making an effort to get outside, hike, play sports, take walks, et cetera, that of course counts towards this two hour threshold. And I know this sounds like a lot, this two hours, and yet for most people, it certainly will vary, depending on time of year, but I think striving to get on average about two hours of outdoor time as much as you can or opening a window, which wouldn't be as good as getting outside, but opening a window and trying to get some natural light exposure to the eye to trigger the activity, these intrinsically photosensitive melanopsin and retinal ganglion cells, that's going to be a really good idea in trying to offset and maybe even reverse some vision loss. Now, the other behavioral protocols which have shown to be useful in terms of maintaining or improving vision relate to the musculature around the eye and the control of the movement of the lens. And actually, the lens of the eye has its own flexibility. It's a really, really interesting structure. I'll geek out on this far too long if I don't prevent myself from doing so, but the lens is just incredible. The fact that it has a specific structure of proteins like crystallines and things of that sort and that it can still derive nourishment from blood flow but does not actually have vasculature within it. So it's not-- if you notice the lens of your eyes and filled with blood vessels and capillaries because it needs light to pass through, super interesting structure I think the only violation of what I just said is the manatee. Those pigs are underwater, elephant-like creatures that I think were or are endangered. Down in Florida, they were getting chopped up by speedboats, but I think now there's some effort to preserve those big gentle giants. The manatee, as I recall, has a vascularized lens, which is why their eyes look opaque. It looks like they have cataracts. In any case, you're not a manatee. You have no blood vessel supply to the lens. Keeping that lens clear is vital nowadays. They can do lens replacement. There's really a pretty incredible progress in the realm of ophthalmology and surgical replacement of the lens or the cornea, other aspects of the eye. But if you're somebody who is interested in maintaining your vision, you're going to want to maintain the musculature that controls the movement and the change of shape in that lens and the movement of the eyes, which allows you to transition your vision from very sharp when viewing things up close to very sharp one viewing things at a distance. And this is where some of the so-called near-far exercises can be very useful. So when we did a full length podcast on eye health and improving eyesight, which I invite you to listen to if you like, talked about two different types of vision exercises that have been shown to be useful for improving vision at a level of acuity that have a lot to do with improving the musculature and the movement of the eyes and the lens. And that's what's called a smooth pursuit task. So you could go on to YouTube if you like and put smooth pursuit eye task and do this for a few minutes each day if you're trying to keep your vision strong. And what that task involves is, as the name suggests, smoothly tracking a small dot or crosshatch or arrow on the screen, which is very different than the so-called saccade type eye movements that we often make. Saccades are when you dart your eyes to a particular location to look at something that dart it to another location to look at something. Microsaccades are little, tiny versions of those that were doing most all of the time, believe it or not. When you look at a visual scene or image, if you did not have those little microsaccades, your brain would adapt or would attenuate to whatever you were looking at, and the visual image would actually disappear, which really speaks to how important it is that your perceptions change in order to maintain them. This is very similar to where if something is placed on your hand, say a finger, you'll notice that change, but then if you leave it there for a short while, you'll forget that it's there because the cells there have adapted out. There's no change. So your nervous system is largely responding to change. This is also why when you walk into a room and you'll often notice a novel smell, let's hope it's a good smell, after a few minutes or so, you don't notice the smell anymore because your olfactory system adapted that away. So a lot of that adaptation is prevented by those little microsaccades. And the macrosaccades, the bigger saccades, are really for moving your eyes around to look for things in visual space. Smooth pursuit is a very particular kind of visual behavior that you can do in a smooth pursuit task and zero cost. Costs a little bit of time I suppose to do this on YouTube. And most any of them will do. We can provide a link in the show note captions of one that we like or several that we like, but by doing that smooth pursuit task for a bit each day, maybe just a minute or two, you're maintaining your ability through the musculature of the eye to do smooth pursuit. And, of course, you do smooth pursuit when you move about your day, but for people that are trying to offset or reverse vision loss, doing some additional deliberate smooth pursuit exercises can be useful. The other visual exercise that can be very useful is the so-called near-far exercise. So this is best accomplished, I think, by holding out a pen or pencil in front of your eyes, in front of your head, and focusing very intensely through what's called a vergence eye movement, where you bring both eyes to the tip of the pen and then moving that pen closer and closer and closer to your eyes, where you get close enough that you actually have to deliberately bring your eyes-- for those of you listening, this is what I'm doing right now-- to the point where it's blurry and you can no longer hold it in sharp, crisp relief. You can't see it sharply that is. And then you can move it out a little bit distance and play right around that threshold where it's hard to keep it in focus and then move it back out again. And then in doing that for even a minute or two, you'll find is a bit of a strain on your eyes, but you can actually build up the musculature and the neuromuscular connections that allow you to do that more efficiently. And that has been shown to improve certain aspects of vision, especially when people are diligent about doing those exercises, not necessarily every day, but let's say three days a week or so. They can be very fast. I actually find them fun for reasons that escape me entirely. Now, how close you can bring that object and still maintain it in sharp focus will vary from person to person based on a number of things. First of all, how healthy and well-performing their neural retina is, whether or not they have myopia or hyperopia, nearsightedness, et cetera, whether or not, for instance, you're like me and you have a fairly close inter pupillary distance, or whether or not you're more wall eyed and you have your eyes set further apart. All those things will dictate the exact performance of that task, but nonetheless, it's a very useful task to do when trying to maintain or improve vision. Now, of course, there are a lot more behavioral tools that one could use to maintain or enhance vision. I'm really touching on the biggest and what I consider the most important ones that are most accessible to people without the need for any fancy equipment at all. And if you want to learn more about other behavioral tools that one can use to maintain or enhance vision, please see the episode that we did on eyesight. You can simply go to hubermanlab.com. Put into the search function, eyesight or vision. It'll take you right to it. In fact, everything on that website is keyword indexed and will take you to the various episodes and time stamps that you're interested in according to that keyword. Now, the person who asked this question, who by the way, is Page Singer, thank you Page Singer, and the question got a lot of upvotes because apparently there's a lot of interest in this, understandably so, asked about nutrition and supplements for maintaining or improving vision. That could be a very lengthy conversation, but let's just summarize it with a few brief points that we know stand based on the clinical and scientific research. We've all heard that carrots are good for your eyes. Well, it's not carrots per se that are good for your eyes. It's vitamin A that's essential for the so-called phototransduction cascade. The phototransduction cascade is the process by which the photoreceptors, which are in the back of the retina, at least if you're human, they're in the back of the retina, take photons, light energy, and convert it into electrical signals that's then conveyed to the other cells and neurons within the retina and then passed into the brain to create visual perceps. Most people can't get enough of this fat soluble vitamin, we call vitamin A, by making sure that they eat at least some dark green leafy vegetables. And that they do that in their closest to raw form, maybe cooked a little bit but not overly cooked. There are other sources of vitamin A out. There you can look those up online just for sources of vitamin A. Most people will be able to get enough vitamin A from their nutrition and won't require it from a supplement, provided that it's not present at excessively high levels in a foundational supplement or vitamin mineral supplement. Getting some additional vitamin A from a foundational supplement or vitamin mineral supplement is probably not going to be an issue unless you really take in far too much of that vitamin A. It could potentially provide some insurance. But, again, I think most people can get enough vitamin A from their diet if they are taking carrots or to eat the foods that contain vitamin A, green leafy vegetables being one. The other food that's known to be highly enriched in vitamin A is liver, one of my least favorite foods regardless of what animal that liver comes from. Liver is somewhat of a popular/controversial organ meat in the nutrition space for reasons that aren't interesting, for sake of this discussion anyway I suppose for those of you that like liver, you could eat a little bit of liver every once in a while. It is rich in a number of things that are beneficial to health, although for you vegans out there, I'm sure you'll want to avoid liver entirely. I avoid liver because I just simply don't like the way it tastes. Maybe once or twice I've tasted liver that was appetizing to me. And it can be OK, but it's just not, or at least by my read it, can be OK, but it's not a food that I actively seek out, order, or prepare for myself on a regular basis. So fortunately, there are other sources of vitamin A as well. And, again, I just invite you to all put into a web search food sources of vitamin and figure out how to get your daily dose of vitamin A by taking in foods that you like for you. And then in terms of supplementation of things that can enhance vision, this is a newer area. And frankly, it's an area where most of the data point to some supplements that can potentially be beneficial in certain disease conditions. So for instance, in fairly progressed age-related macular degeneration. Age-related macular degeneration is fairly common, or more common than we would like, we should say. And it does appear that supplementing with certain things like lutein, which is present in eggs, or egg yolks in particular, especially egg yolks that aren't overly cooked, or that can be supplemented can potentially help with some instances of age-related macular degeneration. But the data on this are still emerging. I consulted with our chair of ophthalmology at Stanford about lutein and some of the other things that you'll see out there, like zeaxanthin and astaxanthins. And these xanthins come from certain fruits like blueberries, and they're present in supplements and things of that sort. The consensus I got talking to him and talking to some other ophthalmologists are that if you're really aiming to get a healthy diet, you're avoiding cigarette smoking. And by healthy diet I mean getting sufficient amounts of vitamin A and lutein through food sources. Again, you can look up where those food sources are, egg yolks just being one of them. Well, then chances are you're not going to need to supplement with lutein or the zeaxanthins or the astaxanthins. However, I have heard anecdotal reports from a number of people that they'll start taking a supplement for eye health, there are a number of them out there-- we are not, as a podcast, affiliate with any of those eye health supplements by the way-- and people are reporting enhanced vision. I receive emails all the time that say, I'm taking this lutein at 20 milligrams per day, and there I should mention that the dosage that's been explored in a couple of studies is 10 to 20 milligrams per day. Again, you could get that from foods. You could go above that if you're more cavalier, or you could go toward the lower end of that, 10 to 20 milligrams per day, if you are somebody who's more conservative. I should say. Well, there aren't people out there who are, looking at lutein, they think it's fairly safe, and they're taking higher dosages of lutein, so 20 to 30 milligrams per day. They're also taking supplements that contain zeaxanthins and astaxanthins and are reporting anecdotally that their vision is enhanced. I don't dispute those claims, but as of now, there aren't many papers, I could only find about 4, 3 really solid ones and then a fourth, that point to the specific disease instances where supplementing with lutein, zeaxanthin, or astaxanthin can be beneficial for slowing the progression of things like advanced onset age-related macular degeneration. And the degree of offset for that macular degeneration was slight. It wasn't enormous, but it was robust enough that it warranted reporting in the paper. Or things like Lieber's, which is a particular eye disease. It impacts a whole different set of systems in the eye. So basically, what I'm trying to say is, when it comes to supplements to support eye health, make sure you're getting enough vitamin A from your diet. If you're not, consider supplementation or consider changing your diet somewhat to make sure you can get that lutein and vitamin A. And if you are interested in it, and it's within your budget, I don't know of any evidence that supplementing with additional lutein, zeaxanthin, and astaxanthin can be dangerous at all. So for those of you that are really interested in maintaining or improving your vision, that might be an area that you want to explore. I personally am not taking lutein, zeaxanthin, or astaxanthin, at least not at this time. I do take a foundational supplement, which is my source of vitamin A in addition to my food sources. But I don't suffer from vision loss anywhere, readers at night, and I have for a long time. I have a little bit of a muscular weakness in one of my eyes that originated in childhood. So occasionally, if I get very fatigued, one of my eyes will deviate a little bit, a little bit of almost strabismus, especially if I've been awake for very long periods of time. It tends to recover once I get a good night's sleep. Some of you that have experienced this, where you have one eye that might just drift a little bit. I could do this for the camera if you want. OK, this is weird. I used to do this to my sister across the table when we were at a friend's houses for dinner. So I can actually move one of my eyes in like this, which actually just reflects that there's a extraocular muscle closer to my nose. It's rather weak, which allows me to do that. I can't do it so well with the opposite eye. Anyway, now I need to blink to clear my vision. But the point is that, if you're somebody who has a slightly deviating eye, slightly, often if you go to the ophthalmologist or optometrist, they're going to give you a prism lens which is going to redirect the image onto that slightly deflected eyeball. One thing you'll really want to discuss with that ophthalmologist or optometrist is whether or not there are exercises that you could do to overcome that issue without the need for a prism because what I saw and what many other people see when they put on a prism lens is that indeed it can line up their vision or their visual perception better, but indeed, it can lead to progressive weakening of the muscle further and further. So then that eyeball starts to deviate further and further. And that raises a larger question, which is, should we wear corrective lenses? In fact, if you go online, you'll find or hear about these examples of people that stopped wearing their corrective lenses, their glasses or contacts, in order to bring their vision back or improve their vision on their own. Now, if your vision is quite impaired, you're going to need corrective lenses or contacts. However, there are a number of people out there who find that if their vision is somewhat impaired, that forcing themselves to view things at a distance to do smooth pursuit, to do near far, and to make sure that they're getting adequate nutrition and things of that sort, can all sum to help offset some of the visual impairment that would occur if they were to just pop glasses on their face and rely on the corrective lenses in order to focus the light onto the correct area within the eye onto the neural retina. So I'm not telling people to throw off or get rid of their corrective lenses and contacts, but you can be overly reliant on these things, like a crutch, in a way that perhaps you want to do a little bit of work to try and overcome and then maybe work with a weaker prescription. And certainly, in the case of prism lenses, what I mentioned before is a real consideration. It's one I'm very familiar with. So as a last but I think very important and exciting feature of visual improvement is red light. I talked a little bit about this on the episode of the Huberman Lab podcast all about light and health. There's some really spectacular, I think I consider it spectacular, many other people consider it spectacular, research out of University College London. And the work I'm referring to is Glenn Jeffrey's work. I've known Glenn for a long time. These are animal studies, and now two human studies, exploring how exposure to red light early in the day can offset some of the vision loss related to age-related macular degeneration, or simply age-related visual decline. There's a whole mechanism here that's discussed in that episode, but it has to do with the fact that red light and near-infrared light, together, or maybe even separately, when viewed for even just a minute to 3 minutes once, or maybe two or three times per week maximum, can actually reduce the number of what are called reactive oxygen species in the photoreceptors that convert photons into electrical signals the rest of the visual system can understand. So that's a mouthful. Basically what they found was, for people 40 years or older, if they viewed this red light at a distance of about a foot and a half, although I wouldn't get too specific with this, for a few minutes each week total, they were able to offset some of the vision loss within a particular domain of vision. And I don't have time to go into the details here because I do that in the Light for Health episode, but you have different types of photoreceptors, cones, and rods. You have different types of cone photoreceptors that respond to different wavelengths of light, short, medium, and long wavelengths of light so-called blue, green, and red cones, they're sometimes called. When these people who are 40 years or older viewed red light on a consistent basis early in the day, and it did have to be early in the day, there was a real circadian effect there, there was a offset of some of the vision loss that would normally occur in a particular wavelength of light range that resulted in better visual acuity overall. So if you're very concerned about your vision, or you're into red light therapies, et cetera, there are a number of different red light devices out there. At some future point, the Huberman Lab podcast may partner with one of these red light companies. So right now, I'm not going to mention any of them in particular. They're prominent online. What you're looking for is a red light unit that provides red light and maybe far-- near infrared-- excuse me-- light as well. So something in the 650 to 720 ish nanometer range. So really it's going to look red or almost invisible to you if it's really far into the infrared. And you'll want to view that at a distance of about a foot and a half to 2 feet. And you don't want it to be so bright that it's painful to look at because you don't want to damage your eyes. But that's essentially what they used in these studies from the Jeffrey lab. And they showed some pretty impressive offset of some of the aspects of vision loss in these people 40 and older. So that's an area that you may want to explore as well, especially for folks 40 and older. And, again, this red light exposure had to be done early in the day. So hopefully, that collection of behavioral tools near, far, smooth pursuit, some of the discussion about lutein, nutrition, vitamin A, supplementation, zeaxanthins, astaxanthins, getting two hours of light exposure outside, sunlight exposure, get outside to do some of your work, and perhaps even deliberate red light exposure for certain people can be used to offset your concerns and your action potential vision loss and maybe even improve your vision regardless of what age you are. Everything I described is supported from the Peer-reviewed literature. And, again, if you want to get the deep dive on mechanism and further information about dosages, please check out the episode on eyesight and improving your eyesight and the Light for Health episode again at hubermanlab.com. Thank you for joining for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future episodes of these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to receive transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast standard channel and premium tools not released anywhere else, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, it's really twofold. First of all, it's to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which, of course, will still be continued to be released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab podcast, and to fund research, in particular research done on human beings, so not animal models but on human beings, which I think we all agree is the species that we are most interested in. And we are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance. And those protocols will be distributed through all channels, not just the premium channel but through all channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other media channels. So the idea here is to give you information to your burning questions, in depth, and allow you the opportunity to support the kind of research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place. Now, an especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the tiny foundation has generously offered to do dollar-for-dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium channel. So this is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel to further support research for science and science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab Premium channel, again, there's a cost of $10 per month, or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs. You can ask questions and get answers to your questions, and you'll, of course, get answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will also be some premium content such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab podcast episodes and not found elsewhere. And, again, you'll be supporting research for mental health, physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 211 ---
Video ID: 0RYyQRQFgFk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0RYyQRQFgFk
Title: Science-Based Mental Training & Visualization for Improved Learning | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-04-24 12:00:00 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I explore the science of mental visualization and its application for learning motor and cognitive skills. I discuss neuroplasticity-based skill development and the roles of focus, sleep, movement restriction, and agitation. I then present five key principles of mental visualization to enhance learning speed, accuracy, and consistency. I also provide examples of specific protocols, including repetitions, rest periods, and session frequency, and how to adapt these methods for injuries or breaks from traditional training. Throughout, I reference the scientific studies supporting these concepts. This episode should allow anyone to learn or teach more effectively through the use of mental visualization and training.

#HubermanLab #Science #Neuroscience

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 
Maui Nui: https://mauinuivenison.com/huberman  
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman
Momentous: https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Statistics of Mental Imagery: https://bit.ly/3H8NR78
Best practice for motor imagery: a systematic literature review on motor imagery training elements in five different disciplines: https://bit.ly/3UY0RT3
Sleep and the Time Course of Motor Skill Learning: https://bit.ly/41tM9We
Mental practice modulates functional connectivity between the cerebellum and the primary motor cortex: https://bit.ly/3H9kh1H
Motor Imagery Combined With Physical Training Improves Response Inhibition in the Stop Signal Task: https://bit.ly/3oBlmZJ
What is the relationship between Aphantasia, Synaesthesia and Autism?: https://bit.ly/3V2Tslj
Chapter 15 - Aphantasia: The science of visual imagery extremes: https://bit.ly/3V2Tqdh
Visual mental imagery and visual perception: Structural equivalence revealed by scanning processes: https://bit.ly/3L0jvoE
Using motor imagery practice for improving motor performance – A review: https://bit.ly/3ApXzyi
Motor Imagery Combined With Physical Training Improves Response Inhibition in the Stop Signal Task: https://bit.ly/3oBlmZJ
Visual images preserve metric spatial information: Evidence from studies of image scanning.: https://bit.ly/41OMimY
Acquisition and consolidation processes following motor imagery practice: https://go.nature.com/3L1udeK

Other Resources
Mobius strip: https://www.britannica.com/science/Mobius-strip 
Impossible cube: https://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Impossible_cube  
Rubin’s vase: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rubin_vase 
Stop-Signal Task: https://www.psytoolkit.org/experiment-library/stopsignal.html (Click on “Run the Demo” in the left-hand margin. Requires keyboard; not for smartphone)

Huberman Lab Sleep Episodes: 
Dr. Matthew Walker: The Science & Practice of Perfecting Your Sleep: https://hubermanlab.com/dr-matthew-walker-the-science-and-practice-of-perfecting-your-sleep 
Sleep Toolkit: Tools for Optimizing Sleep & Sleep-Wake Timing: https://hubermanlab.com/sleep-toolkit-tools-for-optimizing-sleep-and-sleep-wake-timing
Master Your Sleep & Be More Alert When Awake: https://hubermanlab.com/master-your-sleep-and-be-more-alert-when-awake

Timestamps
00:00:00 Mental Training & Visualization
00:04:46 Sponsors: LMNT, Maui Nui, Eight Sleep
00:08:04 Developmental vs. Adult Neuroplasticity
00:11:42 Learning New Skills: Focus & Sleep 
00:14:49 Long-Term Potentiation (LTP), Long-Term Depression (LTD) & New Skills
00:23:42 Principle #1: Very Brief, Simple, Repeated Visualization
00:29:36 Sponsor: AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:30:51 Principle #2: Mental Training Cannot Replace Real Training
00:37:36 Principle #3: Combining Real & Mental Training
00:43:17 Principle #4: Assigning Real-World Labels to Visualizations
00:50:37 Principle #5: Mental Imagery Equivalence to Real-World Perception
00:55:28 Tools: Effective Mental Training: Epochs, Repetitions, Sets & Frequency
01:03:43 Sponsor: InsideTracker 
01:05:00 Adding Mental Training; Injury, Travel or Layoffs
01:11:09 Timing of Mental Training & Sleep
01:15:17 Role of Gender & Age on Mental Training
01:17:10 First-Person vs. Third-Person Visualization; Eyes Open vs. Closed
01:23:53 Physical Skills, Motor Cortex & Cerebellum
01:31:15 “Go” & “No-Go” Pathways
01:34:19 Stop-Signal Task, Withholding Action 
01:44:19 Aphantasia, Synesthesia; Social Cognition
01:52:58 Mental Training Practice & Benefits
01:57:36 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today we are discussing mental training and visualization mental training and visualization is a fascinating process that has been shown over and over again in now hundreds of studies to improve our ability to learn anything when I say anything I mean the ability to learn music the ability to learn and perform mathematics the ability to learn and perform motor skills in sport in dance across essentially all domains the other incredible thing about mental training and visualization is that as you'll soon see when you go into the literature that is the scientific studies on mental training and visualization you quickly realize that it does not take a lot of mental training and visualization in order to get better at anything however that mental training and visualization has has to be performed in a very specific way and today we will discuss exactly how to do mental training and visualization in the specific ways that allow it to complement the actual performance of a motor or cognitive skill to allow you to learn more quickly and to consolidate that is to keep that information in mind and body so that you can perform those cognitive tasks music tasks motor tasks etc for long periods of time without ever forgetting how to do them all of mental training and visualization relies on what I consider consider really the Holy Grail of our brain and nervous system and that's neuroplasticity neuroplasticity is our nervous system which of course includes the brain the spinal cord and all the connections between the brain and spinal cord and the organs and tissues of the body and then all the neural connections back from the organs and tissues of the body to the brain and spinal cord so the whole thing in both directions has the ability to change in response to experience in ways that are adaptive that is that allows us to do things that we could not do before and by doing those things or by being able to perform those mental operations we can do better in the world that we live in we can perform new tasks we can think new thoughts we can come up with novel solutions to pre-existing problems that before really vexed us and that we couldn't overcome all of that is considered neuroplasticity so today what I'm going to cover is a brief summary of what neuroplasticity is that is how it occurs in the brain and body this is extremely important to understand if you're going to use Mental training and visualization then I'm going to talk about what happens in our brain and body when we do mental visualization in a dedicated way many people have heard perhaps that when you imagine something happening that your brain doesn't know the difference between that imagination of the thing happening and the real thing happening turns out that is not true it is simply not true however there is somewhat of an equivalence between a real experience and an imagined experience and we'll talk about the difference between those and how that can be leveraged in order to get the the most out of mental training and visualization then I will cover exactly which types of mental training and visualization work best across all domains meaning for Music Learning mathematics solving puzzles motor learning Sports Performance etc etc to really allow you a template in which you can plug in or designate what you're going to do each day for a brief period of time in order to accelerate your learning in whatever you choose and then I'm going to go into a bit of what happens in the brains of different types of people uh these different types of people that I'm referring to are people who have more or less of a natural ability to imagine things and visualize them because it turns out that we vary tremendously from one individual to the next in terms of our ability to mentally visualize and imagine things and our ability to get better at that over time and the good news is anyone can get better at mental training and visualization in ways that can serve them well I'll also briefly touch on the fact that certain people in particular people on the autism spectrum as well as people with synesthesias which is the combining of different perceptual experiences so you may be one of these people or you may have heard of people that for instance when they think of a number they also just naturally spontaneously think of a color and vice versa we talk about how that relates to mental imagery and visualization and the creative process and problem solving in general and then finally what I'll do is I'll recap mental training and visualization from the standpoint of how best to apply mental training and visualization according to specific challenges things like challenges with public speaking or challenges with sports performance or challenges with test taking Performance challenges with essentially anything that will allow you to build specific mental training visualization practices that are brief that are supported by Neuroscience studies and that are highly effective before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need meaning sodium magnesium and potassium but nothing that you don't meaning no sugar and it has the sodium magnesium pottassium in the ideal ratios for hydrating and providing electrolytes to the cells and tissues of your body so I use element in my water when I wake up I like to hydrate right away so I'll have an element packet in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up I tend to do the same while I exercise which I typically do in the morning sometimes in the afternoon and I'll drink another one throughout the day the great thing about element is it also tastes terrific I particularly like the watermelon flavor but frankly I like all the flavors just mixed into again about 16 to 32 ounces of water if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element lnt.com huberman to claim a free element sample pack with your purchase again that's drink element lm.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by Maui Nei venison which I can confidently say is the most nutrient-dense and delicious red meat available Maui Nei spent nearly a decade building a USDA certified wild harvesting system to help balance deer populations on the island of Maui the solution they built is extremely powerful because it turns the proliferation of an invasive species into a wide range of nutrient-dense products from butcher Cuts so venison steaks and ground venison Etc to organ Meats bone broth and jerky I really love all of their products so I love the venison steaks and the ground venison and their bone broth is fantastic it has an unmatched 25 gam of protein per 100 calories so it's very high density high quality protein per calorie so if you'd like to try Maui Nei venison go to mauii venison docomo to get 20% off your first order again that's Maui Nei venison docomond to get 20% off your first order today's episode is also brought To Us by eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity I've talked many times before in this podcast about the fact that sleep is the foundation of mental health physical health and performance now one of the key features to getting a good night's sleep is making sure that you get the temperature of the environment you sleep in right that's because in order to fall asleep and stay deeply asleep throughout the night your core body temperature needs to drop by about 1 to 3° conversely in order to wake up in the morning feeling refreshed and ready to go your core body temperature needs to go up by about 1 to 3° of course you can adjust the temperature of the room that you sleep in I do hope that people are doing that but adjusting the temperature of your mattress and your direct sleeping environment is also key and with eight sleep it makes it very easy to program the temperature of that mattress and sleep environment not just throughout the night but for specific phases of the night I started sleeping on an eight Sleep mattress cover well over a year ago and it's the best sleep that I've ever had if you'd like to try eight sleep you can go to eights sleep.com huberman and check out the Pod Pro cover and save $150 at checkout eight sleep currently ships in the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again 8sleep.com huberman to save $150 at checkout let's talk about mental training and visualization now perhaps surprisingly mental training and visualization has been studied since the late 1800s there's actually a paper published in 1880 by gton called the statistics of mental imagery so long ago people were quantifying and trying to understand how is it that people come up with mental images and how they can apply that to learning things more quickly and more stable over time now as I mentioned earlier mental training and visualization relies on a process that we call neuroplasticity neuroplasticity is a term that many people have heard and encompasses many different things so broadly speaking neuroplasticity includes developmental plasticity which is the sort of plasticity that occurs between about birth and age 25 and that can be summarized very easily as passive plasticity in other words the sorts of changes that happen in one's nervous system simply by engaging in the world and experiencing Life as a child as a young adult as an adolescent and as a 22 23 24 year old Etc now of course of course of course it is not the case that on your 25th birthday you close out passive developmental plasticity and start engaging in the other type of neuroplasticity which is adult neuroplasticity it's a gradual tapering off of Developmental plasticity that occurs between age 0 and 25 and for some people might occur somewhere around 26 for other people around 23 when we say 25 we're really just talking about the average age in which passive plasticity tapers off however starting fairly early in adolescence and extending all the way out into one's 80s or 90s or hundreds should one live that long is the other form of neuroplasticity which is adult neuroplasticity adult neuroplasticity is very different than developmental plasticity because it is the sort of plasticity that one can direct towards one's own specific desired learning so if we wanted to get a little bit technical here for sake of clarity not for sake of confusion we would say adult plasticity is really about self-directed adaptive plasticity and the reason we call it that as opposed to something else or simply adult plasticity is that there are many different forms of neuroplasticity there is for instance maladaptive neuroplasticity that occurs if one gets a really hard head hit and concussion there will be changes to the brain and nervous system but those changes to the brain and nervous system do not allow it to perform better in fact it often impairs the brain and nervous system's ability to function and therefore is maladaptive so I don't want to get overly wordy with a number of different terms here but I do think it's important to understand that we have developmental plasticity again in which the brain and nervous system changes simply in response to experiencing specific things for better or worse and there's adult self-directed adaptive plasticity in which one can direct specific changes in terms of learning things cognitively or learning things in terms of motor function so sport Dance Etc or combination of the two now just to really clarify what I mean by developmental versus self-directed adaptive plasticity I mentioned that self-directed adaptive plasticity actually can start in adolescence right even though there's ongoing developmental plasticity I mean let's be really direct the brain of a 14-year-old is very different than the brain of that same individual when that person is 21 because there's ongoing developmental plasticity however starting at about adolescence we can all start to decide what it is that we want to learn and engage in self-directed adaptive plasticity now the way to engage self-directed adaptive plasticity regardless of whether or not you're a 13-y old 14y old or you're a 90-year-old or anywhere in between is that it requires two things the first thing it requires is focused dedicated attention to the thing that you're trying to learn that's the first step and that actually triggers a number of different chemical and electrical processes in the brain that are often associated with agitation and frustration believe it or not the agitation and frustration is a reflection of the release of specific chemicals in particular nor epinephrine and epinephrine also called nor adrenaline and adrenaline in the brain and body that creates this discomfort and this heightened level of alertness and attention that many of us don't like and tend to back away from but it is exactly that chemical or I should say neurochemical milu which signals to the neurons the nerve cells in the brain and elsewhere in the body that something needs to change because if you think about it if you can do something perfectly or if you try and do something and it doesn't cause any neurochemical change in your brain and body well then there's no reason for your brain and its connections with the body to change in any particular way okay so you need Focus dedicated attention to the thing that you're trying to learn it's often accompanied by agitation frustration Etc so that's perfectly normal in fact that's a signal that things are going right meaning they're headed towards learning but there's a second component that's really required for self-directed adaptive plasticity and that's periods of deep rest in particular a goodn night sleep in particular on the night that follows that focused attention to the thing you're trying to learn there are now hundreds of studies in both animal models and in humans showing that it is really during sleep and other states of deep relaxation things like meditation and non-sleep deep rest which I've talked about before on this podcast but really during our main night of sleep that the rewiring of neural connections that is the actual neuroplasticity takes place so the verb neuroplasticity the rearrangement of connections between neurons really occurs during sleep in particular on the first night following an attempt to learn something through this focused attention now developmental plasticity which is passive also requires good sleep it's slightly different or frankly it's a lot different in terms of the underlying mechanisms than self-directed adaptive plasticity but because today we're mainly talking about how to learn faster through mental training and visualization and that really Maps more closely onto self-directed adaptive plasticity just really want to emphasize this two-step process there has to be focused dedicated attention and then there needs to be sleep and in particular sleep on the first night following that training now should you have the unfortunate experience of getting woken up in the middle of the night following trying to learn something or should you simply not be able to sleep for whatever reason on the night following a bout of learning or an attempt to learn do not despair because it turns out that there are what are called second and third night effects also once you sleep you will learn those neuroplastic events the reordering of connections that we call synapses and the changes that occur in neural circuits that reflects what we call self-directed adaptive plasticity that still will occur but ideally you got a great night's sleep on the first night following trying to learn and the second night and the third and so on and so on on now there are a few other things that are critical to understand about self-directed adaptive plasticity that will become especially important when thinking about protocols for developing the ideal mental training and visualization process for you and that is that there are different forms of plasticity that occur between neurons although the two main forms are what are called long-term potentiation and long-term depression I just want to ceue up right now that the word depression is a very loaded word because the moment people hear the word depression oh no that's bad but in the case of neuroplasticity long-term depression is simply a change in the connections between neurons and the excitability between neurons that in many ways can be excellent for learning things in particular motor skills and we'll get into this in more detail in a little bit but it turns out that a lot of our ability to get better at some sort of motor skill involves this thing that we call long-term depression and that's because much of what is happening when we learn a new motor skill is that we are deped pressing or suppressing specific actions in order to generate a very specific coordinated action some of the best examples of long-term depression can actually be borrowed from developmental plasticity so for instance if you've ever sat across from an infant who is trying to eat their meal so imagine a one and a half-year-old or a 2-year-old trying to eat some noodles or some soup or any kind of baby suitable food with a spoon and they're holding the spoon or they're trying to hold the spoon what you'll notice is that their motor movements are terribly uncoordinated they often will take that spoon to their cheek or to their eye or to their head we've all seen these very amusing photos of babies with bowls of food on their head or with food all over their face or just everywhere it appears that they're basically getting the food everywhere except where it's supposed to go which is in their mouth and that's because their motor movements are not very well coordinated at that age and they're not very well coordinated not because they lack sufficient numbers of neural connections synapses between neurons but rather because they have too many connections between too many different neurons the neural circuits that control very dedicated coordinated movement are not there yet instead too many neurons are connected to too many other neurons and so they can't generate the precise movements that are required in order to get that spoon to their mouth now over time they get better at moving the utensil to their mouth such that hopefully by about F age five or six they are eating you know in a relatively cleaner way and hopefully by time they're 10 or 11 or 12 they're getting the food into their mouth and not all over their face uh people learn this to varying degrees all you have to do is go to a restaurant and watch how people eat um and you will see a vast variation in people's coordinated movements with utensils but in general there's a theme the younger the person the more uncoordinated their movement of utensils and as they get older the more coordinated now of course in people that are very very old they have challenges moving objects and their limbs in very smooth ways and that has to do with a topic that we'll get into when we talk about age related cognitive decline and motor related dementias but for sake of today's discussion if you just want to think about what happens with long-term depression and the development of a motor skill both as a baby as an adolescent and as an adult when you're trying to learn a new motor skill is that you are eliminating incorrect movement and when you are eliminating incorrect movements to arrive at only the correct movements in a very reflexive and repeated way so think your golf swing your tennis serve think serving of volleyball think a child learning to crawl and then walk think a child learning to eat with utensils in the example I gave before what's happening in all of those cases is that yes certain Connections in the brain are being strengthened or what we call potentiated they are undergoing long-term potentiation the so-called quote unquote fire together wire together Mantra that was popularized by the great neurobiologist Dr Carla shatz my colleague at Stanford but in addition to that long-term depression the quieting or the silencing of specific synapses that is connections between neurons is absolutely critical for motor skill learning so we have ltp long-term potentiation and LTD long-term depression is every bit as important as ltp long-term potentiation for getting better at some sort of motor skill and indeed at getting better at some sort of cognitive skill now as we hear this this should be intuitive to all of us if you look at somebody's attempt to learn a particular dance step or at somebody's attempt to do a tennis serve the first time it's all over the place now it's not perhaps all over the place in that they're doing a jumping jack while trying to serve the tennis ball but they're generally arcing the racket too widely on one trial and then they're arcing it too close to their body on the next trial so if we were to draw a line over each one of those trials we would see that there were lines everywhere over time whereas once they quote unquote perfect the tennis serve it's going to be line drawn directly over line drawn directly over line meaning the Arc of that tennis serve is going to be very restricted and that without question has reflected the removal or the quieting of particular synapses connections between neurons in the brain and body to allow that very narrow coordinated and direct movement the same is true for learning anything in the cognitive domain meaning if you are to learn a language it is not of course the case that you know every word in that language and then you simply remove certain words and arrive at the correct sentence structure that you're trying to achieve but rather you have to suppress your native language or if you're a young child you have to suppress the generation of just kind of random babbling sounds turns out babbling isn't random at all but the point is that you have to suppress the enunciation of particular sounds and direct the pronunciation of other sounds in order to generate that new language or your ability to speak at all okay so we can really think about neuroplasticity as both a building up process in which you increase connection so-call long-term potentiation and a sculpting down or a removal of connections process that we're going to call long-term depression now I have to acknowledge that of course there are other forms of neuroplasticity too I know there are probably some afficionados listening to this who will be perhaps shouting back at uh whatever device my voice is coming out of wait what about Spike timing dependent plasticity or what about pair pulse facilitation yes yes and yes there are multiple forms of communication between neurons that can strengthen those connections or weaken those connections but for today's discussion we just broadly want to think about long-term potentiation and long-term depression because it captures the two most important themes related to mental training and visualization which is that when we perform a given cognitive or physical task in the real world so we actually try the dance step or the tennis serve or when we actually try a math problem where we try and learn some specific knowledge and write it down and remember it that is engaging particular neurons right they're firing they're releasing chemicals but it is also actively suppressing the activity of other neurons and we are always completely unaware of the ways in which our brain is suppressing certain activity okay so today we have to keep in mind that where there is strengthening of connections there is also weakening of connections and when it comes to mental training and visualization and here's the really key point with mental training and visualization you are capturing both processes both the potentiation that is the building up and strengthening of connections and the weakening of the connections that are inappropriate for the thing you're trying to learn and there are different aspects of mental training and visualization protocols that really harness the potentiation versus the depression aspect and today we will cover mental training and visualization protocols that capture both the potentiation and the depression aspect of neuroplasticity and in that way serve as an augment that is a complement to the actual real world cognitive and physical training that you're doing because I'll just give this away right now turns out that mental training and visualization is not a replacement for real world cognitive or motor Behavior again mental training and visualization cannot replace real world execution of cognitive tasks or of motor tasks if you want to learn however mental training and visualization can and has been shown to be effective for greatly enhancing the speed at which you learn and the stability of that learning over time okay so let's take a second and really think about what's happening in the brain and body when we do mental training or visualization in fact we can do a little experiment right now that is not unlike many of the classic experiments looking at what's happening in the brain and body Dre mental training and visualization in which I just ask you to close your eyes and imagine a yellow Cube okay and next to that yellow cube is a red rose and perhaps I also ask you to float or fly up above the cube and the rows and look at them from the top top down and then I tell you to fly back around and land behind those and look at them from the perspective of behind that yellow Cube and that red rose okay now what the data tell us is that most people will be able to do that most of you will be able to do that to some degree or another regardless of your attention span whether or not you have ADHD or not most of you will be able to do that to some degree or another we also know from neuroimaging studies in which people are placed into a functional magnetic resonance imaging scanner that during the sort of visualization you just did or that I described that your visual cortex and Associated areas quote unquote light up they become very active in similar but not identical ways to how they would light up and be activated were you to actually look at a yellow cube and a red rose on a screen and perhaps Fly Above them virtually of course and land behind them virtually of course or if you were to actually look at a yellow Cube and red rose in the real world right in front of you on a table then you know get up on your tippy toes and look down at them from the top and then walk around the table and look at them from the other side so there is some degree of what we call perceptual equivalence between real world experiences digital experiences and imagined meaning with our eyes closed just in our Mind's Eye experiences this is true not just of vision and what we call the visual domain but also the auditory domain okay so for instance I could play for you a short motif of a song Let's just pick something that I think most people know goodness I'm a terrible musician and even worse um singer but let's just take the the opening to acdc's back and black right I think I can do that when it's like [Music] okay got it that's the the actual sound although admittedly a dreadful version of of the great ACDC song Back in Black but now I ask you to close your eyes or you could keep them open and just imagine that okay or for instance I place you in a quiet room so you close your eyes and ask you to imagine the opening to acdc's black and black but I ask you to pause it halfway through what you would find again is that most people somewhere between 90 and 95% of people would be able to do all the sorts of things I described right Cube and rows ACD back and black even a samata sensory task I imagine you to imagine what it's like to touch felt or to touch chinchilla hair or something like that a Chinchilla's hair ideally alive chinchilla sitting still those little critters move really really fast but they have very very soft hair High hair density So Soft okay most people can do that a about 5 to 15% of people are less able to do that and there's a small percentage of people in that 5 to 15% that simply cannot do it at all that just cannot visualize well we'll talk later about these people they have what's called aasia an inability to mentally visualize but most people are actually pretty good at visualizing things when they are told what to visualize and and this is a really key point and if what they are told to visualize is very simple and the whole visualization is quite brief lasting on the order of about 15 seconds to generate the visualization in the auditory or in the visual aspect of one's mind's eye or ear if you will and if it's repeated over and over what's far harder for everybody to do and in fact what most people simply cannot do is Imagine long extended scenes and stories in their mind that go on for minutes and minutes and involve a lot of different sensory stim this is a really key point in fact as we start to home in on ideal mental training and visualization protocols I'd like to establish this as the first principle of mental training and visualization which is that if you are going to use Mental training and visualization to its best effect in order to engage neuroplasticity and learning you need to keep those visualizations quite brief really on the order of about 15 to 20 seconds or so and pretty darn sparse meaning not including a lot of elaborate visualization not including a lot of sequences of motor steps what I mean are motor sequences if you're trying to learn something in terms of physical movement or visual sequences or auditory sequences if you're trying to learn things in terms of music or Dance Etc that can be completed and repeated in 15 seconds or less now later I'll give you a couple of specific examples but if you want to use Mental training and visualization understand this is the key first principle they have to be very short visualizations that you can repeat over and over and over again with a high degree of accuracy so you don't want to embark on a mental training and visualization Paradigm in which it involves a lot of elaborate stimul and you have to think really hard and work really hard even if you're in that category of people who can do mental visualization pretty naturally and easily now if you're somebody who can't do mental visualization in fact if you're somebody who has full-blown FN or the inability to mentally visualize well then it's especially important that you make those mental trainings and visualizations really brief and very very simple I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors athletic greens athletic greens now called ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs I've been taking athletic green since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast the reason I started taking athletic greens and the reason I still take athletic greens one once or usually twice a day is that it gets me the probiotics that I need for gut health our gut is very important it's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain the immune system and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health and those probiotics and athletic greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health in addition athletic greens contains a number of adaptogens vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met and it tastes great if you'd like to try athletic greens you can go to athletic greens.com huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road in the car on the plane Etc and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's athletic greens.com huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 now in order to develop the best mental training and visualization protocols for you let's go a little bit deeper into what the research says about mental visualization now the classic work on mental visualization really hinges on a number of different researchers and their work but in particular Roger Shepard who did this work at Stanford and Steven klin who's now at Harvard there of course others in the field but it's really the work of Shephard and cin that lay the foundation for our understanding of what happens in the brain when we mentally visualize something Shephard did these incredible experiments in which he had students mentally visualize simple objects like a square like a triangle and he measured how long it took them to do that now of course at the time when he did these experiments there were no sophisticated brain Imaging devices and machines like fmri however everything I'm about to describe has been later confirmed using things like fmri what Shephard did and what he found is that if people were told to visualize very simple objects they did it pretty quick however if they were told to visualize more complex objects or importantly to rotate those objects in their Mind's Eye well then it took longer for them to perform those mental visualizations now many of you might think duh if I have to just imagine a triangle or a cube that's going to be very easy and very fast whereas if I have to rotate that triangular cube in my mind's eye that's going to take more time and indeed that is somewhat of a duh except and this is so very important except that what shepher and his colleagues found is that how long it takes somebody to generate and rotate a given visual image scales directly with the complexity of that image in fact kyin did some experiments I think illustrate this even better and here's the experiment I love this experiment I think you'll love it too because it illustrates something so fundamentally important about how our brains work not just for sake of mental training and visualization but this is how our brains work at all he showed people a picture of a map so a map drawn on a piece of paper this was a map of an island it included things like a loading dock for some boats it had a location for getting food on the island it had some trees it had some other small landmarks drawn out and people looked at this and memorized it or in other experiments they just had people imagine this island and the location of these different landmarks on the island so didn't really matter which but then he had people imagine moving or walking from one location on the island to another so they'd say okay you're at the loading dock now move to the restaurant okay you're at the restaurant now move to the palm tree you're on the NorthShore of the island now go around the side of the island clockwise to arrive at the bay on the southwest corner this sort of thing what klin found was absolutely incredible what he found was that the amount of time that it takes people to move from one location on the map to another scaled linearly directly with the actual physical location between those objects on the map so for those of you that can understand or in the importance of what Shephard and coslin showed great I'm guessing however that for most people out there you're still grasping it like okay interesting you know how things happen in the real world dictates how they happen in our mind's eye but I want to make sure that I really nail home the importance of this for everybody the importance of this is that when we look at something in the real world so if I look at the pen in front of me I'm holding up my pen for those of you there listening just holding up my pen in front of me I move it to the right and back and forth what's happening is I'm activating or I'm triggering the electrical activity of neurons which we can think of kind of as pixels in my eye okay so it's you know leftward to rightward motion for me and back and forth and those are getting activated and they're sending signals up to my visual cortex and that information is processed at a given speed what the visualization experiments that Shepard and klin and others did show is that the processing speed of imagined experiences is exactly the same as the processing speed of real experiences and the spatial relationship between imagined and real experiences is exactly the same as well put simply when we imagine something in our mind's eye or mind's ear we are Imagining the real thing happening and when I say the real thing it's not the obvious real thing of course if you're imagining something that's the thing you're imagining what I mean is that your brain at the level of neurons is behaving exactly the same way and this needn't have been the case okay there could have been a result for instance that if people were asked to visualize a cube and rotate it from you know flip it from top to bottom okay so put the top that's upward on a table now down on the table and so forth or to migrate around the island you know counterclockwise going from you know the northern coast all the way down to the southern coast clockwise and then back up to the northern coast that they could have just done it really quickly like all in one second but that's not what happens they always match the speed at which they do things in their Mind's Eye to the same speed that they do them in the real world so in telling you this what I'm saying is that mental visualization at the neural level is identical to real world events so when you've heard that when we imagine something it's identical in terms of our brain's experience of it and our body's experience of it as when we actually experience something that is true at the neural level however when it comes to learning and improving performance in the cognitive or physical domain they are not equivalent so this is the second principle of mental training and visualization as you recall the first principle of mental training and visualization was that in in order to make it effective it needs to be very brief and very simple and repeated over and over again the second principle of mental training and visualization is that while yes mental training and visualization recaptures the same patterns of neural firing in the exact same ways as real world behavior and thinking it is not as effective as real world behavior and thinking in other words if you want to learn something the ideal situation is to combine real training in the physical world with mental training and I'll talk about exactly how to do that and in what ratios a little bit later now there's a really incredible set of experiments that illustrate why it is that mental training and visualization can be extremely effective but that it's always going to be most effective when combined with real world training and experiences the experiments that I'm talking about involve the use of what are called by stable images or impossible figures some of you are probably familiar with possible figures these are figures or objects that when you look at them they have these odd features like you're not sure where they stop and where they start where they end uh one good example would be the so-called Mobius strip the mobus strip is literally a strip or a line that is contiguous it goes up and it loops around and then it curves around and then it goes back and and it just continues and continues and when you look at it you can never really tell where it starts and where it stops because it doesn't have any of the features that allow you to see what's the front and what's the back in any kind of stable way another example of an impossible figure would be you know a little um set of Cubes that look like they're coming out toward you maybe with a little Bend in them going up at a right angle perhaps but then if you look at it a little bit longer that little piece that's facing up looks like it's in front and you can't really tell what's in front and what's in back and so it's called an impossible figure because you don't really know how to frame it in your mind to tell what's closer to you and what's further apart by stable images are somewhat similar although different in the sense that they typically are simple Silhouettes so for instance the faces vases by stable image is perhaps the most famous of these where you look at this image it's very simple and it looks like two vases but then you look at it a little bit longer and you realize that you're looking at the side angle or the profile of two faces looking at one another and when you see those two faces looking at one another you can't see the vases at the same time but then if you decide to see the vases again you can see the vases again but the faces disappear so it's by stable meaning that you can't see the faces and vases at the same time and impossible figures and by stable images are capturing the fact that your visual cortex and some of the associated areas that compute visual scenes in your world are essentially trying to recreate whatever it is that's out in front of them and that's effectively what your visual system does it's very good at recreating visual images in your brain in your mind's eye because if you think about it even with your eyes open your brain is just creating an abstract representation of what it thinks is out there but that when it comes to assigning an identity to something like oh that's a face or oh that's a vase that is constrained by different neural circuits by different areas of the brain and somehow those circuits can't be coactive we cannot see the faces and the vases at exactly the same time we can switch back and forth really quickly just as we can switch back and forth really quickly when we're looking at the impossible figure and think okay that's the front of it that's the back no wait that's the back that's the front and it's going back and forth but we can't see them both at the same time no one can see them both at the same time okay we know this from brain Imaging studies now impossible figures in bable images can be seen right you could look them up right now on your phone or computer or I could show you pictures of them on paper right in front of you and you can do these sorts of perceptual experiments of telling people look at the face look at the vase look at the front of the cube and I'll make it at the back of the cube and they can do somewhat deliberately however and this is I think so very interesting to understanding how mental training and visualization does and does not support Real World Learning if you try to imagine a by stable image you can't do it in fact no one can do it until they do something else okay so for those of you that saying wait I can do it I can do faces vases in my mind's eye I promise you that the neuroimaging disputes your belief okay and supports the idea that we can see real world by stable images we can see real world impossible figures but when we try and imagine those in our Mind's Eye we simply can't do it we can't do the perceptual shift in our Mind's Eye we can't switch back and forth between faces and vases however and I just have to chuckle because I think these experiments are so clever if I have you trace or Draw with a pen on a piece of paper and imp possible figure or the faces vases by stable image and then I ask you to imagine that bable image or impossible figure and to switch back and forth you were able to do it so what that illustrates is that it's the combination of imagined and real world experiences real motor movements real perceptual experiences combined with motor movements combined with what you imagine in your mind's eye that really gives you the most depth and flexibility over your mental visualization and in doing so we can really stamp down a third principle of mental training and visualization which is that your mental training and visualization will be far more effective if you are performing the exact same or very similar mental and physical tasks in the real world okay so first principle is mental training and visualization needs to be simple and brief and repeated second is that mental training and visualization is not a replacement for realworld motor training or cognitive training it's an augment it's an addition that can really help and the third principle of mental training and visualization is that you need to combine mental training and visualization with real world behaviors and experiences that are very very similar now as a brief but I think really relevant aside one of the things that also makes mental training and visualization more effective is when we assign cogni ative labels to what's going on when we visualize so what I mean is that people are much better at manipulating faces and vases in their Mind's Eye of course only once they've drawn them out physically with their hand as I mentioned before then they are manipulating abstract objects like impossible figures in part because by labeling them faces and vases people are able to capture a lot of other neural Machinery that's related to faces and bases in fact we have entire brain areas on both sides of the brain devoted to the processing of faces called fusiform face area we have other areas in our brain that are involved in processing of 3D objects but faces are of particular value there's a there's a value to understanding what a face is as opposed to a non-face and there's a value to understanding what a particular face is in fact the simplest way to put this is that the human brain is in many ways a face recognition and expression of faces recognition machine it of course does other things but it is exceptionally good at that unless you're a profession in which the relationships between 3D objects and your ability to manipulate them is exceedingly important you're not going to have a lot of neural real estate specifically devoted to that some people will be better at it some people will be worse but when it comes to faces unless you have a condition like propath agnosia which is an inability to recognize say famous faces and distinguish them from non-f famous faces or if you have some sort of face recognition deficit which about anywhere from one perhaps to 3% of people out there have they're just terrible at recognizing faces and by the way there's about half a percent of people out there that are what are called super recognizers that can recognize faces in a large crowd they can recognize specific faces even from just partial profiles by the way these people are extremely valuable to Securities agencies and security agencies are very good at finding these people um machines are quickly getting better or at least as good as super recognizers but the best super recognizers are still better than the best Ai and machine algorithms out there but the point is that in your mind's eye you are better able to manipulate specific objects or to see things more clearly and with more specificity when it has a label that you recognize from your real world experience as opposed to abstract or fictional labels okay again stamping home the idea that what you experience in the real world really serves to support your mental imagery and therefore the key importance of experiencing and doing things in the real world and supporting that with mental training and visualization and not just relying on mental training and visualization and the tangent here that's a little bit of fun and I don't think we've ever talked about before on this podcast is that of UFOs unidentified flying objects you know there's a lot of people out there who think that they've seen UFOs I guess technically they have because a UFO is an identified flying object and if it's unidentified at least to them then it is indeed a UFO I guess the question is whether or not uh or the disput rather is whether or not those UFOs are actually flown by aliens or controlled by aliens I think that's where the dispute lies but you can imagine how if somebody sees an object in their environment and decides Ah that's a UFO okay remember these faces vases or these impossible figures if they say oh that thing is a UFO as opposed to something else they see in other words the face not the vase well that stamps it down as a memory in their visual system and related systems and then in their Mind's Eye they are seeing the UFO they're not seeing the other thing that it could possibly be okay so it stamped down a very specific memory so the point here is that mental training and visualization relies on not just the physical Contours and the exact spatial profiles and the speed of movement of particular things that we experience in the real world it also heavily depends on the cognitive labels and the decisions we make about the things that we see and this will become very important as we build up toward our fourth principle of mental training and visualization which is that our cognitive labels that is what we decide is happening when we do mental training and visualization turns out to be very important now this is not simply to say that you can decide okay I want to learn how to play piano and so I'm going to tell myself that a particular chord I imagine in my mind's eye is identical to the real world chord just because I decide it is the brain doesn't work that way it's not possible to just lie to yourself and learn better as a consequence of the lies you tell yourself however what this tells us is that it is very very important that your mental training and visualization accurately recapitulate the real world training that you're doing so we are going to stamp down a fourth principle of effective mental training and visualization based on what we know from the scientific literature is that your mental training and visualization should assign labels to what you're doing that can be matched to real world training and experiences now these can be somewhat abstract so for instance if you're trying to learn a particular aspect of the golf swing okay so let's say that you're working on your golf swing seems to be there are a lot of people out there working on their golf swing and you're going to do some mental training and visualization in order to improve your golf swing we already know again let's just March through them that your mental training visualization needs to be brief and simple it needs to be the same or in fact it will be we can say the same as your real world golf swing in other words it will take you exactly the same amount amount of time to perform that golf swing in your mind's eye as it would in the real world incredible right again something that maybe is taking a little bit of time to sink in but once it does you're going to be like wow the brain is really an incredible machine and that third principle that you still have to do golf swings in the real world in addition to the mental training of golf swings and fourth that if you want that mental training and visualization to really improve your golf swing you're going to have to name or apply an identity to the specific golf swing or aspect of the golf swing that you're practicing so this could be abstract you could call it mental training and visualization of golf swing 1A and you could imagine your mind's eye you know the perfect golf swing over and over and over and over but then when you're in the real world you're also going to have to call that either out loud or just to yourself golf swing 1 a okay as opposed to a putt which might be 1B so naming and giving an identity to a real world skill and applying the same name or identity to the mental version of that the visualization of that can enhance the mental training and visualization in significant ways so when we apply identities or names to these mental trainings and visualizations and again provide that they are brief and repeated and so on WE greatly enhance the amount of neural Machinery in the brain and body that we are able to recruit when we go to perform those real world golf swings and golf putts and here just replace golf swing and golf putt with anything that you're trying to learn you're able to recruit a lot more neural machinery and greatly increase the probability of proper execution so before we go any further I want to share with you a couple of incredible aspects of mental visualization that really can be harnessed and applied toward mental training and visualization some of these were done by Roger Shepard and his graduate students in postdocs some were done by Steve klin and by others what these experiments really show is that mental training and visualization is capturing many many of the exact same features of real world behavior and perceptions not all of them but many of them so for instance if I tell you to close your eyes and imagine a ceiling that has tiles that are black and white checkered tiles you know one black tile one white tile for instance we know based on experiments where we measure eye movements Behind Closed eyelids that people tend to move their eyes up when they imagining things above them such as a ceiling whereas if I tell you to imagine things down on the floor like you're taking a hike and you're looking for rattlesnakes actually just recently I experienced because it's spring here in California rattlesnake along a hiking trail it's really quite beautiful although I um have to confess I enjoyed keeping my distance uh I don't like snakes uh very much I don't dislike snakes but I prefer not to interact with them unless I have to if I have you imagine that rattlesnake depending on your relationship or thoughts about rattlesnakes number of things will happen in your brain of course activation of the limic system or not for instance but what I know is that regardless of how you feel about snakes most of you will move your eyes down when imagining a snake okay it might be subtle it might be fast but statistically that result shows up as opposed to when I imagine or I ask you to imagine something above you you tend to move your eyes up in addition to that if I tell you for instance to imagine an elephant and a mouse next to one another you presumably have some real world understanding about the relative sizes of elephants versus mice elephants generally are bigger than mice thank goodness mice are smaller than elephants if I ask you to tell me about the details of that Mouse's face so for instance can you see its whiskers the processing time required for you to do that is much longer than the processing time required if I say tell me what the position of that elephant's trunk is now why would that be so okay the position of the elephant's trunk wasn't something that I told you it wasn't dictated by me it's in your mind's eye maybe you don't even know and you have to go searching for it but what we do know is that if I tell you to look at a small object in your mind's eye versus a larger object so for instance the mouse versus the elephant it takes longer for you to do that in other words just as with the map experiment the distance between things on a map is conserved in your mind's eye as a linear relationship takes longer to go far distances between things on a map in your mind than it does to go shorter distances it's also the case that it takes you longer to look at the details of a small object versus a large object because why because you are zooming in in your mind's eye again all of which speaks to the equivalence of mental imagery with real world imagery and perception and as I mentioned earlier and as we'll see in a moment this also extends into the motor domain it takes you longer to perform Complex Motor sequences in your mind's eye than it does simple motor sequences just as it would in the real world and if you're saying of course of course of course well then great then we've really underscored the point which is that when you imagine things it is not exactly the same but it is very very much the same as actually doing or perceiving those things in the real world and the fifth principle of effective mental training and visualization is this notion of equivalence of mental imagery versus Real World perception and behavior these are the experiments as you recall where if people are told to look for clouds in their mental visualization they tend to look up or if they're looking for something on the floor they tend to look down even Behind Closed eyelids now this can be applied toward building an especially effective mental training and visualization protocol if you deliberately move your eyes in the direction of the thing or things that you are trying to recapitulate in your mind in your visualization that is you don't necessarily have to include this step but mental training and visualization is going to be more effective if you do because with consciously generated eye movements again even Behind Closed eyelids you are bringing about more of the neural circuitry that one would experience if you were to perform that particular cognitive task or motor task in the real world which as I mentioned before in principle number three you need to be doing anyway sep separately from your mental training and visualization so what we're talking about here is thus far five principles of mental training and visualization that are well established from the scientific research literature in fact I haven't mentioned this quite yet and I'll refer to some other references but there's a wonderful systematic review of a large number of studies that have looked at mental training and visualization what's effective what's less effective across a bunch of different disciplines that include education medicine music psychology and sports we will provide a link to this paper in the show captions but the title of the paper is best practice for motor imagery a systematic literature view on motor imagery training elements in five different disciplines as the title suggests it's mainly for motor imagery training but it extends into music which of course involves motor training and execution but as well as education this review establishes a number of different important things I'm going to read off some of the um key or uh highlight takeaways for instance I described principle one of effective mental training and visualization which is that the visualization be brief and it be simple and it be repeated may ask um how many times that very brief 5 to 15 second exercise of going through some routine should be repeated well different Studies have used different ranges of let's call them repetitions in a given training session but the number that seems to be most effective is somewhere between 50 and 75 repeats per session that brings about the question of how long one should rest between each repeat this gets a little tricky depending on what you're trying to do uh remember that we have this of threshold of about 15 seconds for completion of the entire motor sequence let's say what you're trying to do like a golf swing takes you 5 Seconds to imagine in your mind's eye from the point where you let's just say have the ball on the te you bring the the golf club up you might reposition your your feet just a little bit you know that kind of a little wiggle that golf golfers do and then the swing if that whole thing takes five seconds in your mind's eye and roughly 5 seconds in the real world well then you'd be able to repeat it of course three times in 15 seconds that would be one repetition even though you're doing it three times so it's one 15sec Epoch as it's sometimes called EPO Epoch and then you would rest for an approximately equivalent amount of time 15 seconds or so and then repeat and rest 15 seconds or so and then repeat rest 15 seconds and then repeat again three golf swings within that 15 seconds rest 15 seconds three golf swings within that 15 seconds rest 15 seconds truth told these Epoch and these rest periods do not need to be exact you could imagine for instance that you get three repetitions of the Swing within 14 seconds well then do you do another one or do you wait until the end of that 15 seconds I encourage you not to obsess too much about those sorts of points rather you want to do as many repeats as you can in about a 15-second Epoch and then rest for about 15 seconds and then repeat for a total of 50 to 75 repetitions which might not sound like a lot to some of you might sound like an awful lot to others of you to me it sounds like a lot you know 50 repetitions of something in where you're trying to concentrate in your mind's eye on getting something accomplished over and over over again in exactly the same way might seem like a lot we know based on the learning literature that your ability to successfully perform something in the real world will lend itself to better performance of that thing in the imagined world within your mind's eye that's also one of these sort of does but if you're trying to get better at something that you've never performed before you really should know that the mental training visualization is probably not the best augment to that real world training until you're able to perform it successfully in the real world at least some of the time mental training visualization can be effective however at increasing the accuracy or the frequency at which you can do that real world Behavior so if normally you're only getting the correct swing or you're only hitting the the golf ball correctly say 10% of the time mental training and visualization can really help bring that number up but it is important that you are able to successfully complete that motor task in the real world similarly for performance of cognitive tasks so say for instance um speaking a new language you might ask well gosh what what in the landscape ape of speaking a new language can be restricted to 5 to 15 seconds where I could repeat it anywhere from you know one to three times in a given Epoch and then rest and then keep repeating 50 to 75 times Well there I would encourage you to pick something that you are able to do perhaps very slowly so to speak a particular sentence but with some challenge in getting the accent and the enunciation right but you've completed it successfully before and you want to get more smooth or more fluid with it likewise for you know playing piano guitar again you have to translate to the specific cognitive and or motor activity that you are seeking to improve at but those epochs lasting 5 to 15 seconds are really the Cornerstone of an effective mental training and visualization practice and the repeated nature of it 50 to 75 repetitions in a given session is also another Cornerstone of an effective mental training and visualization practice uh so says this review and some of the other papers that I'm going to get to in a few moments now now one of the other key components of a successful mental training and visualization practice is how often you perform that mental training and visualization practice and again number of different Studies have looked at this through a number of different lenses meaning anywhere from two to eight times per week it does appear that performing these sessions anywhere from 3 to five times per week is going to be effective we could perhaps even say most effective because most of the uh let's just call it the strongest data really point to repeating these 50 to 75 Trials of the same thing three to five times per week so you can come up with a number that's reasonable for you to do consistently and you might ask do you have to continue to perform the mental training and visualization forever and the good news is the answer to that question is no it does seem that once you have what's called Consolidated the Motor Performance or the cognitive performance of something it can be further supported or reinforced that is Consolidated in the neural circuits that are responsible for performing that mental or physical task so in other words once you are performing that cognitive or motor task in a way that's satisfactory or perhaps just improved perhaps you're not 100% but it's improved in the real world you don't need to continue to do mental training and visualization to to maintain that real world performance so that's a good thing in fact the ideal situation would be than to pick a different sequence or thing that you're trying to learn and do mental training and visualization for that uh I perhaps might have misspoke there although I don't want to edit this out I misspoke in the sense that again I said for the thing that you're trying to learn remember mental training visualization is going to be most effective for building up the number of accurate trials or the your ability to do something with a greater frequency of something that you're already capable of doing or have done at least once in the real world okay this is not to say that mental training and visualization can't be used to acquire new skills it can in principle but it has been shown to be most effective for enhancing the speed and the accuracy of skills that one has already demonstrated some degree of proficiency at in the real world I think that's important to point out because we often hear mental training visualization and this equivalence of perceptual and motor experiences in our Mind's Eye to the real world and we think oh all we have to is Imagine doing something and we will get better at it and unfortunately that's not the case the good news is however if you can do something once even very slowly in the real world and then you bring it to the mental imagery and visualization domain you can get much faster at it in a way that really does translate back to the real world I'd like to just take a brief moment and thank one of our podcast sponsors which is insid tracker insid tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that blood work is the only way that you can monitor the markers such as hormone markers lipids metabolic factors Etc that impact your immediate and long-term Health one major challenge with blood work however is that most of the time it does not come back with any information about what to do in order to move the values for hormones metabolic factors lipids Etc into the ranges that you want with inside tracker changing those values becomes very straightforward because it has a personal ized dashboard that you can use to address the nutrition-based behavior-based supplement based approaches that you can use in order to move those values into the ranges that are optimal for you Your vitality and your longevity inside tracker now includes a measurement of APO lipoprotein B so-called apob in their ultimate plan apob is a key marker of cardiovascular health and therefore there's extreme value to knowing your apob levels if you'd like to try insid tracker you can go to insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off of insid tracker's plans again that's insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off now if you recall principle number three or what I'm calling principle number three of effective mental training and visualization which was that you have to be able to perform the thinger that you're trying to get better at through visualization and imagery in the real world that should raise the question of what is The Rao of real world training versus mental training that's going to be most effective ah well here there are some really interesting data uh not just in the review that I mentioned but in a couple of the other papers that we're going to talk about in a few minutes but what I've done is I've synthesized the information across those papers and they really all point to the fact that real world training is more effective than mental training and mental training is more effective than no training now the mental training more effective than no training is kind of a duh except that there are people for instance people who are injured who are trying to maintain or replenish some motor skill or ability to move in a particular way or who have had traumatic brain injury and are trying to recreate experiences in a way that's safe for them while in a somewhat restricted format so for instance if you've damaged a limb or you're experiencing chronic pain and you need to take a layoff from some physical activity there are now many studies looking at stroke patients at um patients that have been in accidents TBI also people who are suffering from more conventional limb and connective tissue injuries that if they do mental training it obviously is not going to put them at risk of doing those same movements as it would in the real world right but that it can actually accelerate or at least maintain skill performance so this is pretty exciting if you think about it what this means and the reason it underscores this mental training is better than no training is that should you find yourself in the unfortunate circumstance of being injured or unable to perform a given Behavior Imagining the sequence of behavior that you'd like to maintain or even build up over time provided you've done that motor sequence before in the real world well the mental training and visualization can really help keep that online or even help you improve over time in fact I have a colleague in the psychology department at Stanford who told me an anecdote and admittedly it's just an anecdote of a student who was recruited to Stanford um both for their academic prowess but also for their abilities in tennis and was injured in their first year and at first thought this was devastating but did a cognitive reframe around the idea that that let's call it extended layoff from actual tennis was going to afford them the ability to do more mental training than they would otherwise even though they were um quite sad to not be able to do actual physical training for tennis and when they came back from that injury they did indeed manage to improve beyond the initial non-injured State they were in before the injury which is pretty remarkable but as this colleague pointed out to me they were very careful to include a lot of mental training and visualization during that quote unquote layoff period so again mental training better than no training physical training better than mental training but when we say physical training better than mental training what we're really talking about is when you allocate a certain amount of training hours for a given skill per week okay so how would this look what these Studies have done is they've said okay if people have the option of doing the real world training for 10 hours a week versus mental training for 10 hours a week which group performs better it turns out it's the ones that do the physical training for 10 hours per week however we also know that combinations of physical training and mental training can bring about results that are greater than either one of those alone how would that work well I wish I could tell you that if you did nine hours of physical training per week plus one hour of mental training that your performance would be better than if you did 10 hours of physical training and that's not the case okay this is why we can reliably say physical real world training and again this could be in the cognitive domain is always going to be more effective on an hour by hour basis compared to mental training so if you can do real world training and perhaps we should be calling it real world as opposed to physical but if you can do real world training compared to purely mental training that's going to be the best use of your time this is really important it doesn't underscore everything that we're talking about because here's the really cool thing if you do 10 hours per week of real world physical training again could be running could be music could be math could be whatever it is you're trying to learn shooting basketballs hitting golf balls and you add one hour or even half an hour of mental training to that real world training well then the results are significantly greater than you would experience with physical training alone and of course it would be greater than you could achieve with mental training alone because we already established that real world training is more powerful in learning skills and retaining skills than is mental training okay if any of that was confusing let me just say it one more time just to be ultra clear if you have the option to do real world training for a cognitive Andor motor skill versus mental training always go with real world training however if you can add to a maximum amount of real world training by doing some mental training and you follow the principles that we've been discussing here which are gleaned from the scientific literature well then you are going to get significantly greater results in terms of speed accuracy and consistency of performance of those real world behaviors and cognitive abilities and of course if you are unable to do physical training for whatever reason injury travel whatever the case may be well then doing mental training is still far far significantly greater than doing no training at all okay so total layoffs it turns out are a bad thing if you want to get better at something and indeed if you want to retain certain skills both cognitive and motor now a couple of other things to keep in mind as you're thinking about how to build up skills through a combination of physical and mental training well remember back to the beginning of the episode where we talked about neuroplasticity and the fact that self-directed adaptive plasticity which is really what we're talking about here in this entire episode things that you're trying to learn in a deliberate way that is as you recall a two-part process requires focused attention both when you're doing it in the real world and when you're doing mental training and it requires rest and sleep and in fact you would be very wise to try and get a good night's sleep both on the days when you do physical training again also called real world training and mental training you may also be asking can you do them on the same day and this gets into some Nuance in the literature but by my read of the literature here's the takeaway if you are doing the maximum amount of physical training that you can do according to your schedule preventing injury and all those sorts of important constraints and you're going to add mental training and imagery it doesn't really matter when you do it you could do it immediately after your physical training you could do it on a separate day but you do want to place it at a time in which you can try and get good sleep that night so for instance Believe It or Not Studies have been done where people are doing mental training at times when they should be sleeping that is going to offset some of the degradation and performance that you would normally see but it's generally a bad idea you should do your real world training and your mental training whenever it is that you can and then you should try and get as much quality sleep as you possibly can on the night following that physical Andor mental training okay this is true pretty much every night of your life right if had my way that is if I had a magic wand which obviously I don't I would ensure that I and everyone else in the world get sufficient amounts of quality sleep every single night but that's just not realistic there are going to be times where that's simply not going to happen for whatever reason and I always say if you're not going to get sufficient amounts of quality sleep for whatever reason try to make it for a fun reason or a good reason but I think getting sufficient amounts of quality sleep 80% of the nights of your life is a reasonable goal and one that's worth driving toward and we have lots of episodes now three really on mastering sleep on perfecting your sleep and uh episode guest episode with the great Matthew Walker uh who wrote the book why why we sleep incredibly important book all of those as well as our toolkit for Sleep describe ways to improve your sleep so you can refer to those episodes if you're having challenges with sleep and want to improve on sleep and things like non-sleep deep rest which can support your ability to sleep and your ability to learn so sleep is still vitally important not just for ensuring neuroplasticity occurs following real world training but also following mental training and again when you place that mental training is not so critical at least it doesn't appear to be based on the literature so if anyone out there has knowledge of any peer-reviewed studies stating that mental training should be done either before or after some hours away from Real World Training please send that to me or put it in the show um excuse me put it in the comments on YouTube and I'll see it there because I do read all the comments but I'm not aware of any any such data or analysis and by the way if you are interested in understanding the relationship between motor skill acquisition and retention and this first night phenomenon of sleep the first night after training versus sleep on the second night Etc there's a really wonderful paper that was published by none other than the great Matthew Walker when I believe he was a graduate student maybe he was a postto when he did this in Robert stick Gold's Lab at Harvard uh the title of the paper is sleep and time course of motor skill learning uh this is a paper published in 2003 uh still an incredibly important paper I will provide a link to it in the show note captions it really highlights um some of the key aspects of when people sleep and how critical sleep is on the night following and the nights following that training in order to really consolidate certain types of learning and what phases of sleep relate to the consolidation of motor learning Etc a really wonderful paper and of course but just one of Matthew and Robert stick Gold's incredible papers on sleep and learning remember at the beginning of the episode when I mentioned that many people are good at mental training and visualization but people are not well sex differences have been explored and age related differences have been explored in terms of people's ability to mentally visualize and train up specific skills and while initially there were some sex differences identified really the bulk of the subsequent literature that is the majority of quality peer-reviewed studies on this aspect of mental training visualization point to the fact that there are no significant differences between males and females in terms of their ability to mentally visual visualiz nor their ability to use that mental visualization toward improving cognitive or motor skills uh that point was uh covered in some detail in the review I mentioned earlier best practice for motor imagery a systematic literature review on motor imagery training elements and five different disciplines this review also looked at age related effects and perhaps the only thing that really popped out from this literature review in terms of age dependent differences that point to changes in protocols that you might make is that for individuals 65 or older a common comination of physical and mental training may actually allow them to gain and consolidate skills better than were they to do physical training alone now whether or not that's due to some lower upper limit of physical training that they can do because of their age or whether or not that's something specific to do with older versus younger neural circuits isn't clear but what this review also makes clear is that for the vast majority of people out there so teens people in their 20s and their 40s and so on physical training more effective than mental training we said that before combination of physical and mental training more effective than physical training alone provided the mental training is on top of the maximum amount of physical training that one could do and of course mental training more effective than no training at all okay so we talked about sets and Reps we talked about you know 5 to 15sec EPO with about 15sec breaks in between or rest between sets if you will repeated for 50 to 75 trials done three to five times per week some of the conditions of keeping it really simple The Importance of Being able to actually perform those sequences in the real world and so on what we haven't discussed is first person versus third person and eyes open versus eyes closed so what are we really talking about here well first person mental training and visualization would be where you are imagining doing something and you are seeing yourself doing something from the inside out as opposed from the outside in Imagine for instance wearing a head cam okay or a body Cam and doing something with your hands or being in virtual reality and having the sense that whatever you see in front of you and that's moving and that you're doing that's you so what I mean by this is a mental training or visualization protocol for instance if you were at the piano or at a guitar where you're actually looking down at or sensing the feeling of your hands but you're not actually moving your hands okay as opposed to seeing yourself from outside of your body so looking at yourself say standing next to you or from across the room you're looking at yourself playing the piano or playing guitar or swinging a golf club or doing a tennis serf okay first person versus third person and what the data tell us is that first person mental training and visualization is generally more effective than third person mental training and visualization which perhaps raises another chorus of does out there but it needn't have been the case right I mean you could imagine that seeing yourself doing something and doing it perfectly because you've done it perfectly once before hopefully would allow you to build up that skill more quickly because you have that third person perspective where you can really see every aspect and every element of what you're trying to perform Well turns out that the first person mental training and visualization is significantly more effective than that third person mental training and visualization so if what you're trying to learn lends itself well to this firsters mental experiencing of self as you perform the cognitive Andor motor skill I suggest you do that as opposed to the third person version now what if what you're trying to learn doesn't lend itself well to firstperson visualization for instance what if you're trying to learn a specific cognitive skill that doesn't involve any overt modor Behavior to be observed well in that case it's very clear that closing your eyes ideally and trying to perform that specific cognitive task or the statement or the you know uttering of a particular sentence in another language or doing some sort of computation or problem solving of some sort in your head well that itself of course is first person because it's inside your own body as opposed to and I don't know that anyone would actually do this but looking at yourself from a third person perspective in your mind's eye and seeing yourself perform that cognitive challenge whatever that challenge may happen to be okay now we have to address eyes open versus eyes closed and this is where the literature gets pretty interesting I always thought for some reason I don't know why but I presumed that mental training and visualization should always be done eyes closed but it turns out that's not how a lot of studies of mental training and visualization have been done and in fact many of them have arrived at really impressive protocols which are essentially the protocols that I've distilled out and I'm listing out during today's episode having people either watch videos of themselves performing a given skill and imagining themselves in that role and again it's them so again during the mental training visualization they're watching a movie of themselves so they're somewhat in the third person perspective I guess we could technically say they are in the third person perspective but they're watching thems so in doing that we know based on neuroimaging studies that when we watch videos of ourselves doing things we experience that more from a first-person perspective than if we watch videos of other people doing things use your imagination here folks so if you're somebody for instance who's trying to get better at a particular skill this could be not just sport but also public speaking watching videos of yourself doing that can be very effective but of course we have to come back to the first principle of effective mental training and visualization which is that whatever it is that we're trying to build up or consolidate as a skill needs to be brief and repeated so what we're really talking about here is watching a video of ourselves on Loop or listening to a audio or audio video recording of ourselves on Loop for whatever aspect uh that we're trying to build up or improve upon now for people that for instance are trying to get better at dealing with public speaking and there isn't a particular skill or utterance of particular sentences or words that they're trying to accomplish but rather they're trying to learn to be more relaxed or to articulate better in the public speaking scenario there would be one of the few instances in which I suggest more General theme and not exact recapitulation of some specific words that you're going to say perhaps it could be a sequence of you walking out onto stage toward the podium or out from the podium and facing the audience and looking in multiple directions up and down to see people in every corner of the room and just repeating that on Loop in your mind's eye or watching yourself do that on video and making yourself calm in your internal State as you're doing that this is more of mental autonomic training because what you're really trying to do is control your autonomic nervous system the nervous system aspect that controls how alert or calm you are as opposed to a specific skill however you could also translate this to you know dance steps or to motor sequences for playing an instrument and so on so the point here is that it's not as if there is zero utility to third person mental training and visualization there can be but firsters mental training visualization is going to be more effective as I mentioned before and if you're are going to use third person mental training visualization ideally you would be looking at yourself either on video or listening to yourself in audio Andor video that is going to be more effective than closing your eyes and trying to imagine yourself from a third person perspective in your mind's eye okay so just to make it really simple first person better than third person visualization if you're going to go with third person visualization try and go with real third person visualization where you're actually seeing and or hearing yourself on a screen and again this was somewhat of a surprise surprised to me I always thought that mental training and visualization was done with eyes closed I thought okay you close your eyes you imagine this you imagine that that's actually not the case for many many studies some of which are considered real Hallmark studies within the field of mental training and visualization and the different neural circuits that it recruits and along those lines there's a really interesting study it came out not that long ago this was just a summer of 2022 I'd like to discuss in a little bit of detail because it really hammers home a number of the principles that we've talked about the title of the article is mental practice modulates functional connectivity between the cerebellum and the primary motor cortex going to tell you the essential features of this study first of all primary motor cortex sometimes called M1 is a relatively small but vitally important strip of neurons in or near the front of your brain the neurons there are called upper motor neurons they communicate through a set of neural connections with what are called lower motor neurons the lower motor neurons sit what's called the ventral Horn of the spinal cord so along the spinal cord you have sensory inputs coming from skin and muscle and what's called propri receptive feedback that tells you where your limbs are in relation to each other and to yourself and so on you also have motor neurons that live in the spinal cord they're actually the ones that send little wires that we call axons out to the muscles release acolan onto those muscles and allow those muscles to contract lower motor neurons are the ones that actually generate movement however they are largely responsible for reflexive movements or already learned movements and they require some input from things like Central pattern generators and some other circuits within the spinal cord and brain stem but it's those M1 primary motor cortex neurons that are called upper motor neurons because they control lower motor neurons through directed action okay so when I say primary motor cortex I'm really talking about those upper motor neurons M1 the cerebellum is an area in the back of your brain if you were to look at a brain You' see two little loes back there that are highly foliated foliated means that lots of lots of f and lots of bumps and grooves back there and it actually means mini brain it looks like a kind of a mini brain stuffed in the back of the brain in certain animals the cerebellum is much larger than the rest of the brain in humans the cerebellum is relatively small compared to the rest of so-called neocortex the outer shell the human brain the cerebellum is involved in Balance it's also involved in eye movements it's also involved in timing and motor learning and the key thing to understand is that the cerebellum communicates with the primary motor cortex and it can do so through what's called inhibition and it has outputs that inhibit the activity of neurons in the motor cortex and elsewhere and that has a profound influence on the execution of motor Behavior and the learning of particular motor behaviors now I don't want to get into too much detail around all this but what you need to know is that the cerebellum communicates with M1 primary motor cortex M1 is primary motor cortex those are the upper motor neurons that are going to control the lower motor neurons and are going to control physical Behavior an execution of physical movements the communication between cerebellum and primary motor cortex is inhibitory although it can activate motor cortex too and this gets into a little bit of technical detail but there can be inhibition of inhibition so if you take something that's a break and you inhibit that break what you end up with is more excitation okay so the takeaway here that's key and everyone should be able to understand even though you may or may not be following this whole cerebellum primary motor cortex thing is that when we gain a new skill or we get more proficient at a skill so faster more accurate there tends to be more net excitation of the cerebellum to motor cortex communication and that is accomplished by reducing inhibition so that's where it gets a little bit confusing to some but in this paper what they did is they explored people's ability to improve on a very specific but very simple motor sequence it's one that you're already familiar with it's that t sequence that I talked about before where the thumb is digit one index finger number two middle finger number three ring finger number four and pinky finger number five and it's a one two 1 3 1 4 1 15 1 two 1 3 1 14 one 15 and they had people actually perform this and they measured their speed and accuracy and then they had them do a practice session that was either an intentional task so one group just looked at an attentional queue and had to maintain uh focus on that attentional and another group did mental practice they basically did 50 imagined trials so just in their Mind's Eye of this 1 two 13 1 1415 rep on repeat okay 50 trials much in the same way as what I referenced as the ideal protocol earlier okay 50 rounds of that then they got tested again on the motor task in the real world and there were also recordings of the cerebella to primary motor cortex communication so there were a bunch of different results in this study I think are interesting but the ones that are most important are that quote we found that mental practice enhanced both the speed and accuracy of this 1 two 13 1 145 performance in the real world when people did these 50 imagin trials there are many results out there different papers that parallel and essentially say the same thing as what is said in this paper remember there have been studies of mental training dating back to the 1880s but what this paper really does it looks at the neur machinery and the changes in the neurom machinery and what they found using transcranial magnetic stimulation both in the context of stimulating but also recording activity and connectivity between cerebellum and primary motor cortex is that mental training enhanced the net excitation of cerebellum to motor cortex communication that is it reduced the inhibition in a way that allowed motor cortex to generate these movements with more accuracy and more speed what's also interesting about this paper is that it showed that the Improvement in performance of this task was not related to activation of the motor pathways themselves so it's not the case that the cerebellum activation or inhibition changed the patterns of excitation going directly to the spinal cord because those Pathways actually exist through a couple of intermediate stations what it really showed is that when people do mental training and here you could say Okay 50 trials that's a lot of Trials but it's not actually that many trials is pretty fast learning if you think about do a task in the real world do 50 Trials of the imagined task do the trial in the real world again significant Improvement in speed and accuracy through now what are becoming to be established neural circuit connections between cerebellum and primary motor cortex okay so this study is one of several but not a tremendous number of studies out there that are starting to really pinpoint the underlying neural circuits that allow mental training and visualization to really improve motor skill performance but again and please hear me on this in this study and in the vast majority of other studies that have shown significant Improvement in Motor Performance in the real world by use of mental training and visualization there was an ability of each and everyone in the study to perform the specific motor sequence in the real world that then they were able to enhance with mental training and visualization now thus far we've been talking mostly about performance of motor sequences and one of the things to really understand about performance of motor sequences both in the real world and in the Imagine context is that it involves the doing that's what we call a go action and not doing certain things what do I mean by not doing well for many tasks out there even ones as simple as the 1 two 13 1 1415 task that we talked about a moment ago there is the need not just to tap those fingers in the correct sequence as quickly as possible but also to be accurate about it to not do 1314 or 13 and four at the same time so there's both a go component an action component and a withhold action component and the ability to withhold action is strongly constrained by the time domain in other words the faster that we need to perform a given motor sequence the more likely we are to perform incorrect components of the motor sequence as well okay so one of the key things about mental training and visualization that's really remarkable is that it can also be used and has been shown to improve not just go aspects of Motor Performance and cognitive performance but also noo aspects of Motor Performance and skill learning now the go noo thing is something I've discussed before on this podcast in reference to the so-called basil ganglia basil ganglia are subcortical so they're below that bumpy surface of the human brain that we're most accustomed to seeing when we look at it from the outside and the basil ganglia are strongly involved in Go versus noo type tasks and learning now there are only a few studies that have really looked at the learning and the Improvement of noggo components of motor learning but these no-go components are really really important in fact if we were to look at what's involved at Improvement in a golf swing or shooting free throws or getting better at piano or getting better at math or language speaking I think it's fair to say that at least half and probably as much as 75% of motor learning is about restricting inappropriate movements or utterances or thoughts if what you're trying to learn is purely cognitive okay I think that's an important point that brings us back to our initial learning when we come into this world that developmental plasticity which as you recall we have a lot of interconnected aspects of our brain and nervous system early in life remember the example of the kid trying to eat and getting the spoon of food and Bowl on their head Etc and then over time getting more accurate at bringing food to their mouth and eating in a in a clean way things most but not all people accomplish in at some point in the course of their lifetime well there haven't been many but there have been a few very interesting studies looking at how mental training and visualization can improve the no-go aspect of motor learning and I think this is important to highlight because it really mirrors What's Done in the real world as opposed to just the finger tapping type things which are mostly go tasks again there's a little bit of a no-go component there but there are specific tasks that people have developed for the laboratory that really closely mimic action learning and cognitive learning in the real world and one of the more um important of those is What's called the stop signal task now the stop signal task is something that I'll explain to you I'll also provide a link in the show note caption so you can try it it's actually a lot of fun to try this because it really gives you a sense of just how challenging some of these laboratory tasks are let me just describe it for a moment the stop signal task was really developed and popularized by Gordon Logan and William Cowen Gordon Logan is at Vanderbilt University and has done a lot of really important work uh but one of the important aspects of his work is looking at Motor Performance and skill acquisition and the development of the stop signal task I'll describe the stop signal task for you now in Broad Contour you or another research subject would sit in front of a screen there are two keys on that keyboard or two keys among the other keys on that keyboard one which is designated left the other which is designated right and then on the screen you'll be Pres presented for instance with a left facing or a right facing Arrow so in the initial trial what would happen is that Arrow would pop up on the screen and your job is to press the left key when the right facing arrow is presented you press the right key okay pretty straightforward but there's a limited amount of time in which you can do this and the idea is that you're going to need to do this within approximately 500 milliseconds of the presentation of that Arrow or else it's going to tell you that you missed that trial now of course if you press the wrong key so if the arrow goes goes left and you press the right key then you would be told you got that one wrong okay so this is a reaction time test and not one that's particularly novel what's novel and what Logan and Cowan developed was that in the stop signal task every once in a while not every trial but every once in a while that arrow is presented and then with some delay ranging from anywhere from 100 milliseconds to maybe 350 milliseconds there would be a red circle or a red X also presented which is a stop signal and your job is to not press the key that corresponds to the direction of arrow in fact not press any key at all now you can imagine how if the stop signal shows up with a longer delay after the presentation of the arrow there's a higher probability that you will have already generated the key pressing movement okay so at the link that we provided in the show note caption you can actually do these two tasks and what you'll find is that you and most people will be able to do this Arrow to Reaction Time pressing of the left to right key somewhere in the neighborhood between 300 milliseconds and maybe as long as 500 millisecond delay you'll get an average of how quickly you respond and then of course if you choose to and I would hope you would choose to go on and do the stop signal task you will be told trial by trial whether or not you are hitting the right keys because if you are you'll be allowed to progress to the next trial or if you are told to stop that is you get the stop signal and you press the key anyway you'll be told that you made an error because you did not stop now again with very short delays between the presentation of the arrow and the stop signal you are going to be much better at inhibiting or preventing yourself from the behavior at the no-go aspect of motor execution that is what you will find is that if the stop signal is presented very shortly after let's say 100 milliseconds which is very very brief amount of time after the presentation of the arrow there's a good chance that you're going to be able to withhold the key pressing behavior however if the delay is anywhere from 200 to 350 milliseconds after the presentation of the arrow chances are that you're going to press the button even when you shouldn't have on at least some of those trials okay and if you try and game the system and wait a certain amount of time after the presentation of each Arrow there will also be times in which the stop signal does not appear and you fail to hit the button in the appropriate amount of time so it's a fun little task it doesn't cost any or is that maybe a couple of minutes of your time and if you do have time to go to it I think um it will give you a much deeper flavor for the sorts of experiments that we're talking about here and that you find that these stop signals are actually pretty hard to generate when you're trying to learn some new motor behavior and that actually illustrates a bigger Point here if today you sense that we've been talking about studies of you know tapping fingers and you know stopping button presses and that those examples are highly artificial and don't really translate to the real world well keep in mind that the tasks that are used in these studies really Target the specific neural circuits that is the same neural circuits that you would use for the performance of essentially any motor task now of course other motor tasks like ones where you involve your feet or cognitive tasks where you have to think really hard about specific information and search for that information assemble it in particular ways of course involve other neurons and neural circuits that we haven't discussed today but the core components of these go and no-go tasks or the stop signal task really capture the core elements of most all of cognitive endoor motor learning in some way that's fundamentally important okay so they have real world relevance the paper that I'd like to just briefly describe to you is entitled motor imagery combined with physical training improves response inhibition in the stop signal task okay so that title is a little bit uh wordy but now you know what the stop signal task is and what this paper essentially found was that if people did physical training so the sort of experiment that I just described versus mental training where they sat eyes open and imagined their responses to those arrows and stop signals but they didn't actually generate any key presses versus a combination of the physical training so the actual pressing of the buttons or withholding pressing of the buttons as the case may be plus mental training over the course of about 5 days using the Contour described of the key principles of mental training and performance we talked about I'll get to the specifics in a moment but it really obeyed most all of what we've talked about if not all of it so repetition simple repeated over about five days and so on and so forth what they found was that the mental training and physical training group so mental and real world training groups performed significantly better in the stop signal reaction time that is they were able to withhold action when they needed to withhold action more frequently and with more accuracy vended either the physical training or mental training groups alone so this actually spits in the face of what we said earlier which is that physical training is always better than mental training and mental training is always better than no training and it's important to point out here that both the physical training and the mental training groups experience significant improvements in their reaction time and accuracy at the stop signal task but in the case of this study which is exploring the withholding of inappropriate behaviors the combination of mental training and physical training outperformed either physical or mental training alone so while earlier we said that if you have a certain amount of time in order to train something up physical training is always going to be better than mental training well here we have somewhat of an exception where if the thing you're trying to learn involves withholding mistakes as opposed to trying to generate the right behaviors per se well then you are probably better off doing a combination of mental training and physical training let me state that a little bit differently if you're finding that you're screwing up something not because you can't initiate that particular motor Behavior but you're doing the wrong thing at the wrong time you're not able to withhold a particular action well then in that case mental training in combination with physical training becomes especially important so for you coaches for you students out there keep that in mind when trying to learn how to withhold particular action sequences because they're not serving you well in the real world using a combination of real world training and physical training is actually better for you on an hour per hour basis than is physical training alone a couple of key details about this study should you decide to implement these protocols in this study they did approximately 30 Trials of the thing that they were trying to get better at now they did those in the real world so in this case the stop signal task involved actually pressing those buttons and then they had a test phase of about 144 go trials and about 48 stop trials okay so this is important if you are a coach or you're a student or you're just going to self-direct this kind of learning in your self-directed adaptive plasticity it's important that you mix in both go and no-go trials okay it wasn't always the case that there was a stop signal generated the other thing that was really impressive about the study is that the changes occurred very quickly so the training was performed five times over five days so once a day for five days again back to to this three to five times per week principal and the improvements were really significant in some cases in fact if you decide to puruse this paper uh you can go to um table two and you can see you know in some cases a near doubling in the reduction in reaction time through a combination of mental and physical training compared to physical training alone or mental training alone again however both physical training and mental training groups alone saw significant improvements but the combination of mental training and physical training was far greater than you saw with either one of those alone so that's all nicely Quantified for you in this paper so again I really like this paper despite it not involving a huge number of subjects I think it is a key paper because it really points to such an important element of motor learning and training which is this action withholding component this no-go component that here is captured so nicely in the stop signal task so before we round up our discussion about motor training visualization I wanted to just briefly touch on some of the studies that have explored why certain individuals are better or worse at motor training and visualization and what that might correlate with at the beginning of today's episode I briefly mentioned aphantasia which is this phenomenon where some people just simply can't or seem to have extreme Challenge generating visual imagery been a number of studies exploring how fantasic as they're sometimes called although nowadays it's um not considered polite if you will to refer to people according to their condition so for instance propas agnosia is a condition in which people are unable to recognize particular faces and in the past these people were referred to as propac agnostics okay as if their condition defined them right um nowadays it's not considered polite to do that rather we say the person has propath agnosia or suffers from propath agnosia Al other words suffer then also has become a little bit touchy I'm going to do my best to just try and be as clear as possible here and explain that people who have Fantasia can have a Fantasia to varying degrees so they can either have a complete absence of ability to generate mental imagery or they have a poor or kind of rudimentary ability to generate visual imagery in their Mind's Eye it was thought that people who have aphantasia are not capable of what's called synesthesia synesthesia or when people have perceptual blending and this is not while under the influence of any kind of psychedelic or other kind of drug perceptual blending of an atypical kind or rare kind I actually have some friends I two friends that have different forms of synesthesia One Associates different keys on the piano or musical notes with specific colors in a very very onetoone specific way so they'll tell you that E flat on the piano is a particular tone in their mind of of Amber Hue okay and that I forget what other key is associated with a particular shade of red and so on and so forth are these people better at piano are they more perceptive of colors in their environment not necessarily so this is just a perceptual blending it doesn't necessarily lend itself to any improved ability now you could imagine why people would hypothesize that people have a Fantasia especially it's its extreme form would not be capable of or have synesthesias but turns out that's not the case there are a couple of really interesting papers again we will link these in the show note captions um one is entitled what is the relationship between aphantasia synesthesia and autism and the other one is aphantasia the science of visual imagery extremes and I really like the review aphantasia the science of visual imagery extremes for those of you that are interested in understanding aphantasia with more depth the study addressing the relationship between aphantasia cesia and autism found that aphantasia is indeed linked to weak visual imagery but that aphantasia can also be synesthesics and vice versa what was also interesting about this study is they address the question of whether or not people who have a Fantasia that is a challenge or inability to generate mental or visual imagery tend to have features associated with autism or residing somewhere on the autism spectrum and I'm not trying to use ambiguous language here but the whole set of language and nomenclature around autism and autism spectrum is also undergoing revision now because we are now coming to understand that autism and nowadays it's generally not considered correct to call people autistics in that sense but autism is considered one set of positions along a spectrum that includes things like Aspergers Etc but that may also include other aspects of cognition and even personality so these are starting to be viewed not just as a spectrum or one Continuum ranging from you know non-autistic to autistic but a lot of variation and subtlety in between and even crossing over with other aspects of U personality Psychology and Neuroscience okay so I'm not trying to be vague here I'm trying to be accurate rather by saying the whole description and categorization of autistic non-autistic Etc is undergoing vast revision right now but the important point I think from this paper is that indeed it was found that people who have aphantasia tend to exhibit more of the features that are associated with the autism spectrum now how those things relate to one another in terms of their clinical relevance isn't clear and of course it is entirely unclear as to what's the chicken and what's the egg there so you could imagine no pun intended for instance that people that are on the autism spectrum might be less proficient at generating visual imagery because they are exceedingly proficient at other things you could also imagine that people are placed onto the autism spectrum as it's sometimes referred to or are associated with particular features on the autism spectrum because in a causal way of the aphantasia and of course it's extremely important to highlight that not all people that consider themselves or that people consider Autistic or that are on the autism spectrum or Aspergers or any variation thereof necessarily have aphantasia just as it is that not all people that are on the autism spectrum completely lack or even lack what's called theory of mind which is the ability to sort of empathize And subscribe feelings and motivations of others when viewing the actions and perceived feelings of others okay so what I just described hopefully doesn't come across as just a bunch of words soup what I'm trying to pinpoint is that there does seem to be a relationship between one's ability to generate visual imagery and certain constellations of cognitive emotional perception and behavior and vice versa okay in a future episode I promise to cover synesthesia and autism and some of the related cognitive and motor aspects of autism and things like Aspergers I'm going to feature an expert guest or actually several expert guests in this area because it is a rapidly evolving and somewhat controversial field meanwhile I think it's important to at least consider how mental training and visualization might relate to to certain aspects of cognition and our ability to visualize things not just in terms of other people's behavior which is one of the common ways that people probe for autism and Asbergers versus non-autistic and non- Asbergers and so on the So-Cal theory of Mind task in effect asking whether or not children or adults can really get in the mind of others that's a typical task developed by Simon Baron Cohen but also whether or not children and adults are capable of generating mental imagery in a really Vivid way or whether or not they have minor or even extreme Challenge in doing so and perhaps the most direct way to explain why I included this aspect of the discussion of mental training and visualization as it relates to different cognitive phenotypes or neurocognitive phenotypes such as autism Asbergers Etc is because if you think about motor skill execution or cognitive skill execution and the relationship between mental training and visualization and motor skills or cognitive skills that's all pretty straightforward when you're talking about finger tapping and go noo tasks and learning piano and things of that sort but in many many ways our learning of social cognition our learning of how to behave in certain circumstances what's considered normal or atypical neurotypical and neuroatypical if you will a lot of that is not just generated from the inside out but it also involves observation and visualization of what are considered appropriate and inappropriate definitely placed in quotes by the way folks I'm not placing judg judement I'm just saying appropriate and inappropriate for a given context behavior in other words social learning and social cognition is every bit as much a learned behavior and pattern of cognitive and motor patterns as is tapping fingers or withholding keypresses in a go noo task it's just that it transmits into a domain that involves smiling versus frowning versus asking a question versus staying silent versus sitting still versus fidgeting what's appropriate and when what's inappropriate and when all of that is what we call social cognition and has direct parallels to everything we've been talking about up until this point so today we did a deep dive which is often the case on this podcast into mental training and visualization during the course of the episode I try to lay down one by one the key components of an effective mental training and visualization practice everything ranging from making sure that the practice involve brief EPO repeats of specific sequences of motor Endor cognitive behavior that those be relatively simple so that you can imagine them even if you're somebody who's not good at doing mental training and visualization and I should mention that if you do mental training and visualization repeatedly over time you get better at mental training and visualization there's a what's called metaplasticity here so it's not just about engaging neuroplasticity of particular circuits it's also about getting better at engaging plasticity so plasticity of plasticity I also describe the key Importance of Being able to actually execute specific movements and cognitive tasks in the real world if you want the mental training and visualization to be especially effective and we talked about the importance of naming things we talked about the importance of creating not just one but many parallels between real world training and mental training and visualization and really on the whole what we established was that cognitive Andor motor learning really is something that you should do in the real world as much as possible but if you can't due to injury or whatever conditions using mental training is a reasonable substitute but not a complete substitute and if you can't do real world training for whatever reason injury or otherwise that mental training is going to be better than no training at all and of course we established that at least for withholding action in order to get better at a skill a combination of physical training and mental training is going to be best but that if you're trying to learn a new skill and you're having challenges with performing that skill because of an inability to do the skill in the first place or on a consistent basis will then on an hour by- hour basis you're best off investing your time into the physical training only incorporating mental training and visualization if you are able to do that on top of the maximum amount of real world training that you're capable of doing and of course we talked about the actual neural circuits and a bit about how the actual neuroplasticity occurs early in the episode I mentioned long-term depression well in describing the improvements in no-go tasks those stop signal tasks a lot of what's observed during those tasks is Improvement or rather an increase in long-term depression of specific neural connections so my hope is that in learning about those basic neural circuits and plasticity mechanisms and in learning about the critical importance of focus and attention during learning both real world and imagined as well as the importance of sleep and deep rest for really consolidating learning and the different tools the various steps or principles of effective mental training and visualization that you now have a fairly coherent or maybe even a very coherent picture of how to develop the best mental training and visualization protocols for you I realize that everyone has different goals everyone has different time constraints if you are somebody that's interested in developing a mental training and visualization protocol so if you're a coach or teacher or simply a learner or you're trying to self-direct your own adaptive plasticity I want to emphasize that the key components that we discussed today are essential to include but I wouldn't obsess about whether or not a given Epoch is 15 or 20 seconds or even 25 seconds I wouldn't obsess over whether or not you got 30 repetitions in and then your mind drifted or whether or not you could do the full 50 to 75 or whether or not even in your mind's eye you made some errors what's been shown over and over again in this literature is that performing mental training and visualization repeatedly and in a very restricted way that makes it easier to perform those trials over and over and over again and with a high degree of accuracy almost always really we can fairly say in a entally every study where it's been explored has led to improvements in real world performance of both cognitive Andor physical tasks so if you're trying to learn anything at all I do encourage you to explore motor training and visualization because basically all the studies out there in fact I couldn't find one exception where some degree of improvement wasn't observed when people use motor training and visualization on a consistent basis even just the three to five times per week these simple repeats over and over so I don't want to over complicate or make it sound like mental training and visualization has to be performed in a very precise way or that it has to be done perfectly each and every time quite to the contrary what is clear is that mental training and visualization is a very effective way to improve real world performance if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for us or comments about the podcast or guest you'd like me to feature on the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support the hubman Lab podcast not so much on today's episode but on many previous episodes of The hubin Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep for hormone augmentation and for improving Focus the uberman Lab podcast is prject to have partnered with momentous supplements if you'd like to learn more about the supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast please go to live momentous spelled o us.com huberman again that's liv.com huberman if you're not already following hubman lab on social media I am huberman lab on LinkedIn Facebook Twitter and Instagram and at all those places I cover content some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from content on the huberman Lab podcast so again it's hubman lab on all social media platforms also I know many of you are interested in summaries of podcasts and what we call toolkits which describe ideal toolkits and protocols for sleep or ideal toolkit and protocols for neuroplasticity or for deliberate cold exposure etc for that reason we've established What's called the neural network newsletter this is a completely zeroc cost newsletter that you can sign up for by going to hubman lab.com go to the menu scroll down to newsletter and you sign up by providing your email we do not share your email with anybody and there are also some sample PDFs of existing hub podcast protocols again ranging from neuroplasticity to sleep and other topics that we've covered in brief one to three page summaries thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion all about the science and effective implementation of mental training and visualization and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 212 ---
Video ID: 3ZGItIAUQmI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3ZGItIAUQmI
Title: Dr. Matthew MacDougall: Neuralink & Technologies to Enhance Human Brains | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-04-17 12:00:04 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Matthew MacDougall, MD, the head neurosurgeon at Neuralink. Dr. MacDougall trained at the University of California, San Diego and Stanford University School of Medicine and is a world expert in brain stimulation, repair and augmentation. He explains Neuralink’s mission and projects to develop and use neural implant technologies and robotics to 1) restore normal movement to paralyzed patients and those with neurodegeneration-based movement disorders (e.g., Parkinson’s, Huntington’s Disease) and to repair malfunctions of deep brain circuitry (e.g., those involved in addiction). He also discusses Neuralink’s efforts to create novel brain-machine interfaces (BMI) that enhance human learning, cognition and communication as a means to accelerate human progress. Dr. MacDougall also explains other uses of bio-integrated machines in daily life; for instance, he implanted himself with a radio chip into his hand that allows him to open specific doors, collect and store data and communicate with machines and other objects in unique ways. Listeners will learn about brain health and function through the lens of neurosurgery, neurotechnology, clinical medicine and Neuralink’s bold and unique mission. Anyone interested in how the brain works and can be made to work better ought to derive value from this discussion.

#HubermanLab #Neuroscience 

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
HVMN: https://hvmn.com/huberman 
Levels: https://levels.link/huberman 
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman 

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Matthew MacDougall
Clinical Practice: https://www.sutterhealth.org/find-doctor/dr-matthew-macdougall 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/drmmacdougall
Twitter: https://twitter.com/matthewmacdoug4 
The Institute: https://www.theinstitute.com/fellow/matthew-macdougall 

Neuralink
Neuralink: https://neuralink.com 
Neuralink’s Patient Registry: https://neuralink.com/patient-registry
Join Neuralink: https://neuralink.com/careers

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Matthew MacDougall
00:04:05 Sponsors: HVMN, Levels, Thesis
00:07:38 Brain Function & Injury; Brain Tumor Treatment
00:13:52 Frontal Lobe Filter; Sleep Deprivation
00:19:00 Neuroplasticity, Pharmacology & Machines
00:22:10 Neuralink, Neural Implants & Injury, Robotics & Surgery
00:31:05 Sponsor: AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:32:20 Neocortex vs. Deep Brain
00:36:45 Decoding Brain Signals
00:42:08 “Confidence Test” & Electrical Stimulation; RFID Implants
00:51:33 Bluetooth Headphones & Electromagnetic Fields; Heat
00:57:43 Brain Augmentation & Paralysis
01:00:51 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:02:09 Brain Implants & Peripheral Devices
01:12:44 Brain Machine Interface (BMI), Neurofeedback; Video Games
01:22:13 Improving Animal Experimentation, Pigs
01:33:18 Skull & Injury, Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI)
01:39:14 Brain Health, Alcohol
01:43:34 Neuroplasticity, Brain Lesions & Redundancy 
01:47:32 Car Accidents & Driver Alertness
01:50:00 Future Possibilities in Brain Augmentation & BMI; Neuralink 
01:58:56 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today my guest is Dr Matthew McDougall Dr Matthew McDougall is the head neurosurgeon at neurolink neurolink is a company whose goal is to develop Technologies to overcome specific clinical challenges of the brain and nervous system as well as to improve upon brain design that is to improve the way that brains currently function by augmenting memory by augmenting cognition and by improving communication between humans and between machines and humans these are all of course tremendous goals and neurolink is uniquely poised to accomplish these goals because they are approaching these challenges by combining both existing knowledge of brain function from the fields of Neuroscience and neurosurgery with robotics machine learning computer science and the development of Novel devices in order to change the ways that human brains work for the better today's conversation with Dr Matthew McDougall is a truly special one because I and many others in science and medicine consider neurosurgeons the astronauts of Neuroscience in the brain that is they go where others have simply not gone before and are in a position to discover incredibly novel things about how the human brain works because they are literally in there probing and cutting stimulating Etc and able to monitor how people's cognition and behavior and speech changes as the brain itself has changed structurally and functionally today's discussion with Dr McDougall will teach you how the brain works through the lens of a neurosurgeon it will also teach you about neuralink specific perspective about which challenges of brain function and disease are immediately tractable which ones they are working on now that is as well as where they see the future of augmenting brain function for sake of treating disease and for simply making brains work better today's discussion also gets into the realm of devising the peripheral nervous system in fact one thing that you'll learn is that Dr McDougall has a radio receiver implanted in the periphery of his own body he did this not to overcome any specific clinical challenge but to overcome a number of daily everyday life challenges and in some ways to demonstrate the powerful utility of combining novel machines novel devices with what we call our nervous system and different objects and Technologies within the world I know that might sound a little bit mysterious but you'll soon learn exactly what I'm referring to and by the way he also implanted his family members with similar devices so while all of this might sound a little bit like science fiction this is truly science reality these experiments both the implantation of specific devices and the attempt to overcome specific movement disorders such as Parkinson's and other disorders of deep brain function as well as to augment the human brain and make it work far better than it ever has in the the course of human evolution are experiments and things that are happening now at neuralink Dr McDougall also generously takes us under the hood so to speak of what's happening at neurolink explaining exactly the sorts of experiments that they are doing and have planned how they are approaching those experiments we get into an extensive conversation about the utility of animal versus human research in probing brain function and in devising and improving the human brain and in overcoming disease in terms of neurosurgery and neural links goals by the end of today's episode you will have a much clearer understanding of how human brains work and how they can be improved by Robotics and engineering and you'll have a very clear picture of what neural link is doing toward these goals Dr McDougall did his medical training at the University of California San Diego and at Stanford University School of Medicine and of course is now at neurolink so he is in a unique stance to teach us about human brain function and dysfunction and to explain to us what the past present and future of brain augmentation is really all about before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is hvmn Ketone IQ hvmn Ketone IQ increases blood ketones I want to be very clear that I like most people have heard of the ketogenic diet but I like most people do not follow a ketogenic diet that is I'm not in ketosis however most people don't realize that you can still benefit from increasing your blood ketones which is what hvmn Ketone IQ does I take Ketone IQ prior to doing really focused cognitive work so I take it once in the afternoon anytime I'm going to prepare for a podcast or do a podcast or if I'm going to do some research or focus on a grant anything that requires a high level of cognitive demand and that's because ketones are the brain's preferred use of fuel even if you're not following a ketogenic diet if you'd like to try Ketone IQ you can go to hvmn.com huberman to save 20 off your order again that's hbmn.com huberman to save 20 today's episode is also brought To Us by levels levels is a program that lets you see how different foods and activities affect your health by giving you real-time feedback on your diet using a continuous glucose monitor nowadays there's a lot of excitement about continuous glucose monitors and levels allows you to assess how what you eat and what combinations of foods you eat and exercise and sleep and things like alcohol should you indulge in alcohol and things of that sort how those impact your blood glucose now it's very important that the cells of your body and in particular the cells of your nervous system not experience levels of blood glucose that are too high or too low so-called hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia what levels allows its users to do is to understand how their specific routines food intake patterns exercise Etc impact their blood sugar levels I like most people who use levels find that there's a lot to learn and a lot to be gained by understanding these blood glucose patterns if you're interested in learning more about levels and trying a continuous glucose monitor yourself you can go to levels.link huberman right now levels is offering an additional two free months of membership again that's levels.link l-i-n-k huberman to get two free months of membership today's episode is also brought To Us by thesis thesis makes custom nootropics and as many of you have perhaps heard me say before I am not a fan of the word nootropics because it literally means smart drugs and the brain has neural circuits for focus it has neural circuits for creativity as neural circuits for task switching it does not have neural circuits for quote unquote being smart thesis understands this and has designed custom nootropics Each of which is designed to place your brain and body into a specific State ideal for a particular type of work or physical effort such as creativity or Focus or Clarity if you'd like to try thesis nootropics you simply go to their website you fill out a brief quiz and they will design a custom starter pack so that you can assess which things work for you more or less well and then they'll iterate with you over the course of the next few weeks or months to come up with the ideal nootropic kit for your needs to get your own personalized nootropic starter kit go online to takethesis.com huberman you can take that three minute quiz and they'll send you four different formulas to try in your first month again that's takethesis.com huberman and use the code huberman at checkout to get 10 off your first box and now for my discussion with Dr Matthew McDougall Dr McDougall welcome good to be here nice to see Andrew great to see you again uh we'll get into our history a little bit later but just to kick things off as a neurosurgeon and as a neuroscientist can you share with us your vision of the brain as an organ as it relates to what's possible there I mean I think most everyone understands that the brain is along with the body the seat of our cognition feelings our ability to move Etc and the Damage there can limit our ability to feel the way we want to feel or move the way we want to move but surgeons tend to view the world a little bit differently than most because as the not so funny joke goes you know they like to cut and they like to fix and they like to mend and they in your case have the potential to add things into the brain that don't exist there already so how do you think about and conceptualize the brain as an organ and what do you think is really possible with the brain that most of us don't already probably think about yeah that's a great question thinking about the brain as this three pound lump of meat trapped in a prison of the skull it seems almost magical that it could create a you know human a human set of behaviors and a life merely from electrical impulses when you start to see patients and see say a small tumor eating away at a little part of the brain and see a very discrete function of that brain go down in isolation you start to realize that the brain really is a collection of functional modules pinned together duct taped together um in this in this bone box attached to your head um and sometimes you see very interesting failure modes so one of the most memorable patience I ever had was very early on in my training I was down at UC San Diego and saw a very young guy who had just been in a car accident we had operated on him and you know as is so often the case in neurosurgery we had saved his life potentially at the cost of quality of life when he woke from surgery with bilateral frontal lobe damage he had essentially no impulse control left and so you know we rounded on him after surgery saw that he was doing okay to our you know first guess at his uh health and we continued on to see our other patients and we were called back by his you know 80 year old recovery room nurse saying you've got to come see your patient right away something's wrong and we walk in to see him and he points at his elderly nurse and says she won't have sex with me and you know it was Apparent at that moment his frontal lobes were gone and that person is never going to have reasonable human behavior again um and uh that's you know it's one of the most tragic ways to have a brain malfunction but uh you know anything a brain does anything from control of hormone levels in your body to Vision to sensation to you know the most obvious thing which is muscle movement of any kind from eye movement to moving your bicep all that comes out of the brain all of it can go wrong any of it any part of it or all of it um so yeah working with the brain is the substance of the brain as a surgeon very high stakes but you know once in a while you get a chance to really help you get a chance to fix something that seems unfixable and you have you know lazarus-like Miracles not not too uncommonly so it's extremely satisfying as a career could you share with us one of the more satisfying experiences or perhaps the top Contour of what um qualifies as satisfying in in neurosurgery yeah um you know one of the relatively newer techniques that we do is you know if someone comes in with a reasonably small tumor somewhere deep in the brain that's hard to get to the traditional approach to taking that out would involve cutting through a lot of good normal brain and disrupting a lot of neurons a lot of white matter that you know kind of the wires connecting neurons um then the modern approach involves a two millimeter drill hole in the skull down which you can pass a little fiber optic uh cannula and and uh attach it to a laser and just heat the tumor up deep inside the brain under direct MRI visualization in real time so your this person is in the MRI scanner you're taking pictures every second or so as the tumor heats up you can monitor the temperature and get it exactly where you want it where it's going to kill all those tumor cells but not hurt hardly any of the brains surrounding it and so not uncommonly nowadays we have someone come in with a tumor that previously would have been catastrophic to operate on and we can eliminate that tumor with you know leaving a poke hole in their skin with almost no visual After Effects so that procedure that you just described translates into better clinical outcomes meaning fewer let's call them side effects or collateral damage exactly right yeah we don't you know even in cases that previously would have considered totally inoperable say a tumor in the brain stem or a tumor in primary motor cortex or primary verbal areas Brokers area uh where we would have expected to either not operate or do catastrophic damage those people sometimes now are coming out unscathed I'm very curious about the sorts of basic information about brain function that can be gleaned from these clinical approaches of lesions and um strokes and um maybe even stimulation so for instance in your example of this patient that had bilateral frontal damage what do you think his lack of Regulation reveals about the normal functioning of the frontal lobes because I think the obvious answer to most people is going to be well the frontal lobes are normally um limiting impulsivity right but as we both know because the brain has excitatory and inhibitory neurons to sort of accelerators and breaks on communication right that isn't necessarily the straightforward answer um it could be for instance that the frontal lobes are acting as conductors right and are kind of um important but not the immediate players in determining impulsivity so um two questions really what do you think the frontal lobes are doing because I'm very intrigued by this uh human expanded real estate we have a lot of it compared to other animals and more generally what do you think damage of a given neural tissue means in terms of understanding the basic function of that tissue yeah it varies I think from tissue to tissue but with respect to the frontal lobes I think they act as sort of a filter they selectively are saying backward to the rest of the brain behind them when part of your brain says that looks very attractive I want to go grab it and take it you know out of the jewelry display case or you know whatever the frontal lobes are saying you can if you go pay for it first right they're filtering the behavior they're they're letting the impulse through maybe uh but in a controlled way um this is very high level very broad uh thinking about how the frontal lobes work and that that patient I mentioned earlier is a great example of when they go wrong you know he had this impulse sort of strange impulse to be attracted to his nurse that normally it would be easy for our frontal lobes to say this is completely inappropriate wrong setting wrong person wrong time uh in his case he had nothing there and so even the slightest inclination to uh to want something came right out to the surface so um yeah a filter calming the rest of the brain down from acting on every possible impulse when I was a graduate student I was um running what are called you know these uh what these are but just to inform you what are called acutes which are um neurophysiological experiments that last several days because at the end you uh you terminate the animal this isn't uh my apologies to those that um are made uncomfortable by animal research I now work on humans so a different type of animal but at the time we were running these acutes that would start one day and maybe end two or three days later and so you get a lot of data the animals anesthetized and doesn't feel any pain the entire time of the surgery but the um one consequence of these experiments is that the experimenter me and another individual are awake for several days with an hour of sleep here an hour of sleep there but you're basically awake for two three days something that really I could only do in my teens and 20s I was in my 20s at the time and I recall um going to eat at a diner after one of these experiments and I was very hungry and the waitress walking by with a tray full of food for another table and it took every bit of self-control to not get up and take the food off the tray something that of course is totally inappropriate and I would never do and it must have been based on what you just said that my forebrain was essentially going offline or offline from the sleep deprivation right because there was a moment there where I thought I might reach up and grab a plate of food passing by simply because I wanted it right and um I didn't um but I can relate to the experience of feeling like the shh response is a flickering in and out under conditions of sleep deprivation so do we know whether or not sleep deprivation limits for brain activity in a similar kind of way you know I I don't know specifically if that effect is more pronounced in the forebrain as opposed to other brain regions but it's clear that sleep deprivation has broad effects all over the brain people start to see visual hallucinations so the opposite end of the brain as you know the visual cortex in the far back the brain is affected people People's Court motor coordination goes down after sleep deprivation so um I think you know if I if you force me to give a definitive answer on that question I'd have to guess that the entire brain is affected by sleep deprivation and it's not clear that one part of the brain is more effective than another so we've been talking about damage to the brain and inferring function from damage uh maybe we could talk a little bit about what I consider really the Holy Grail of the nervous system which is neuroplasticity this incredible capacity of the nervous system to change its wiring strengthen connections weaken connections maybe new neurons but probably more strengthening and weakening of connections right nowadays we hear a lot of excitement about so-called classical psychedelics like LSD and psilocybin which do seem to quote unquote open plasticity they do a bunch of other things too but um through the release of neuromodulators like serotonin and so forth how do you think about neuroplasticity and more specifically what do you think the potential for neuroplasticity is in the adult so let's say older than 25 year old brain with or without machines being involved because um in your role at neurolink and as a neurosurgeon in other clinical settings surely you are using machines and surely you've seen plasticity in the positive and negative direction right what do you think about plasticity what's possible there without machines what's possible with machines so as you mentioned or alluded to the plasticity definitely goes down in older brains uh it it is harder for older people to learn new things to make radical changes in their behavior uh to you know kick habits that they've had for years um machines aren't the obvious answer so implanted electrodes and computers aren't the obvious answer to increased plasticity necessarily compared to drugs we already know that there are pharmacologics some of the ones you mentioned psychedelics that have a broad impact on plasticity yeah it's hard to know which area of the brain would be most potent as a stimulation Target for an electrode to broadly juice plasticity compared to uh you know pharmacologic agents that we already know about I think with plasticity you're talking in general you're talking about the entire brain you're talking about altering you know a trillion synapses all in a similar way in their tendency to be rewireable to their tendency to be up or down weighted and an electrical stimulation Target in the brain necessarily has to be focused you know with a device like potentially neural links there might be a more broad ability to steer current to multiple targets with some degree of control but you're never going to get that broad um Target ability with uh any electrodes that I can see coming in our lifetimes so say that would be coding the entire surface and depth of the brain the way that a drug can and so I think plasticity research will bear the most fruit when it focuses on pharmacologic agents I wasn't expecting that answer given that you're at neural link and um and then again I think that all of us me included need to take a step back and realize that while we may think we know what is going on at neurolink in terms of the specific goals and the general goals and I certainly have in mind I think most people have in mind a chip implanted in the brain or maybe even the peripheral nervous system that can give people super memories or some other augmented capacity we really don't know what you all are doing there and for all we know um you guys are taking or administering psilocybin and combining that with stimulation I mean we really don't know and I say this um with a with a tone of excitement because um I think that one of the things that's so exciting about the different Endeavors that Elon has really spearheaded um SpaceX Tesla Etc is that early on there's there's a lot of Mystique right you know Mystique is a quality that um is not often talked about but um it's I think a very exciting time in which Engineers are starting to toss up big problems and go for it and obviously Elon is certainly among the best if not the best in terms of going really big I mean Mars seems pretty far to me right electric cars are all over the road nowadays are very different than the picture a few years ago right when you didn't see so many of them rockets and so forth and now the brain so to the extent that you are allowed could you share with us what your vision for the missions at neurolink are and what the general scope of missions are and then um if possible uh share with us some of the more specific goals I can imagine basic goals of trying to understand the brain and augment the brain I could imagine clinical goals of trying to repair things in humans that are suffering in some way or animals for that matter yeah it's it's funny what you mentioned uh neuralink and I think Tesla and SpaceX before it end up being these blank canvases that people project their hopes and fears onto and so we we experience a lot of upside in this people you know assume that we have superpowers in our ability to alter the way brains work and people have terrifying fears of the horrible things we're going to do uh for the most part those extremes are not true uh you know we are making a neural implant we have a robotic insertion device that helps Place tiny electrodes the size uh smaller than the size of a human hair all throughout a small region of the brain in in the first indication that we're aiming at we are hoping to implant a series of these electrodes into the brains of people that have had a bad spinal cord injury so people that are essentially quadriplegic they have perfect brains but they can't move use them to move their body they can't move their arms or legs because of some high-level spinal cord damage exactly right and so this you know pristine motor cortex up in their brain is completely capable of operating a human body it's just not wired properly any longer to a human's arms or legs and so our goal is to place this implant into a motor cortex and have that person be able to then control a computer so a mouse and a keyboard as if they had their hands on a mouse and a keyboard even though they aren't moving their hands their motor intentions are coming directly out of the brain into the device and so they're able to regain their digital freedom uh and connect with the world through the internet why use robotics to insert these chips and the reason I asked that is that sure I can imagine that a robot could be more precise or less precise but in theory more precise than the human hand no tremor for instance right um uh more Precision in terms of uh maybe even a little micro detection device on the the tip of the blade or or something that could detect a capillary that you would want to avoid and swerve around that the human eye couldn't detect and you and I both know however that no two brains nor are the two sides of the same brain identical right so navigating through the brain is perhaps best carried out by a human however and here I'm going to interrupt myself again and say 10 years ago face recognition was very clearly performed better by humans than machines and I think now machines do it better right so is this the idea that eventually or maybe even now robots are better surgeons than humans are in in this limited case yes uh these electrodes are so tiny and the blood vessels on the surface of the brain so numerous and so densely packed that a human physically can't do this a human hand is not steady enough to grab this you know couple Micron width Loop uh at the end of our electrode thread and place it accurately uh blindly by the way into the cortical surface accurately enough at the right depth to get through all the cortical layers that we want to reach and I would love if human surgeons were you know essential to this process but very soon humans run out of motor skills sufficient to do this job and so we are required in this case to lean on robots to do this incredibly precise uh incredibly fast incredibly numerous placement of electrodes into the right area of the brain so in some ways neurolink is pioneering the development of robotic surgeons as much as it's pioneering the exploration and augmentation and treatment of human brain conditions right and as the device exists currently as we're submitting it to the FDA it is only for the placement of the electrodes the the robot it's part of the surgery I or or another neurosurgeon still needs to do the you know the more crude part of opening the skin and skull and presenting the robotic pristine brain surface to sew Electric threads into well surely getting quadriplegics to be able to move again or maybe even to walk again is a um heroic goal and one that I think everyone would agree would be wonderful to accomplish is that the first goal because it's hard but doable right um or is that the first goal because you and Elon and other folks at neurolink have a passion for getting paralyzed people to move again yeah broadly speaking you know the mission of neuralink is to reduce human suffering at least in the near term you know there's hope that eventually there's a use here that makes sense for a brain interface to bring AI as a tool embedded in the brain that a human can use to augment their capabilities I think that's pretty far down the road for us but definitely on a desired roadmap in the near term we really are focused on people with terrible medical problems that have no options right now with regard to motor control you know our mutual friend recently departed Krishna shenoy was a giant in this field of motor prosthesis it just so happens that his work was foundational for a lot of people that work in this area including us and he was an advisor to neuralink um that work was farther along than most other work for addressing any function that lives on the surface of the brain the physical constraints of our approach require us currently to focus on only surface features on the brain so we can't say go to the really um very compelling surface deep depth functions that happen in the brain like you know mood appetite addiction pain sleep we'd love to get to that place eventually but in the immediate future our first indication or two or three will probably be brain surface functions like motor control I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors athletic greens athletic greens now called ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs I've been taking athletic green since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast the reason I started taking athletic greens and the reason I still take athletic greens once are usually twice a day is that it gets to be the probiotics that I need for gut health our gut is very important it's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain the immune system and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health and those probiotics and athletic greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health in addition athletic greens contains a number of adaptogens vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met and it tastes great if you'd like to try athletic greens you can go to athleticgreens.com huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road in the car on the plane Etc and they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin d3k2 again that's athleticgreens.com huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 so for those listening the outer portions of the brain are filled with or consist of rather neocortex so the the bumpy stuff that looks like sea coral some forms of sea coral look like brains or brains look like them and then underneath uh reside a lot of the brain structures that control what Matt just referred to um things controlling mood hormone output how awake or asleep the brain is um and would you agree that those deeper regions of the brain have in some ways more predictable functions I mean that lesions there or stimulation there lead to more predictable outcomes in terms of deficits or improvements in function yeah in some way yes I mean the the deeper parts of the brain tend to be more stereotyped as in more similar between species than the the outer surface of the brain they're kind of the firmware or the the housekeeping functions to some degree body temperature blood pressure sex motivation hunger or things that you don't really need to vary dramatically between a fox and a human being whereas the the outer more reasoning functions of problem-solving functions between a fox and a human are vastly different and so the physical requirements of those brain outputs are different I think I heard Elon describe it as the human brain is I'm essentially a monkey brain with a super computer placed on the outside which um sparked some interesting ideas about what neocortex is doing we have all this brain real estate on top of all that more stereotyped function type stuff in the deeper brain and it's still unclear what neocortex is doing in the case of frontal cortex as you mentioned earlier it's clear that it's um providing some quieting of of impulses some context setting rule setting context switching all of that makes good sense but then there are a lot of cortical areas that sure involved in Vision or touch or hearing but then there's also a lot of real estate that just feels un unexplored right so I'm curious whether or not in your clinical work or work with neural link um or both whether or not you have ever encountered neurons that do something that's really peculiar and intriguing um and here I'm referring to examples that could be anywhere in the brain yeah like where you go wow like these neurons when I stimulate them or when they're taken away lead to something kind of bizarre but interesting yeah yeah there's um the one that comes immediately to mind is unfortunately in a terrible case in kids that have a tumor in the hypothalamus that lead to what we call gelastic seizures which is sort of an uncontrollable fit of laughter there's been cases in the literature where this laughter is so uncontrollable and so pervasive that people suffocate from failing to breathe where they laugh until they pass out and so you know you don't normally think of a deep structure in the brain like the hypothalamus as being involved in the you know a function like humor and and certainly when we think about this kind of laughter in these kids with tumors it's mirthless laughter is the the kind of textbook phrase humorless laughter it's just a reflexive um almost zombie-like behavior and it comes from a very small population of neurons deep in the brain this is one of the other sort of strange loss of functions you might say is you know it's it's nice that you and I can sit here and not have constant uh disruptive fits of laughter coming out of our bodies but that that's a neuronal function that's you know thank goodness due to neurons properly wired and properly functioning and any neurons that do anything like this can be broken and so we see this in horrifying cases like that from time to time so I'm starting to sense that there are two broad bins of approaches to augmenting the brain either to treat disease or for sake of increasing memory creating super brains Etc one category you alluded to earlier which is pharmacology and you specifically mentioned that the tremendous power that pharmacology holds right whether or not it's through psychedelics or through prescription drug or you know some other compound the other approach are these little microelectrodes that are extremely strategically placed right into multiple regions in order to play essentially a concert of electricity that is exactly right to get a quadriplegic moving um that Sparks two questions first of all is there a role for and is neural link interested in combining pharmacology with stimulation so not immediately right now we're solely focused on the extremely hard some might say the hardest problem facing humans right now of decoding the brain through electrical stimulation and recording that's that's enough for us for now so um to just uh give us a bit Fuller picture of this you were talking about a patient who can't move their limbs because they've have spinal cord damage right um the motor cortex that controls movement is in theory fine right you make a small hole in the skull and through that hole a robot is going to place electrodes obviously motor cortex but then where how is the idea that you're going to play a concert from different locations you're going to hit all the keys on the piano in different combinations and then figure out what can move the limbs what I'm alluding to here is I still don't understand how the signals are going to get out of motor cortex past the lesion and into um and out to the limbs because the lesion hasn't been dealt with at all in this scenario so just to clarify there I I should emphasize we're not in the immediate future talking about reconnecting the brain to the patient's own limbs that's on the road map but it's way down the road map a few years what we're talking about in the immediate future is having the person be able to control electronic devices around them with their motor intentions alone right so prosthetic hand and arm or just Mouse and and keys on a mouse and keys on a keyboard for starters so you wouldn't see anything in the world move uh as they have an intention the patient might imagine say flexing their fist or moving their wrist and what would happen on the screen is the mouse would move down and left and click on an icon and bring up their word processor and then a keyboard at the bottom of the screen would allow them to you know select letters in sequence and they could type this is the easy place to start easy in quotes I would say because um the transformation of electrical signals from motor cortex through the brain stem into the spinal cord and out to the muscles is somewhat known right through 100 years or more of incredible laboratory research right but the transformation meaning how to take the electrical signals out of motor cortex and put it into a a mouse or a robot arm that's not a trivial problem I mean that that's a whole other set of problems in fact well we're taking we're unloading some of that difficulty from uh from the the brain itself from the brain of the patient and putting some of that into software so we're using smarter algorithms to decode the motor intentions out of the brain we have been able to do this in monkeys really well so we have you know a small army of monkeys playing video games for you know smoothie rewards and they do really well we we actually have the world record of a bit rate of information coming out of a monkey's brain to you know intelligently control a cursor on a screen we're doing that better than anyone else and you know again thanks in no small part due to Krishna shenoi and his you know his lab and the people that have worked for him that have been helping neuralink um but what you can't do with that monkey is ask him what what he's thinking you can't ask him we can ask him but he won't get a very interesting answer yeah you can't tell him to try something different you can't tell him to hey you know try their shoulder on this early try the other hand and see if there's some cross body uh neuron firing that that gives you a useful signal once we get to people we expect to see what they've seen when they've done similar work in academic Labs which is the the human can work with you to vastly accelerate this process and get much more interesting results so one of the things out of out of Stanford recently is there was a lab that with Krishna and Jamie Henderson and other people decode speech out of the hand movement area in the brain so what we know is that there are you know multitudes of useful signals in each area of the brain that we've looked at so far they just tend to be highly expressed for say hand movement in the hand area but that doesn't mean only hand movement in the hand area okay so here's the confidence test there's a long history uh dating back really prior to the 1950s of scientists doing experiments on themselves sure not because they are Reckless but because they want the exact sorts of information that you're talking about the ability to really understand how intention and awareness of goals can shape outcomes in biology if that is vague to people listening what I mean here is that for many probably hundreds of years if not longer scientists have taken the drugs they've studied or stimulated their own brain or done things to really try and get a sense of what the animals they work on or the patients they work on might be experiencing psychiatrists are sort of famous for this by the way right I'm not pointing fingers at anybody but psychiatrists are known to try the drugs that they administer right and some people would probably imagine that's a good thing just so that the clinicians could have empathy for the sorts of side effects and not so great effects of some of these drugs that they administer to to patients but the confidence test I present you is would you be willing or are you willing if allowed to have these electrodes implanted into your motor cortex yeah you're not a quadriplegic right you can move your limbs yeah but given the state of the technology at neurolink now would you do that or maybe in the next couple of years if you were allowed would you be willing to do that yeah and be the person to say hey turn up the stimulation over there I feel like I want to reach for the cup right with that robotic arm but I'm feeling kind of some resistance because it's exactly that kind of experiment done on a a person who can move their limbs and who deeply understands the technology and the goals of the experiment that I would argue actually stands to advance the technology fastest sure as opposed to putting the electrodes first into somebody who um is imperative a number of levels and then trying to think about why things aren't working right right and again that you know this is all with the the goal of of reversing paralysis in mind um but would you implant yourself with these microelectrodes yeah absolutely I I would be excited to do that I think for the first iteration of the device it probably wouldn't be very meaningful it wouldn't be very useful because I can still move my limbs and our first outputs from this are things that I can do just as easily with my hands right moving a mouse typing in a keyboard um we are necessarily making this device as a medical device for starters for people with bad medical problems and no good options it wouldn't really make sense for an able-bodied person to get one in the near term it as the technology develops and we make devices specifically designed to perform functions that can't be done even by an able-bodied person say eventually refine the technique to get to the point where you can type faster with your mind and one of these devices than you can with text to speech or speech to text and your fingers that's a use case that makes sense for someone like me to get it it doesn't really make sense for me to you know get one when it allows me to you know use a mouse slightly worse than I can with my hand currently that said the safety of the device I would absolutely vouch for from you know the hundreds of surgeries that I've personally done with this I I think it's much safer than many of the industry standard FDA approved surgeries that I routinely do on on patients that you know are no one even thinks twice about their standard of care neurolink is already reached in my mind a safety threshold that is far beyond a commonly accepted safety threshold along the lines of augmenting one's biological function or functions in the world I think now's the appropriate time to talk about the small lump uh present in the top of your hand for those listening not watching there's a it looks like a a small lump between um Dr mcdougall's forefinger and thumb or index finger and thumb um placed on skin on the top of his hand you've had this for some years now because we've known each other for gosh probably seven years now or so and you've always had it in the time that I've known you what is that lump um and why did you put it in there yeah so it's a small writable RFID tag what's an RFID what does RFID stand for yeah radio frequency identification and so it's just a very small implantable chip that wireless devices can temporarily power if you approach an antenna they can power and send a small amount of data back and forth so most phones have the capability of reading and writing to this chip for years it it let me into my house it unlocked a deadbolt on my front door for some years it unlocked the doors at neuralink and let me through you know the the various locked doors inside the building um it is writable I can write a small amount of data to it and so for some some years in early uh the early days of crypto I had a crypto private key written on it to store a cryptocurrency that I thought was you know a dead offshoot of one of the main uh crypto currencies after it forked and so I put the private wallet key on there and forgot about it and remembered a few years later that it was there and went and checked and it was worth you know a few thousand dollars more than when I had left it on there so that was a nice finding change in the sofa in the 21st century and then when you say you read it you're essentially taking a a phone or other device and scanning it over the the lump in your hand so to speak and then it can read the data from there yeah essentially yeah um what other sorts of things could one put into these rfids in theory and how long can they stay in there before you need to take them out and um yeah and recharge them or replace them well these are passive they're coded in biocompatible glass and as an extra I'm a rock climber and so I was worried about that glass shattering during rock climbing I additionally coated them in another ring of silicone before implanting that so it's it's pretty safe they're passive there's no battery there's no Active Electronics in them so they could last the rest of my life I don't think I'd ever have to remove it for any reason you know at some point the technology is always improving so I might remove it and upgrade it that's not inconceivable already there's you know 10x more storage versions available that could be a drop in replacement for this if I ever remove it but you know that it it has a small Niche use case and it's an interesting proof of concept tiptoeing towards the concept that you mentioned of you know you have to be willing to go through the things that you're suggesting to your patients in order to you know say with a straight face that you think this is a reasonable thing to do so a small subcutaneous implant in the hand is a little different than a brain implant but yeah what's involved in getting that RFID chip into the hand is it I'm assuming it's an outpatient procedure presumably you did it on yourself yeah yeah this was a kitchen table kind of procedure um any anesthetic or is or no you know I um I've seen people do this with lidocaine injection I for my money I think a lidocaine injection is probably as painful as just doing the procedures a little cut in that thin skin on the top of the hand right some people are cringing right now other people are saying I want one because you'll have to never worry about losing your keys yeah or passwords I actually would like them for passwords because I'm dreadfully bad at uh remembering passwords I have to put them in places uh all over the place and then it's like I'm like that kid in um remember that movie Stand by me where the kid hides the pennies under the the porch and then uses the map yeah spends all summer trying to wind them so I can relate uh yeah so a little it was just a little slit and then put in there no local immune response no no pus no swelling all the materials are completely biocompatible that are on the surface exposed to the body so no no bad reaction it healed up you know in days and it was fine very cool um since we're on video here maybe can you just uh maybe raise it and show us yeah so so were you not to point out uh that little lump I I would have known to to ask about it but and uh any other members of your family have have these a few years after having this and seeing the convenience of me being able to open the door without keys uh my wife insisted that I put one in her as well so she's walking around with one fantastic we consider them our sort of our our version of wedding rings love it well certainly um more permanent than wedding rings in in some sense um I can't help but ask this question even though it might seem a little bit off topic as long as we're talking about implantable devices and Bluetooth and RFID chips in the body I get asked a lot about um the safety or lack thereof of a Bluetooth headphones um you work on the brain you're a brain surgeon um that's valuable real estate in there and um you understand about electromagnetic fields and sure um any discussion about emfs immediately puts us in the category of uh oh like get their tin foil hats and yet I've been researching emfs for a future episode of the podcast sure and emfs are a real thing that's not a valuable statement everything's a real thing at some level even an idea but there does seem to be some evidence that electromagnetic fields of sufficient strength can alter the function of maybe the health of but the function of neural tissue given that neural tissue is electrically signaling among itself so um I'll just ask this in a very straightforward way do you use Bluetooth headphones or wired headphones yeah Bluetooth and you're not worried about any kind of EMF Fields across the skull no I mean I I think the energy levels involved are so tiny that uh you know ionizing radiation aside we're way out of the realm of ionizing radiation that people would worry about you know tumor causing EMF Fields even just the electromagnetic field itself as is very well described in a Bluetooth frequency range the power level are tiny in these devices and so you know we are Awash in these signals whether you use Bluetooth headphones or not for that matter you're you're getting bombarded with ionizing radiation in a very tiny amount no matter where you live on earth unless you live under huge amounts of water um it's unavoidable uh and so I think you just have to trust that your body has the DNA repair mechanisms that it needs to deal with the constant bath of ionizing radiation that you're in uh as a result of being in the universe and exposed to cosmic rays in terms of electromagnetic fields there it's just it's uh you know the energy levels are way way out of the range where I would be worried about this what about heat um you know I don't use the earbuds any longer for a couple of reasons once as you know I take a lot of supplements and I reach into my left pocket once and swallowed a handful of supplements that included a Bluetooth a airpod pro um I knew it I swallowed it the moment after I gulped it down by the way folks please don't do this it was not a good idea it was it wasn't an idea it was a mistake and but I could see it on my phone as registering there never saw it again so I'm assuming it's no longer in my body but um uh anyway there's a bad joke there to be sure um but in any event I tend to lose them or misplace them so that's the main reason but I did notice when I used them that there's some heat generated there um I also am not convinced that plugging your ears all day long is good there's some ventilation through the through the sinus systems that include the ears so it sounds to me like you're not concerned about the use of of um earbuds but um what about heat near the brain I mean there's the the cochlea the auditory mechanisms that sit pretty close to the surface there um heat and neural tissue are not friends sure um I'd much rather get my brain cold than hot yeah um in terms of keeping the cells healthy and Alive um should we be thinking about the heat effects of some of these devices or other things is there anything we're overlooking well think about it this way the uh I use cars as an analogy a lot and you know mostly internal combustion engine cards so these analogies are gonna start to be foreign and useless for another generation of people that grow up in the era of electric cars but using cars as a as a platform to talk about uh fluid cooling systems your body has a massive distributed fluid cooling system similar to a car's radiator you're pumping blood all around your body all the time at a very strictly controlled temperature that blood carries it's mostly water so it carries a huge amount of the heat away or cold away from any area of the body that's focused heating or focused cooling so you could put an ice cube on your skin until it completely melts away and the blood is going to bring heat back to that area you can put you can stand in the sun under much more scary heating Rays from the Sun itself that contain UV radiation that's that's definitely damaging your DNA if you're looking for things to be afraid of the sun is a good one now you're talking to the guy that tells everybody he got sunlight in their eyes every morning but I don't want people to get burned or give themselves skin cancer I encourage people to protect their skin accordingly and and different individuals require different levels of protection from the Sun sure some people do very well in a lot of sunshine never get basal cell or anything like that some people and it's not just people with very fair skin a minimum of sun exposure can cause some issues and here I'm talking about sun exposure to the skin of course staring at the sun is a bad idea I never recommend thinking about the sun just as a heater uh you know for for a moment to compare it with Bluetooth headphones your body is very capable of carrying that heat away and dissipating it you know via sweat evaporation or you know temperature Equalization so any heat that's locally generated in the ear you know one there's a pretty large bony barrier there but two there's a ton of blood flow in the scalp and in the head in general and definitely in the brain that's going to regulate that temperature so I think certainly there can be a tiny temperature variation but I doubt very seriously that it's enough to cause a significant problem I'd like to go back to brain augmentation you've made very clear that one of the first goals for neurolink is to get quadriplegics walking again and again what a marvelous goal that is and I certainly hope you guys succeed well again just just to be very clear the first step is we we aren't reconnecting the patient's own muscle system to their motor Court allowing them um excuse me uh agency over the movement of things in the world yes and eventually their body and you're exactly right yeah eventually their body we would we would love to do that and we've done a lot of work on uh developing a system for stimulating the spinal cord itself and so that gets to the question that you uh that you asked a few minutes ago of how do you reconnect the motor cortex to the rest of the body well if you can bypass the damaged area of the spinal cord and have an implant in the spinal cord itself connected to an implant in the brain and have them talking to each other you can take the perfectly intact motor signals out of the the motor cortex and send them to the spinal cord which most of the wiring should be intact in the spinal cord below the level of say the the injury caused by a car accident or motorcycle accident or gunshot wound or whatever and it should be possible to reconnect the brain to the body in that way so not out of the realm of possibility that you know in some small number of years that neuralink will be able to reconnect to somebody's own body to their brain and here I just want to flag the um 100 years or more of incredible work by basic scientists um the names that I learned about in my textbooks as a graduate student were like georgeopolis and um that won't mean anything to anyone unless you're a neuroscientist but churchopolis um performed some of the first sophisticated recordings out of motor cortex just simply asking like what sorts of electrical patterns are present in motor cortex as an animal or human move is a limb um Krishna shinoy being another um major Pioneer in this area and many others right and just really highlighting the fact that basic research where a exploration of neural tissue is carried out at the level of anatomy and physiology really sets down the pavement on the runway to do the sorts of big clinical uh Expeditions that you all at neurolink are doing yeah it can't be said enough that you know we broadly speaking in Industry sometimes are and sometimes stand on the shoulders of academic Giants they were the real Pioneers that they were involved in the grind for years in an unglorious unglamorous way no stock option no stock options and you know the reward uh for all the hard work is a paper at the end of the day that is read by you know dozens of people and so you know they were selfless uh academic researchers that that made all this possible and we all humanity and neuralink owe them a massive debt of gratitude for all the hard work that they've done and continue to do I agree I'd like to just take a brief moment and thank one of our podcast sponsors which is inside tracker inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that blood work is the only way that you can monitor the markers such as hormone markers lipids metabolic factors Etc the impact your immediate and long-term Health one major challenge with blood work however is that most of the time it does not come back with any information about what to do in order to move the values for hormones metabolic factors lipids Etc into the ranges that you want with inside tracker changing those values becomes very straightforward because it has a personalized dashboard that you can use to address the nutrition-based behavior-based supplement-based approaches that you can use in order to move those values into the ranges that are optimal for you Your vitality and your longevity inside tracker now includes a measurement of APO lipoprotein B so-called apob in their ultimate plan apob is a key marker of cardiovascular health and therefore there's extreme value to knowing your apob levels if you'd like to try inside tracker you can go to insidetracker.com huberman to get 20 off any of inside tracker's plans again that's inside tracker.com huberman to get 20 off along the lines of augmentation early on in some of the public discussions about neurolink that I overheard between Elon and various podcast hosts Etc there were some lofty ideas set out that I think are still very much in play in people's minds things like for instance electrical stimulation of the hippocampus that you so appropriately have worn on your shirt today so for those they have beautiful um looks like either a it looks like a Golgi or a kahal rendition of the hippocampus yeah translates to seahorse and it's an area of the brain that's involved in learning and memory and among other things there was this idea thrown out that a chip or chips could be implants in the hippocampus that would allow greater than normal memory abilities perhaps that's one idea sure another idea that I heard about in these discussions was for instance that you would have some chips in your brain and I would have some chips in my brain and you and I could just sit here look at he looking at each other or not nodding or shaking our heads and essentially hear each other's thoughts which sounds outrageous but of course why not why should we constrain ourselves um to uh as our good friend Eddie Chang and uh who's a neurosurgeon who was already on this podcast once before said speech is just the shaping of breath as it exits our lungs incredible really when you think about it but we don't necessarily need speech to hear and understand each other's thoughts because the neural signals that produce that shaping of the lungs come from some intention you know I have some idea although it might not seem like it about what I'm going to say next so is that possible that we could sit here and just hear each other's thoughts and um and also how would we restrict what the other person could hear yeah well so absolutely I mean think about the fact that we could do this right now if you pulled out your phone and started texting me on my phone and I looked down and started texting you we would be communicating without looking at each other or talking shifting that function from a phone to an implanted device it requires no magic Advance no Leap Forward it's technology we already know how to do if we say put a device in that allows you to control a keyboard and a mouse which is our stated intention for our first human clinical trial or and against I'm deliberately interrupting or I can text an entire team of people sure simultaneously and they can text me and in theory I could have a bunch of thoughts and 5 10 50 people could hear right um or um probably more to their preference um they could talk to me yeah and and so you know texting each other with our brains is maybe an uninspiring rendition of this but it it's not uh very difficult to imagine the implementation of the same device in a more verbally focused area of the brain that allows you to more naturally speak the thoughts that you're thinking and have me have them rendered into speech that I can hear uh you know maybe via a bone conducting implant so silently here or or not silently like I could let's say I was getting off the plane and I wanted to let somebody at home know that I had arrived I might be able to think in my mind think their first name which might cue up a device that would then play my voice to them and just got off the plane I'm gonna grab my bag and then I'll give you a call right on their home Alexa right so that's all possible meaning we know the origin of the neural signals that give us rise to speech we know the different mechanical and neural apparati like the cochlea um eardrums Etc that transduce sound waves into electrical signals right essentially all the pieces are known we're just really talking about like refining it yeah refining it and reconfiguring it it's I mean it's not an easy problem but it's really an engineering problem rather than a neuroscience problem for that for that use case you know for a non-verbal communication you might say um that's a solved problem in a very crude disjointed way uh so some Labs have solved you know part one of it some Labs have solved part two of it there are products out there that solve you know say the implanted bone conduction part of it for the for the deaf Community um there are there are no implementations I'm aware of that are pulling all that together into one product that's a streamlined package from end to end I think that's a few years down the road and we I think have some hints of how easily or poorly people will adapt to these um let's call them novel Transformations a few years ago I was on Instagram and I saw a post from a woman um her name is cassar Jacobson and she is deaf since birth and can sign and to some extent can relapse but she was um discussing uh neosensory so this is a a device that translates sound in the environment into touch Sensations on her hand or wrist she's a uh admirer of birds and all things Avian and um I reached out to her about this device because I'm very curious because this is a very interesting use case of of neuroplasticity in the sensory domain which is a fascination of mine and she said that um yes indeed it afforded her novel experiences now when walking past say pigeons in the park if they were to make some whatever sounds that pigeons make that she would feel those sounds and that indeed it enriched her experience of those birds um in ways that obviously it wouldn't otherwise I haven't followed up with her recently to find out whether or not ongoing use of neosensory has made for a better worse or kind of um equivalent experience of avians in the world which were her is a near Obsession um so she Delights in them um what are your thoughts about in a peripheral devices like that periphery peripheral meaning outside of the the skull no requirement for a uh a surgery do you think that there's a more immediate or even a uh just generally potent um use case for peripheral devices and do you think that those are going to be used more readily before the kind of brain surgery requiring devices are used yeah um certainly the barrier to entry is lower the barrier to adoption is low you know if you're making a tactile glove that's hard to say no to when you can slip it on and slip it off and not not have to get your skin cut at all um what you know again there's no perfect measure of the efficacy of a device of one device compared to another especially across modalities but one one way that you can start to compare apples to oranges is bitrate you know useful information in or out of the brain as you know transformed into digital data and so you can put a single number on that and you have to ask when you look at a device like that is what is the bit rate in what is the bit rate out how much information are you able to usefully convey into the system and get out of the system into the body into the brain and uh I think there's what we've seen in the early stabs at this is that there's a very low threshold for bit rate on some of the devices that are trying to avoid you know a direct brain surgery Could you um perhaps say what you just said but in a way that um maybe people who aren't as familiar with thinking about bitrate might um might be able to digest there I'm referring to myself um I mean I understand bitrate I understand that adding a new channel of information is just that adding information are you saying it's important to understand whether or not that new information provides for novel function or experience and to and um to what extent is the the newness of that valid and adaptive well I'm saying more uh it's hard to measure utility in this space it's hard to you know put a single metric single number on how useful a technology is one crude way to try to get at that is is uh bit rate think of it as as back in the days of dial-up modems the bit rate of your modem was you know 56k or 96 I can still hear the sound of the dial up in the background yeah that was a bit rate that thankfully kept steadily going up and up and up your your internet service provider gives you a number uh that is the maximum usable data that you can transmit back and forth from the internet that's a useful way to think about these assistive devices how much information are you able to get in into the brain and out of the brain usefully and right now that that number is very small even compared to the old modems but you have to ask yourself when you're looking at a technology what's the ceiling what's the theoretical maximum and for a lot of these Technologies the theoretical maximum is is very low disappointingly low even if it's perfectly executed and and perfect developed as a technology and I think the thing that attracts a lot of us to a technology like neuraling is that the ceiling is incredibly High there's no obvious reason that you can't interface with millions of neurons as this technology is refined and and developed further so that's the kind of wide band you know high bandwidth brain interface that you want to develop if you're talking about um and a semantic prosthetic uh an AI assistant to your cognitive abilities uh you know the more sci-fi things that we think about in the coming decades um so uh it's an important caveat when you're evaluating these Technologies they really want it to be something that you can expand off into the Sci-Fi so let's take this a step further because as you're saying this I'm realizing that people have been doing exactly what neurolink is trying to do now for a very long time let me give you an example um people who are blind who have no pattern Vision have used canes for a very long time now the cane is not a chip it's not a an electrode it's not neosensory right none of that stuff what it is is essentially a a stick that has um an interface with a surface so it swept back and forth across the ground and you're translating what would otherwise be visual cues into somatosensory cues sure and we know that blind people are very good at understanding um even when they are approaching say a curb Edge because they are integrating that information from the tip of the cane um up through their somatosensory cortex and their motor cortex with other things like the changes in the the wind and the sound as they round a corner and um here I'm imagining a like a corner in San Francisco downtown which you get to the corner it's a completely different set of auditory cues and very often we know and this is because my laboratory worked on visual repair for a long time I talked to a lot of blind people who use different devices to navigate the world that they aren't aware of the fact that they're integrating these other cues but they nonetheless do them subconsciously right um and in doing so get pretty good at navigating with a cane right now Kane isn't perfect but you can imagine the other form of of navigating as a blind person uh which is to just attach yourself or attached to you another nervous system the best that we know being a dog sighted dog sure that can cue you again with a stopping at a curb's edge or even if there are some individuals that might seem a little sketchy dogs are also very good at sensing um different uh arousal States and others threat danger sure I mean they're Exquisite at it right so here what we're really talking about is taking a cane or another biological system essentially a whole nervous system and saying this other nervous system's job is to get you to navigate more safely through the world right in some sense what neurolink is trying to do is that but with robotics to insert them and chips which raises the the question people are going to say finally a question the question is this we hear about BMI brain machine interface which is really what neuraling specializes in we also hear about AI another example where there's great promise and great fear right we hear about machine learning as well to what extent can these brain machine interfaces learn the same way a seeing eye dog would learn but unlike a seeing eye dog continue to learn over time and get better and better and better because it's also listening to the nervous system that it's trying to support right put simply what is the role for AI and machine learning in the type of work that you're doing that's a great question I think you know it goes both ways basically what you're doing is taking a very crude software intelligence I would say not exactly a full full-blown AI but it's some well-designed software that can adapt to changes in firing of the brain and you're coupling it with another form of intelligence a human intelligence and you're allowing the two to learn each other so undoubtedly the human that has a neuralink device will get better at using it over time undoubtedly the software that the neurolink engineers have written will adapt to the firing patterns that that the device is able to record and over time focus in on meaningful signals toward movement right so if a neuron is fire a high firing rate when you intend to move the mouse cursor up and to the right it doesn't know that when it starts when you first put this in it's just a random series of signals as far as the chip knows but you start correlating it with what the person what you know the person wants to do as expressed in a series of games so you you assume that you know that the person wants to move the mouse on the screen to the Target that's shown because you tell them that's the goal and so you start correlating the activity that you record when they're moving toward an up and right Target on a screen with that firing pattern and similarly for up and left down and left down and right and so you develop a model um semi-intelligently in the software for what the person is intending to do and let the person run wild with it for a while and they start to get better at using the model presented to them by the by the software as expressed by the mouse moving or not moving properly on the screen right so it's imagine a scenario where you're asking somebody to play piano but the the sound that comes out of each key randomly shifts over time um very difficult problem but a human brain is good enough with the aid of software to solve that problem and and map well enough to a semi-stable state that they're going to know how to use that Mouse even when they say turn the device off for the night come back to it the next day and some of the signals have shifted so you're describing this I'm I'm recalling a recent experience I got one of these um rowers you know for to exercise and I am well aware that there's a proper row stroke and there's a improper row stroke and most everybody including me who's never been coached in rowing gets on this thing and pushes with their legs and pulls with their arms and back and it's some mix of Incorrect and maybe a smidgen of correct type execution there's a function within the rower that allows you in this case I mean to play a game where you can actually um every row stroke you generate arrows on toward a dartboard and it knows whether or not you're generating the appropriate forces at the given segment to the row the initial pull when you're leaning back Etc and adjusts the trajectory of the arrow so that when you do a proper row stroke it gets closer to a bullseye and it's very satisfying because you now have a visual feedback that's unrelated to this um the kinds of instructions that one would expect like oh you know hinge your hip a bit more or you know splay your knees a bit more reach more with your arms or pull first with your back all the rowers are probably cringing as I say this because they're realizing the what is exactly the point which is I don't know how to row but over time simply by paying attention to whether or not the arrow is hitting the bullseye or not more or less frequently you can improve your row stroke and get as I understand pretty close to Optimal row stroke in the same way that if you had a coach there telling you hey do this and do that what we're really talking about here is neurobiofeedback sure so is that analogy similar to what you're describing yeah that's a great analogy you know humans are really good at learning how to play games in software so video games are an awesome platform for us to use as a training environment for people to get better at controlling these things in fact it's it's the default and the obvious way to do it is to have people and monkeys play video games do you play video games yeah sure which video games let's see I you know play old ones I'm a little nostalgic so uh I uh like the old Blizzard game Starcraft and Warcraft I don't even know those I remember the first Apple computers I mean I go how old are you uh 43 okay 44 now as of a few days ago happy birthday so we're a little bit offset there yeah I can recall um Mike Tyson's punch out like the original Nintendo game Super Mario Brothers um but the game so the games you're describing I don't recall that my understanding is that the newer games are are far more sophisticated in some respects I I did recently find time to play cyberpunk um which was really satisfying and maybe appropriate it's a game where the characters are all fully modded out with cybernetic implants well perfect um but you know the the root of the game is run around and shoot things so maybe not so different from you know duck hunt or whatever from our childhoods the reason I ask about video games is um there's been some controversy as to whether or not they are making young brains better or worse and I think some of the work from Adam gazzali's Lab at UCSF and other Laboratories have shown that actually provided that um children in particular and adults are also spending time in normal face to let's call them more traditional face-to-face interactions that video games can actually make nervous systems that is people a much more proficient at learning and motor execution sure um visual detection um and on and on yeah there's some work uh showing that surgeons are better if they play video games so I try to squeeze some in as a you know a professional development activity great great well I'm sure you're getting cheers from the uh from those that like video games out there and some of the parents who are trying to get their kids to play fewer video games are cringing but that's okay we'll let them settle uh they're familial disputes among themselves let's talk about pigs sure neural link has been um quite generous I would say in announcing their discoveries and their goals and I I want to highlight this because I think it's quite unusual for a company to do this um I'm probably going to earn a few enemies by saying this um despite the fact that I've always owned Apple devices and from the South Bay um you know the apple design team is notoriously cryptic about what they're going to do next or when the next phone or computer is going to come out is is is vaulted to um a serious extent neural link has been pretty open about their goals right with the understanding the goals change and have to change and one of the things that they've done which I think is marvelous is they've held online symposia where you and some other colleagues of mine from the Neuroscience committee Dan Adams who have tremendous respect for and Elon and others their neural link have shared some of the progress that they've made in experimental animals I'm highlighting this because I think if one takes a step back I mean just for most people to know about and realize that there's experimentation on animals implantation of electrodes and so on is itself a pretty bold move because that understandably evokes some strong emotions um in people and in some people evokes extremely strong emotions sure um neural link did one such Symposium where they showed implant devices in pigs right then they did another one you guys did another one where it was implant devices in monkeys right I assume at some point there will be one of these public symposia where um the implant devices will be in a human what was the rationale for using pigs I'm told pigs are very nice creatures yeah I'm told that they are quite smart right um and for all my years as a neuroscientist and having worked admittedly on every species from mice to cuttlefish to humans to hamsters to uh you know I confess um various carnivore species which I no longer do I work on humans now for various reasons I never in my life thought I would see a implant device in the cortex of a pig sure why work on pigs yeah well let me let me say first neurolink is almost entirely composed of animal loving people the people at norlink are obsessive animal lovers there are signs up all around the office you know spontaneously put up by people within the organization you know talking about how we want to save animals we want to protect animals if there was any possible way to help people the way we want to help people without using animals in our research we would do it it's just not known how to do that right now and so we are completely restricted to making advances to getting a device approval through the FDA by first showing that it's incredibly safe in animals and so as is the case for any medical advancement essentially exactly I do want to highlight this that the the FDA and the other governing bodies um oversee these types of experiments and ensure that they're done with a minimum of discomfort to the animals of course but um I think there's an inherent speciesism right in uh in most humans not all some people truly see equivalence between a lizard and a human lizard life being equivalent to human life most human beings I think in particular human beings who themselves or have loved ones that are suffering from diseases that they hope could be cured at some point view themselves as species and feel that if you have to work on a biological system in order to solve the problem um working on non-human animals first makes sense right to most people sure but certainly there's a category of people that feels very strongly in the opposite direction sure and you know I think we would probably be having a very different conversation around animal research if uh we weren't you know we as a species we as a culture weren't just casually slaughtering millions of animals to eat them um every single day and so that is a background against which that the relatively minuscule number of animals used in research it becomes almost impossible to understand why someone would point to that ridiculously small number of animals used in research when the vast vast majority of animals that humans use and end their lives are are done for food or for fur or for fur or these other reasons that people you know have historically used animals so we in in that context we do animal research because we have to there's no other way around it if tomorrow uh laws were changed and the FDA said okay you can do some of this early experimentation in willing human participants that would be a very interesting option I think there would be a lot of people that would step up and say yes I'm willing to participate in early stage clinical research you already volunteered uh yeah um and I wouldn't be alone and that you know is a potential way that animals could maybe be spared uh being unwilling participants in this on that note to whatever extent possible I think neuralink goes um really really far much much farther than anyone I've ever heard of any organization I've ever heard of any anything I've ever seen to give the animals agency in every aspect of the research we have just an incredible team of people looking out for the animals and trying to design the experiments such that they're as purely opt-in as humanly possible no animal is ever compelled to participate in experiments beyond the surgery itself so if say on a given day our our star monkey pager doesn't want to play video games for Smoothie no one forces them to ever this is a very important point and I want to cue people to really what Matt is saying here um obviously the animals are being researched on for neural links so they don't get to opt in to opt out of the experiment right um but what he's saying is that they play these games during which neural signals are measured from the brain because they have electrodes implanted in their brain through a surgery that thankfully to the brain is painless right no pain receptors in the brain um and are playing for reward this is very different very different than the typical scenario in Laboratories around the world where people experiment on mice monkeys some kisses pigs or other species in which the typical Arrangement is to water deprive the animals we never do that and then have the animals work for their daily ration of water right and some people are hearing this and probably think wow that's barbaric and here I'm not trying to point fingers at the people doing that kind of work I just think it's important that people understand how the work is done right in order to motivate an animal to play a video game right depriving them of something that they yearn for is a very efficient way to do that we don't do that we they have free and full access to food this entire time so they aren't hungry they aren't thirsty the only thing that would motivate them is if they want a treat extra to their normal rations but there's there's never any deprivation there's never any adverse negative stimuli that pushes them to do anything I must say I'm impressed by that decision um because uh training animals to do tasks in laboratory settings is very hard and the reason so many researchers have defaulted to water deprivation and and having animals work for a ration of water is because frankly it works right it allows people to finish their PHD or their postdoc more quickly than having to wait around um and try and figure out why uh their monkey isn't working that day in fact having known a number of people who've done these kinds of experiments although we've never done them in my lab my monkey isn't working today is a common uh gripe among graduate students and postdocs who do this kind of work um and for people who work on mice okay so this is um uh very important information to get across and there's no Public Relation statement uh woven into this is just we're talking about the nature of the research but I think it is important that people are aware of this yeah it's one of the one of the underappreciated Innovations out of neurolink is how far the Animal Care team has been able to to move in the direction of Humane treatment of these guys wonderful as an animal lover myself I can only say wonderful why pigs yeah pigs are you know they're actually fairly commonly used in medical device research um more you know in the cardiac area their hearts are you know somewhat similar to human hearts how big are these pigs I've seen Little Pigs and I've seen big pigs yeah there's a range there's a bunch of different varieties of pig there's a bunch of different species that um you know you can optimize for different uh characteristics there's mini pigs there's um you know Yorkshires there's uh a lot of different kind of pigs that we use in different contexts when we're trying to optimize a certain characteristic so yeah the pigs are we don't necessarily need them to be smart or task performers although occasionally we have you know trained them to walk on a treadmill when we're studying how their limbs move for some of our spinal cord research um but we're not you know recording interesting say cognitive data out of their minds they're really just a biological platform with a skull that's close enough in size and shape to humans to be a valid platform to study the safety of the device unlike a monkey or a human a pig I don't think can reach out and hit a button or a lever exactly how are they signaling that they um saw or um sent to something yeah so again the pigs are really just a safety platform to say the device is safe to implant it doesn't you know break down or cause any kind of toxic reaction the monkeys are where we are really doing our heavy lifting in terms of ensuring that we're getting good signals out of the device that that what we expect to see in humans is validated on a functional level in in monkeys first let's talk about the skull yeah years ago you and I were enjoying a conversation about these very sorts of things that we're discussing today and he said you know the skull is actually a pretty lousy uh biological adaptation far better would be a titanium plate You Know spoken like a true neurosurgeon uh with a radio receiver implanted in his hand um but in all seriousness you know drilling through the skull with a two millimeter hole certainly don't do this at Home Folks um please don't do this but um that yes that's a small um entry site but I think most people cringe when they hear about that or think about that sure and it obviously has to be done by a neurosurgeon with all the appropriate um uh environmental conditions in place to limit infection what did you mean when you said that the skull is a poor adaptation in a titanium plate will be better and in particular what does that mean in reference to things like traumatic brain injury I mean are human beings unnecessarily vulnerable at the level of traumatic brain injury because our skulls are just not um hard enough you know maybe I'm being too harsh about skull the skull is uh very good at what it does given the tools that we are working with as biological organisms that develop in our mother's uterus the skull is you know usually the appropriate size it's one of the hardest things in your body um that said there are a couple puzzling vulnerabilities some of the thinnest bone in the skull is in the temporal region this is uh you know neurosurgeons will all know that I'm heading toward a feature that sometimes Darkly is called God's Little joke where the very thin bone of the of the temporal um part of the skull has one of the largest arteries that goes to the lining of the brain right attached to the inside of it and so this this bone just to the side of your eye tends to fracture if you're struck there and the sharp edges of that fractured bone very often cut an artery called the middle meningeal artery that leads to a big blood clot that crushes the brain that's how a lot of people with you know otherwise would be a relatively minor injury end up dying is this large blood clot developing from high pressure arterial blood that crushes the the brain and so why would you put the artery right on the inside of the very thin bone that's most likely to fracture it's an enduring mystery but this is probably the most obvious failure mode in in you know the design of a human skull otherwise you know in terms of General impact resistance I think the brain is a very hard thing to protect and the the architecture of human anatomy probably given all other possible architectures that can arise from development it's not that bad really um one of the interesting features in terms of shock absorption that hopefully prevents a lot of traumatic brain injury is the fluid sheath around the brain the the brain you may know is um it's mostly fat it floats in salt water in our brains so our brains are all floating in in salt water and so with rapid acceleration deceleration that sheath of salt water adds a marvelous protective cushion against development of you know bruising of the brain say or bleeding in the brain and so I think for any flaws in the design that do exist um you can imagine things being a lot worse and there's probably a lot fewer tbis than would exist if a human designer was taking a first crack at it as you describe the the thinness of this temporal bone and the in the presence of a critical artery just beneath it um I'm thinking about most helmets um and here I also want to cue up the fact that while whenever we hear about TBI or CTE or brain injury people always think football hockey but most traumatic brain injuries are things like car accidents or construction work right and it's not football and hockey for some reason football and hockey and boxing get all the attention but my colleagues that work on traumatic brain injury tell me that most of the traumatic brain injury they see is somebody slips at a party and hits their head or um uh you know was in a car accident or environmental environmental accidents of various kinds to my mind most helmets don't actually cover this region close to the eyes so is there is there also a failure of um helmet engineering that um you know I can understand why you'd want to have your peripheral vision out the sides of your eyes uh per free of your eyes but it seems to me if this is such critical real estate why why isn't it being better protected you know I'm no expert in helmets but um I don't think we see a lot of epidural hematomas and squirts injuries to get this kind of injury you usually need a really focal blunt trauma like the baseball bat to the head is a classic mechanism of injury that would lead to to a temporal bone fracture an epidural hematoma um with sports injuries you know you don't often see that especially in football with uh you know a a sharp sharper object coming in contact with the head it's usually another helmet right is the the mechanism of injury uh so I I I can't think off the top of my head of an instance of this exact injury type in sports you spent a lot of time poking around in brains of humans um and while I realize this is not your area of expertise you are somebody who I am aware you know cares about his health and the health of your family and I think generally People's Health um when you look out on the landscape of things that people can do and shouldn't do if their desire is to keep their brain healthy do any um any data or any particular practices come to mind I mean I think we've all heard the obvious one don't don't get a head injury right if you do get a head injury make sure it gets treated and don't get a second head injury right but those are sort of duh type um answers that um I'm able to give so I'm curious about the answers that um perhaps I'm not able to give yeah well you know the obvious ones it's one that you you talk about a lot um and I see a lot of the the smoldering wreckage of humanity you know in the operating room uh and in the emergency room for people that come in you know I work my practices in San Francisco right next to the tenderloin and so a lot of people that end up coming in from the tender line have been drinking just spectacular amounts of alcohol for a long time and their brains are uh you know very often on the scans they look like small walnuts inside their empty skull there's so much atrophy that happens with an alcohol soaked brain chronically that I would say that's you know Far and Away the most common source of brain damage that many of us just volunteer for and it's you know when you look at the morbidity kind of the human harm in aggregate that's done it's mystifying that that it's not something that we are all paranoid about we're um people think that I don't drink it all I'll occasionally have a drink I I could take it or leave it frankly if all the alcohol in the plant disappeared I wouldn't notice but I do occasionally have a drink maybe one per year or something like that but I am shocked at um this current state of affairs around alcohol consumption and advertising Etc when I look at the data mainly out of the UK brain bank which basically shows that for every drink that one has on a regular basis when you go from zero to one drink per week there's more brain atrophy thinning of the gray matter cortex you go from one to two more thinning you go from two to three and there's a near linear relationship between the amount that people are drinking and the amount of brain atrophy and to me it's like it's just sort of obvious from the these large-scale studies that um as you point out alcohol atrophy is the brain yeah it kills neurons right and I don't have any bias against alcohol or people that drink I know many of them but it does seem to me kind of shocking um that we're talking about you know the Resveratrol and red wine which is at you know infinitesimally small amounts and not even clear Resveratrol is good for us anyway by the way um a matter of debate I should point out but um so alcohol certainly alcohol and excess is bad for the brain sure um in terms of uh okay so we have head hits bad alcohol bad um you're working as you mentioned you're the tenderloin um is there any awareness that amphetamine use can can disrupt brain structure or function you know that that's not an area that I spent a lot of time researching in I you know I incidentally take care of people that have used every substance known to man in quantities that are you know spectacular but I haven't specifically done research in that area I'm not super well versed on the literature yeah I ask in part because um maybe you know a colleague or will come across a colleague who's working on this is there's just such a um a incredible increase in the use of things like Adderall Ritalin modafinil armodafinil which I think in small amounts in clinical clinically prescribed situations can be very beneficial but um let's be honest many people are using these on a chronic basis right I don't think we really know what it does to the brain aside from increasing addiction for those substances that's very clear well For Better or Worse we're generating a massive data set right now well put um I'd like to briefly go back to our earlier discussion about neuroplasticity you made an interesting statement which is that we are not aware of any single brain area that one can stimulate in order to invoke plasticity right it's a malleability of neural architecture years ago Mike mirzanek and colleagues at UCSF did some experiments where they stimulate nucleus basalis and paired that stimulation with eight kilohertz tone or um in some cases they could also stimulate a different brain area the ventral tegmental area which causes the release of dopamine and pair it with a tone and in it seemed in every one of these cases they observed massive plasticity um now I look at those data and I compare them to the kind of classic data um I think it was Carl Ashley that did these experiments where they would take animals and they'd scoop out a little bit of Cortex put the animal back into a learning environment and the animal would do pretty well if not perfectly sure so they scoop out a different region of Cortex and a different animal and by the end of maybe three four years of these kinds of lesion experiments they um referred to the equal potential of the cortex meaning they concluded that it didn't matter which piece of the cortex you took out that there was no one critical area so on the one hand you've got these experiments that say you know you don't really need a lot of the brain right and and every once in a while a news story will come out where um they'll a patient a person will go in for a brain scan for some other reason or an experiment and the person seems perfectly normal and they're like missing half their cortex right and then on the other hand you have these experiments like the stimulation of basalus or VTA where you get massive plasticity from stimulation in one area I was I've never been able to reconcile these kinds of discrepant findings and so I'd really like just your opinion on this you know what is it about the brain as an organ that lets it be both so critical at the level of individual neurons in circuits so so critical and yet at the same time um it's able to uh circumvent these what would otherwise seem like massive lesions and holes in itself yeah I mean a lot of a lot of it to reconcile those experiments you first account for the fact that they're probably in different species right you take out a particular portion of a pig or a rabbit grain a small amount you might not see a difference but a small portion of a human brain say the part most interested in coordinating speech or finger movement and you're going to see profound losses or visual cortex right I take out a small portion of V1 and you'll you'll have a visual deficit um and so species matters uh age matters if you take out half of the brain in a very young baby that baby has a reasonable chance of developing High a high degree of function by having the remaining half subsume some of the functions lost on the other side because they're very very young and their brain is still developing it's a it's to some degree a blank slate with extremely high plasticity over many years so that can overcome a lot of deficits um taking an adult animal's brain that isn't very well differentiated functionally to begin with you might not see those deficits so apparently there's a lot of redundancy as well right there's a lot of say cerebellar and spinal circuits in other animals that generate stereotyped Behavior patterns and might not need the brain at all to perform say a walking movement or some other sequences of motor activities so a lot of that depends on the experimental setup I would say in general adult humans are very vulnerable to losing small parts of their brains and losing discrete functions I'm going to take the liberty of asking a question that merges across neural Link in Tesla I could imagine that cars whether or not they're on autopilot mode or being driven by the human directly um and Society generally would benefit from knowing whether or not a human is very alert or sleepy sure I don't own a Tesla um perhaps this technology already exists but is there any idea that a simple sensor maybe even a just eyelid position or pupil size or head position could be introduced to a car like the Tesla or another car for that matter yeah and resolve a common problem which is that when people are less alert not just when people fall asleep but the simple drop in alertness that occurs when people are sleepy is my read of the data is responsible for approximately a third a third it's incredible of accidents between vehicles and then of course some percentage of those are going to be lethal accidents so in terms of preserving life this might seem like a minor case but it's actually a major case scenario yeah you know I have no you know special insight into how Tesla software works I know they have brilliant engineers um when I have a Tesla when I drive it it seems to know when I'm looking at the road versus not and it yells at me if I'm not looking at the roads how does it do that and what voice does it use there's a small camera uh up by the rearview mirror and I think it's a simple eye track my my guess here is that it's a simple eye tracking program um and so it may already be the case that it's implemented that it's detecting whether your eyes are open or not obviously you know it's not um strict it's not stringent because sunglasses um and I've I've seen Forums on the internet where people tape over that small camera so like so they can wall oh goodness but uh you know I think they're definitely making efforts to try to try to save lives here incredible I say incredible just because I think I'm fortunate enough to live in a lifetime where there were no electric cars when I was growing up and now things are moving oh so fast um no pun intended what is your wish for brain machine interface and brain augmentation so let's let's assume that the the clinical stuff can be worked out or maybe you have a a pet clinical condition that you just are um just yearning to see resolved yeah that would be fine too but in addition to that way you really just expand out let's say we can extend your life 200 years or we're thinking about the kind of world that your children are going to live in and their grandchildren will live in what do you think is really possible yeah with brain augmentation and brain machine interface and here please feel no bias whatsoever to answer in a way that reveals to us your um your incredible empathy and consideration of clinical conditions because that's how you spend your days is fixing patients uh and helping their lives be better so if it lands in that category great but um for sake of of fun and forsake of delight and forsake of um really getting us the audience to to understand what's really possible here please feel no shackles yeah uh well you know I I love the idea down the road and we're talking you know a 10-year maybe 20-year time frame of uh humans just getting control over some of the horrible ways that their brains go wrong right so I think everybody at this point has either known someone or second order known someone a friend of a friend who has been touched by addiction or depression suicide obesity these functions of the brain or malfunctions of the brain are what drives me these are the things that I want to tackle in my career you know in terms of my kids lifetime I'm thinking you know full human expansion of human cognition into AI full immersion in the internet of your cognitive abilities having no limitation for what you think um as bottlenecked by needing to read the Wikipedia article first to have the data to inform your thoughts having communication with anyone that you want to unrestricted by this you know flapping air past meat on your face it's a you know a means of communication that's ridiculously prone to being misunderstood it's also a tiny narrow bottleneck of communication where you know trying to send messages back and forth through a tiny straw and there's no reason that needs to necessarily be true it's the way things have always been but it isn't the way things are going to be in the future uh and I think there's a you know a million very sci-fi possibilities in terms of banding human Minds together to be even more potent as a as a multi-unit uh organism uh you know as an opt-in multi-brain uh you know these are things that are so far down the road I can't even directly see how they would be implemented but the technology we're working on is a little crack in the door that allows some of this stuff to even be thought about in a realistic way well to that to that point I you know encourage anyone who is you know excited about things like that you know especially mechanical engineers software Engineers robotics engineers come to the neuralink website and look at the jobs we've got we need the brightest people on the planet working on these the hardest problems uh in the world in my opinion and so if you want to work on this stuff come help us I have several responses and to what you just said um first off I'll get the the least important one out of the way which is that years ago I applied for a job at neurolink the neural link website at that time was incredibly sparse right it was just said neural link and I said if you're interested give us your email so I put my email there I got no response so um the uh they made a wise choice in um now uh fast forward several years I am um very grateful and I think very lucky um that you who passed through fortunately for me through my lab at one point and we had some fun Expeditions together in the wild uh neural exploration so we can talk about some other time as well as I'm learning from you as you pass through your time at Stanford um but have arrived there at neurolink and and I'll say that they're very lucky to have you and um folks like Dan Adams who have known for your very long time so uh phenomenal neurosurgeons like yourself neuroscientists and um Vision scientists like Dan and others it's really an incredible Mission so I really want to start off by saying um thank you to you and all your colleagues there I know that neurolink is really tip of the spear in being public facing with the kinds of things they're doing and and being so forthcoming about how that work is done in animals and exactly what they're doing um and that's a very brave stance to take yeah especially given the nature of the work but well that's classic Elon right he he doesn't keep secrets in public too commonly he tells you what he's going to do and then he does it and people are always amazed by that you know he releases the Tesla master plan and tells you exactly what the company intends to do for the next several years and people assume that there's some subterfuge that he is misdirecting but it's it's right out there in the open and I think neuraling follows in that path of you know we want people to know what we're doing we want the brightest people in the world to come help us we we want to be able to help patients we want you know the most motivated patients with quadriplegia to you know visit our patient registry uh and and sign up to be considered for clinical trials that that will happen in the future we'll put a link to that by the way so um maybe just uh the direct call could happen now so you uh this is for people who are quadriplegic or who know people who are quadriplegic who are interested in being part of this clinical trial it's a patient registry right now that we're just collecting information to see who might be eligible for clinical trials that'll happen in the future we're still working with the FDA to hammer out the details and and get their final permission uh to proceed with the trial great so please see the note in the show note the link excuse me in the in the show note captions for that yeah I want to thank you guys for your stance uh being public facing and also doing the incredibly hard work I also think the robotics aspect which you've clarified for me uh today is extremely Forward Thinking and uh absolutely critical so a lot of critical engineering that note out will Wick out into other domains of neurosurgery and medical technology not just serving neural links Mission directly and I really want to thank you uh first of all for coming here today and taking time out of your important schedule of seeing patients and doing brain surgery literally time away from your family and time away from your mission at neurolink briefly to uh to share with people what you guys are doing as I mentioned before there's a lot of Mystique around it and even despite the fact that neurolink has gone out of their way to try and erase some of that Mystique this to me is the clearest picture ever to my knowledge that has been given about what's going on there and and the the stated and the real Mission and what's going on at the level of of nuts and bolts and and guts and brains and this kind of thing and I really just want to thank you also for for being you which is uh perhaps sounds like a a kind of an odd um thing to hear but I think as made apparent by the device implanted in your hand you don't just um do this for a job you live and breathe and embody truly embody this stuff around the nervous system and trying to figure out how to fix it how to make it better and you live and breathe it and I know your deep love for it so I want to thank you for um not just the brains that you put into it and the energy you put into it but also for the the heart that you put into it thanks for that Andrew I appreciate that we we just want to help people we want to make things better well I know that to be true knowing you and um thank you again for coming here today and I look forward to another round of discussion and um whenever the time happens to be when these incredible technologies have um spelled out to the next uh major Milestone thank you thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Matthew McDougall all about the human brain and how it functions how it breaks down and the incredible efforts that are being carried out at neurolink in order to overcome diseases of brain and nervous system function and to augment how the human brain works if you'd like to learn more about Dr mcdougall's work and the specific work being done at neurolink please see the links that we've provided in the show note captions if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zero cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and apple and in addition on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five star review if you have questions for me or topics you'd like me to cover on the huberman Lab podcast or guests that you'd like me to consider inviting on the huberman Lab podcast please put that in the comments on YouTube I do read all the comments in addition please check out the sponsors mentioned the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast not so much on today's episode but on various previous episodes of The huberman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep focus and hormone support the huberman Lab podcast is proud to have partnered with momentous supplements if you'd like to hear more about the supplements discussed on the huberman Lab podcast please go to live momentous spelled ous.com slash huberman again that's livemomentis.com huberman if you're not already following the huberman Lab podcast on social media we are huberman lab on Instagram Twitter Facebook and Linkedin and on all those places I focus on material that somewhat overlaps with content from the huberman Lab podcast but often is distinct from the content covered on the huberman Lab podcast so again it's huberman lab on all social media channels for those of you that haven't already subscribed to our so-called neural network newsletter this is a completely zero cost monthly newsletter that has summaries of podcast episodes and so-called tool kits toolkits are lists of about a page to two pages long that give the critical tools for and instance for optimizing sleep or for neuroplasticity or deliberate cold exposure or deliberate heat exposure optimizing dopamine again all available to you at zero cost you simply go to hubermanlab.com go to the menu tab in the corner scroll down to newsletter you provide us your email we do not share your email with anybody and in addition to that there are samples of toolkits on the hubermanlab.com website again under newsletter and you don't even have to sign up to access those but I think most people do end up signing up for the newsletter because it's rich with useful information and again completely zero cost thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Matthew McDougall and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 213 ---
Video ID: 6ZrlsVx85ek
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ZrlsVx85ek
Title: The Science of Healthy Hair, Hair Loss and How to Regrow Hair | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-04-10 12:00:06 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I explain the biology of hair, hair growth, why hair growth slows and what causes hair to stop growing and/or “fall out.” I discuss the essential role of hair stem cells and other supporting biological factors for healthy hair growth. Then I describe various approaches (mechanical and chemical) to slow hair loss by increasing blood flow to hair stem cells, including minoxidil, tadalafil, PRP, microneedling, Botox and ketoconazole treatments. I also discuss how age-related hormone changes cause hair loss and explain the effectiveness of treatments such as caffeine, saw palmetto, growth hormone, finasteride and dutasteride. For all hair growth options, I describe potential side effects, how soon to expect results and the amount of hair regrowth to expect and I highlight effective combination treatments for hair regrowth even in hair “dead” (bald) zones. For many listeners, thinning, brittle hair, or pattern baldness are a source of anxiety and stress. This episode explains the mechanisms underlying hair regrowth tools and the science behind them so that you can evaluate potential treatments and associated side-effect profiles and select the best one(s) for you. 

#HubermanLab #Science #HairGrowth

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Helix Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
HVMN: https://hvmn.com/huberman 
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman 
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-hu.berman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Microneedling and Its Use in Hair Loss Disorders: A Systematic Review: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13555-021-00653-2
Caffeine and Its Pharmacological Benefits in the Management of Androgenetic Alopecia: A Review: https://www.karger.com/Article/Fulltext/508228
The effectiveness of combination therapies for androgenetic alopecia: A systematic review and meta-analysis: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dth.13741
Differential effects of caffeine on hair shaft elongation, matrix and outer root sheath keratinocyte proliferation, and transforming growth factor‐β2/insulin‐like growth factor‐1‐mediated regulation of the hair cycle in male and female human hair follicles in vitro: https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article-abstract/171/5/1031/6616284?redirectedFrom=fulltext&login=false
The structure of people’s hair: https://peerj.com/articles/619/

Note: The Huberman Lab podcast has no affiliation with or financial benefit from any of the products listed below, which are provided as a useful reference only.

Ketoconazole Shampoos
Keeps: https://www.keeps.com/our-products/ketoconazole 
Nurx: https://www.nurx.com/topical/ketoconazole-2-shampoo/fb/ 
Siena Health: https://www.sienahealth.com/product/ketoconazole-shampoo-2 
Intelligent: https://intelligent.shop/products/intelligent-shampoo

Biotin Shampoos
Maple Holisitics: https://www.amazon.com/Biotin-Hair-Shampoo-Thinning-Moisturizing/dp/B01ENCBOA0 
Ouai: https://theouai.com/collections/shampoo-conditioner/products/fine-hair-shampoo 
R+Co: https://www.randco.com/collections/dallas-collection/products/dallas-biotin-thickening-shampoo 

Microneedling https://www.amazon.com/s?k=microneedling+hair+2mm&crid=OOD2YAB5CQXN&sprefix=microneedling+hair+2mm%2Caps%2C168&ref=nb_sb_noss 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Hair
00:04:13 Sponsors: Helix Sleep, HVMN, ROKA
00:08:04 Psychological States & Hair
00:13:19 Hair Anatomy & Stem Cells
00:26:05 3 Phases of Hair Growth
00:35:40 Sponsor: AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:36:55 Minoxidil & Blood Flow
00:45:37 Increase Blood Flow: Massage, Tadalafil, Platelet-Rich Plasma (PRP), Microneedling
00:56:10 Microneedling, Minoxidil & “Dead Zones”
01:00:13 Sponsor: LMNT
01:01:25 Botox Treatments
01:06:27 Androgens, Hair Growth & Pattern Hair Loss; Scalp vs. Beard Hair
01:15:46 Topical Caffeine & Slowing Hair Loss
01:21:06 IGF-1: Growth Hormone & Sermorelin; Insulin Sensitivity: Myo-Inositol
01:25:52 Iron & Hair Growth
01:27:04 5-Alpha Reductase & Saw Palmetto; Curcumin 
01:33:22 Ketoconazole & Offsetting Hair Loss
01:38:46 Topical & Oral Finasteride 
01:51:00 Post- Finasteride Syndrome
01:56:01 Dutasteride
01:58:53 Mechanical & Chemical Stimulation for Hair Growth
02:02:46 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science -based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are discussing hair. Hair is a topic that occupies the minds of many people. There are people that are losing their hair and want to halt or reverse that loss of hair. Today, we will talk about all the ways that science has taught us we can slow or even reverse hair loss. I confess that researching today's topic was a particular joy for me not because I'm obsessed with hair, mine or the hair of others, but because hair turns out to be fascinating from the perspective of cellular biology and stem cells, which is a topic that I've long been interested in and that for much of my career I focused on in the context of development. When your brain and your nervous system develop, it develops from a small batch of cells that turns into many trillions of cells. It does that by cell replication, something that we call the cell cycle. We'll talk a little bit about this and so-called mitosis today. I promise not to get into too much detail. But what makes hair so very interesting from a biological standpoint is that every hair, every single individual strand of hair has its own little stem cell niche, meaning its own little pocket down there in the follicle in which specific stem cells give rise to those hairs for different durations of time, depending on the hair, where it is on your body, et cetera. For instance, the hairs on your head will undergo ongoing growth for 4-6 or even 8 years. Were you to not cut your hair, it would continue to grow. One single hair would continue to grow. I guess we could say all the hairs will continue to grow for up to 8 years. That is very different from, for instance, your eyebrows, which have a much shorter period of hair growth lasting on the order of months. That's why you don't see people with eyebrows that extend down to their waist. But you can see people with hair on their head that extends down to their waist if they don't cut it. Now, that discrepancy illustrates for us just how incredible hair follicles and the stem cells that reside within hairs are and their enormous potential to give rise to these things that we call hairs, which are simply proteins of varying length. Today, we are going to address what determines the length of a hair or rather what determines how long a hair continues to grow before it ceases growing and eventually falls out. We're going to talk about what regulates those stem cells, what allows them to continue to produce hair or cease producing hair. As we do that, you will learn all the biology in clear, simple terms, regardless of your background, that will really set the stage for understanding what we'll also talk about, which is how to slow hair loss or halt hair loss entirely or even reverse hair loss. We will talk about hormone -related hair loss in both men and women. We will talk about some of the mechanical and stress -related influences on hair loss. We will talk about the chemical and mechanical approaches to halting and reversing hair loss, everything from minoxidil to dutasteride to ketoconazole to microneedling to thyroid, estrogen, IGF-1 pathways. Again, all made very clear regardless of whether or not you have a background in biology or not. I will also dispel some of the common myths about balding and hair replacement. If you've heard, for instance, that you inherit your patterns of balding from your mother's father, that is not true. Although it is true that you do inherit certain genes that influence whether or not you have a predisposition to balding in particular parts of your head, and believe it or not, even in particular parts of your body. But it is not the case that you can simply find a photo of your mother's father, say, age 50, or age 60 or 75, and determine whether or not you'll have the exact same pattern of hair loss. That's a myth that I'd like to dispel right here and now. I will dispel some of the other myths about hair loss, hair replacement, and hair regrowth as well. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are the absolute highest quality. I've talked many times before on this podcast about the fact that sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. Helix understands that everybody's sleep needs are slightly different. If you go to their website, you can take a brief quiz, and that quiz will ask you questions such as, do you sleep on your back, your side, or your stomach? Maybe you don't know which is fine. You can simply answer, I don't know. Or do you tend to run hot or cold during the night? Helix takes those answers and then matches you to a mattress that's ideal for your sleep needs. For me, it matched me to the dusk, D-U-S-K mattress. I've been sleeping on a dusk mattress for over 2 years now, and my sleep has been better than it ever was previously. If you're interested in upgrading your mattress, go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their brief 2-minute sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress for you. You'll also get up to $350 off any mattress order and two free pillows. They have a 10-year warranty , and you get to try out their mattress for 100 nights risk-free. They'll even pick it up for you if you don't love the mattress. But I think you will. I certainly love mine. Again, if you're interested, go to helixsleep.com /huberman for up to $350 off and two free pillows. Today's episode is also brought to us by HVMN ketone-IQ. Ketone-IQ is a ketone supplement that increases blood ketones. I want to be very clear that I, like most people have heard of the ketogenic diet, but I, like most people, do not follow a ketogenic diet. That is, I'm not in ketosis. However, most people don't realize that you can still benefit from increasing your blood ketones, which is what HVMN ketone-IQ does. I take Ketone-IQ prior to doing really focused cognitive work, so I take it once in the afternoon, any time I'm going to prepare for a podcast, or do a podcast, or if I'm going to do some research, or focus on a grant, anything that requires a high level of cognitive demand. That's because ketones are the brain's preferred use of fuel, even if you're not following a ketogenic diet. I sometimes also use Ketone-IQ prior to workouts, either resistance training workouts or endurance workouts such as running. Again, that's because Ketone-IQ by raising blood ketones is really a brain fuel. If you're interested in trying Ketone-IQ, go to hvmn.com and use the code Huberman to get 20% off. Again, that's hvmn.com, and use the code HUBERMAN to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that were designed with the biology of the visual system in mind. I've spent a lifetime working on the biology of the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges for you to be able to see clearly throughout the day. For instance, when you go from a shady area to a well-lit area, your brain and eyes have to make a bunch of different adjustments that eyeglasses of the conventional type don't always compensate for. ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses compensate for those sorts of changes and all the sorts of changes that your visual system has to contend with, so you always see things with crystal clarity. The company was founded by two all-America swimmers from Stanford, and initially, their eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed for sports performance. Indeed, all of their eyeglasses and sunglasses can be used while running, while cycling. They won't slip off your face if you get sweaty. They're extremely lightweight. But they also have an enormous number of varieties of eyeglasses and sunglasses that are designed to be worn at work or to dinner. They have the classic performance eyeglasses where makes you look like a cyborg, if you like those. They also have more conventional esthetics that you'd be comfortable wearing pretty much anywhere. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses or sunglasses, you can go to roka.com, that's roka.com, enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's roka.com, enter the code Huberman at checkout. Okay, let's talk about hair. In researching this episode by talking to experts in the biology of hair, and the stem cells that exist in all of us that give rise to our hair growth, and the pigmentation in our hair, and in talking to experts who understand how to halt and even reverse hair loss, that there is a tremendously interesting biology surrounding hair. But there's also an incredible psychology around hair. In fact, most people who experience even marginal hair loss undergo pretty severe anxiety. Now, I confess this is not something I can relate to. I am losing my hair in certain places. I'm 47 years old. I've got a couple of patches up front where there's very minimal hair. I think that, as we'll later learn in this episode, reflects a higher density of DHT, dihydrotestosterone, receptors at that particular location as opposed to elsewhere in my scalp. But keeping my hair is not something that I've fretted about much of my life. Yet as I was researching this episode, I remembered an anecdote from my childhood where my father told me, and I think it was because I was stressing about something, I was trying to get to sleep, and he said, "Don't stress . Calm down." And here's why. If you stress too much, it can actually make your hair fall out. In fact, I have a cousin who lay down one night stressed, and woke up the next morning , and all of his hair was on his pillow. I'll never forget that story. I think he was trying to get me to stress less. I don't know if that story made me stress less or not. But in any event, I don't know that that story is true. I'm not going to challenge the authenticity of that story. I didn't have a chance to reach out to my father and ask him to verify or not. But as we will soon learn, it is true that our psychological well-being can impact both the coloration ,, or lack thereof and the growth rates of our hair. That's a real thing. The reverse is also true, which is that as hair starts to thin, or fall out, or change color, many people expect intense anxiety or even depression. This was not something I was really aware of. Perhaps that's just because I've always kept my hair pretty short anyway. I always assumed that if my hair started to really fall out, I would just shaved my head. But that's me, and that's not most people out there. I think most people would loathe to lose their hair. In fact, given the enormous number, probably up in the high billions of dollars and euros and other currency, of course, that people invest in trying to halt or reverse their hair loss, it's clear that hair is very important to people. What we know is that by age 50, approximately 50% of all men and women will have experienced significant enough hair loss that they start to notice it. And a large percentage, up to 85% of those people will experience some anxiety that leads them to go out and try and either halt or reverse that hair loss. Now, why at age 50? Well, an important point arises from that, which is that the hair loss is not occurring between the 49th and 50th birthday. Hair loss is ongoing from about age 30 to age 50. It's only by age 50, however, that about 50% of people out there start to notice that hair loss. This is typically because they'll be in a bathroom or looking in a mirror and the lighting will be bright enough that it permeates the outer boundary of their hair. They'll notice that their hair is thinning in a particular location. That's usually how this thing happens. Again, our psychological states can impact our patterns of hair growth or loss and of course, patterns of hair growth, but more typically, hair loss and hair graying can really impact psychological states. This is a subject that people take intense interest in. Today, we're going to talk about how hair normally grows, why it grows at the rate , and for the duration that it happens to. Then as we talk about ways to intervene with that hair loss, those biological mechanisms will come up because they really provide a nice framework for explaining why certain treatments work more or less well or why certain treatments might have certain side effects or total lack of side effects. It will also highlight a really key theme that will come up several times in today's podcast, which is that there are both mechanical and chemical approaches to slowing and reversing hair loss. Mechanical approaches would be things as simple as massaging the scalp, but mechanical changes to the scalp can cause either hair loss or facilitate hair growth. This is why things like microneedling are so prominent in the context of trying to reverse hair loss. But again, there are also chemical approaches to trying to halt or reverse hair loss. This relates to the fact that the hair growth itself is strongly regulated by hormones such as estrogen, thyroid hormone, insulin-like growth factor, and that other hormones, in particular the androgens, so things like testosterone, but mainly it's derivatives like dihydrotestosterone are very much involved in setting the stage for hair growth by controlling how big or small that pool of stem cells that gives rise to hair growth is. If any of the terms I just use are confusing to you, don't worry, I will make all of those very clear in a moment. It's actually all pretty straightforward and simple. I'd like to just start by talking about what hair is, how it grows, why it stops growing, and why hair normally falls out. Let's talk about the biology of hair. In doing so, I also want to talk about stem cells. Now, keep in mind that when you hear the word stem cells, you probably, like most people, think about the sorts of cells that people are getting injected into their face to get rid of wrinkles, or give them new skin, or to give them more hair if it's injected in the scalp, or into a joint to repair a joint or a muscle. Those stem cells are what we call exogenous stem cells. Exogenous, meaning from outside the body. The stem cells that we're going to talk about today are so-called endogenous stem cell, cells that we all make that can give rise to other cells. That's really the definition of a stem cell. Stem cells are present in all of us from the very beginning of life. When sperm meets egg, that cell, which we think of as the egg, starts to duplicate, it incorporates the DNA from the sperm and the egg, of course, starts to duplicate, and then those cells give rise to more cells and more cells and the ability of all those cells to replicate and create more cells are because those cells really are stem cells. Now, at some point we are a completed body plan, as the biologists say. We end up with a brain, and a spinal cord, and limbs, and fingers, and livers, and guts, and all the things that we need in order to be a functioning human being. Even though we're a baby at that time, we haven't grown up, we have all the bits that we're going to have for our entire life. At that point, many of the stem cell populations disappear. For instance, past puberty, and probably earlier, you don't get many more new brain cells. You get a few, but you don't get many more new brain cells because the brain doesn't have many stem cell populations, whereas other organs in your body maintain little pockets of stem cells, or in some cases, many stem cells that can give rise to more and more of that tissue across the lifespan. Hair is one such tissue. If we take a look at hair, what we find is that, indeed, there are these things that we call hairs, but there are also stem cells, and those stem cells are actually what give rise to the hairs that we see on the head of our scalp or that we see on the surface of our body. Right off the bat, you should know that every single hair that you have is there because you have a stem cell population that is giving rise to that particular hair. Let's take a step back, or rather, I should say, let's zoom in on one hair and the stem cell population that gives rise to that hair, because in doing so, you're going to learn all the different components that you can tap into if your goal is to halt the loss of hairs or to replace hairs that have already been lost. If we were to just zoom in at the level of one hair, what you would find is that that hair has what typically is called a hair root, so that's the portion below the skin. When we say below the skin, it means that it dives down into a narrow trench, which is in the so-called epidermis, which is this outer layer of skin. It also has a shaft. The shaft is the part that grows out above the skin. What you see on somebody's head or you see on their arm, or when you see an eyebrow, you're seeing the shaft of the hair. The root, of course, goes below the skin. What most people don't realize, however, is that down at the base of the root, there's actually a little cave, a little pocket. If you were to look at this, it would look like a little bulb, a little round area with a bunch of stuff in it right below the root. Within that little cave, there are stem cells. There are populations of cells that have the ability to divide. We call this mitosis. It's a process by which cells can actually divide, and take DNA with them, and then give rise to other cells. We call those cells that divide and move out, we call those daughter cells. We call the cells that give rise to them progenitor cells, but they are effectively stem cells that give rise to these what we call daughter cells. Those daughter cells then become the various types of cells that make up the hair. When you see a hair, you're not seeing something that grows throughout the lifespan. You're seeing something that's going to be born down there in that little cave, then is going to grow. It's actually going to stack up on top of itself. That's because hairs are made up of a protein called keratin. There are a bunch of different kinds of keratin depending on what kind of hair you're looking at. But these are little proteins that stack up on top of one another, and they're structured in a way that makes them pretty darn durable. I mean, it's possible, of course, to pull a hair out. But if you've ever tried to tear a hair, in particular, thick hair like one from the face or even one off the top of your head, it's actually a pretty tensile strong little thing. That's because keratins stack up on top of one another and bind to one another with a really strong bond. What you end up with is a bunch of proteins stacked up on top of one another, and that's the actual hair. We've got the hair shaft, the hair root, and then we've got the stem cells down there in that pocket that give rise to the various cells that make up the actual hair. We also have down there in that little cave, which, by the way, is actually called the hair bulb, if you really want to know the technical name because it's shaped like a bulb. We have not just stem cells, but we have cells that give rise to the pigment of the hair that create what's called melanin. Now, some people have very blond hair, very light hair, some people have darker hair. But everybody, unless they have what's called the albino mutation, where the hairs are truly white, they lack all melanin, and it's a pretty rare condition, although it does happen, most people have some degree of melanin in their hairs because there are little pockets of melanin-producing cells. Melanin is just a protein that essentially gets injected into the keratin, into the hair, and gives it its darker color. Now, there are a couple other components about the hair that you need to know about, especially if you're interested in reversing hair loss or reversing graying of hair. One of those components is a little gland. Next to every hair root within the dermal layer of the skin, so this is below the epidermis, there is a gland called the sebaceous gland, and the sebaceous gland makes oily stuff, and the oily stuff is called sebum. I know the name evokes something gross, but sebum is actually really cool and really important. The sebum gets injected, or seeps rather, into the area right around the hair as the hair starts to approach the surface where it goes from essentially root to shaft. The sebum does two things. First of all, it forms a little bit of a seal right at the place where the hair exits the skin. And that seal is very important, actually, for waterproofing of your skin. So we don't often think of ourselves as waterproof because we are so accustomed to water just landing on our skin and and rolling off. But that's because of some of the oily properties of our skin. Now, it's also true that our skin is pretty densely packed with cells. But in the absence of sebum, we would not be as waterproof as we are. Now as I mentioned, sebum has two important properties. The other important property of sebum is that it actually is a strong antibacterial and antimicrobial. Most people don't realize this, the oils of your skin provide a lot of immune boundary, so that things don't get into the hair root or the region around it and infect our skin. So sebum, while the name is sort of unattractive, to be honest, is actually performing some essential roles both for waterproofing and for our immune system function, protecting us from various kinds of infection. We're going to return to sebum later. As it turns out, sebum is also very important as it relates to psoriasis and as it relates to some of the fungal components that can cause hair loss. So I'm just going to file that away. There's another important component of the region around hairs, which is the arrector pili muscle. The arrector pili muscle is a muscle that lies diagonally between that bulb portion of the hair or a little bit above it, and goes up to the surface of the skin. The arrector pili muscle is a muscle that contracts when we get cold or when we get scared. So if you've ever had goosebumps, that's because the arrector pili muscle contracts pulling the skin at the surface down around the little hair follicles, or at least where the hairs meet the surface of the skin. And so those little bumps are actually where little micro hairs reside. And the dimples between them are the dimples that occur when this arrector pili muscle pulls down. Now, why would this muscle exist? It has a couple of important functions. One of the functions is that when it pulls down, it causes, as the name suggests, the hairs to stand up. Maybe not perfectly vertical, but when you hear, oh, I was so frightened, my hair stood up on end. And that's because the hair has become erect. They stand up. Now, why would this happen when we get cold? It happens because when the hairs stand up, air can be trapped between those hairs and can actually warm our body. This is not so much the case if you have very light hair on your skin. If you're a very hairy person, this is going to be a more robust aspect of your physiology. And yes, this is why dogs like Huskies can go out in the snow and still remain warm. When they get cold, their hairs actually stand up a bit on end because of the contraction of these arrector pili muscle trapping air in there. And then their body warms the hair trapped beneath the hair. And it's like they've got a blanket on made by the interface between the hair, the air, and their skin. So just to recap all the components of hair and the different things around it that are going to be relevant for understanding how to replace hair that's lost. We have the hair itself, which has the shaft that sticks out over the skin, goes a little bit into the skin, but basically sticks out over the skin. We have the root portion which goes down into the skin. It goes through the epidermis and into the dermis. Then we have this bulb like region down at the bottom. Down at the bottom of that bulb, we have stem cells that actually give rise to the actual hair, and we have pigmented cells that pigment that hair. In addition, and this is very important, there are capillaries that go into that bulb region down at the bottom of the hair and that can serve and support the stem cells, the melanin producing cells, which are called melanocytes. So the melanin producing cells in the stem cells get a lot of blood flow that allows them to keep providing new hair or the proteins that make up hair and the pigment that goes into those hairs and those little capillaries deliver not just nutrients and things of that sort, but they also deliver oxygen because it turns out that the whole process of growing more hair is a very active process. Now, as soon as you hear oxygen and you hear that the growth is an active process, that should cue you to why so many of the stories around how to keep your hair and regrow hair involve statements like don't wear a hat, it'll make your hair fall out. Or if you want your hair to grow back, don't wear hats or massage your scalp or increase blood flow. Or why some people will suggest that people take peppermint oil, for instance, or menthol type oils of different kinds and massage them into the scalp. Things that make the scalp tingle. Or there will be light therapies designed to what? To increase blood flow to the scalp. The whole rationale there is that you're trying to increase blood flow to the stem cell and the melanocytes populations that support the hairs and that actually create the hairs. Now, whether or not those are approaches work we'll touch on a little bit later. I'll just give you a little bit of a hint right now, which is that while no single one of those approaches that I described is known to regrow hair in a very robust way because of the requirement for oxygen and nutrients and because it's such an active process for the stem cells and melanocytes to grow and darken the hairs that grow out of your skin. It is true that manipulations or treatments that increase blood flow to those regions can at least slow the loss of hair or can even extend the duration over which hairs continue to grow. So if you've heard things like don't wear a hat, if you want to maintain your hair. Or massage your scalp, if you want your hair to grow faster. In some sense that's true, but none of those manipulations on their own is going to robustly enhance the rate of of your hair growth. Those things are designed to be done in conjunction with some other treatments that have been shown in many, many clinical studies to increase the rate and duration of hair growth. So now you have in mind a picture of what's happening at the level of individual hairs. And if you're anything like me, you're probably thinking, Wow, there's a lot going on down there just below the surface of the skin. And indeed there is. But really the things to think about are that stem cell population that actually give rise to the hair proteins so that actually create the hair. The melanocytes that darken that hair, that give it pigment. That sebaceous gland and the oil sebum that provides some important antimicrobial and other properties to that general region. And that arrector pili muscle, that arrector pili muscle, as I mentioned earlier, is important for creating goosebumps and it's important for keeping Huskies warm in cold environments. But it's doing some other really important things as well, and we'll talk about those as time goes on in this episode. Right now, what I want to do is just talk for a moment about how hairs actually grow and why they grow the way they do. This is extremely important toward understanding hair replacement and slowing hair loss. There are three basic phases of growth of a hair. The first phase is the phase in which the stem cells down in that bulb give rise to the cells that make up the proteins of the hair, so the actual growth of the hair. And keep in mind that the hair is actually growing from the bottom up. Now, you might think, of course, it's growing from the bottom. Everyone knows that. But a lot of people think that the hair starts growing right at the surface of the skin. That's not the way it works. The hair is actually growing from deep within the root and stacking up and then eventually extends out across the top of the skin. That growth phase is called the anagen phase. A-N-A-G-E-N. And this for some people will ring a bell because if you've ever been interested in weightlifting or even if you're an endurance runner, you'll hear about things that are anabolic that promote growth, so Anna of Growth. Or catabolic that promote breakdown. So the first phase of hair growth is called the anagen phase, and it's a period of varying duration depending on which hair in the body we're talking about. So the anagen or the growth phase for hairs on the head, as I mentioned earlier, is anywhere from 2 to 8 years. For most people, it's going to be about six years. What this means is that if we were to just not cut our hair, just let our hair grow for 2 to 8 years, that hair would eventually grow to a length that it was at its maximum and then would stop growing. So we can say that the anagen phase of hairs on the scalp is 2 to 8 years. The the duration of the growth phase. Contrast that, for instance, with the duration of the anagen phase for hairs of the eyebrows. The hairs of the eyebrows grow about 4.2mm per month. Believe it or not, people have measured this thing. Now that's an average. So some people are going to have eyebrows that grow much longer per month. I'm somebody who, for instance, has mostly the same length eyebrow hairs, but every once in a while I get one of those eyebrow hairs that really seems to be heading off my head, like really wants out of there. And so it's much longer than the rest. What does that mean? Does it mean that it grew faster? Maybe. But chances are the stem cell population in that particular eyebrow follicle for that one eyebrow hair is longer than it is for the others. This is really important. I'm trying to illustrate two principles at once here. The first principle is that different hairs on your body, including the hairs on your scalp, have a growth phase of different duration. This is why the hairs on your head can grow very, very long because they have a very long anagen or growth phase, and the hairs on your eyebrows will only grow for a few months before they actually fall out and then have to undergo replication of the stem cells to give you new eyebrow hair to then grow. What's important here is not just that there are differences in the duration of the growth phase, but rather that the rate of hair growth is not something that tends to differ within a given body region. You'll hear people say, "Oh, my hair grows really, really fast." Other people will say, "Oh, my hair grows really, really slowly.' That is probably not the case. Well, there could be slight differences in the rate of growth. That is the addition of more keratin to the actual hairs, so creation of more hair more quickly. Almost certainly what's happening is that the duration of the anagen phase in some people is just much longer than it is in other people. We don't realize this, and we tend to think more in terms of how fast hair grows, because if you were to just look at somebody's hair, you'd say, "Oh, they're all more or less the same length." I mean, some people's bangs are shorter than the back because they cut them. But if they were to just grow their hair, you'd say, "Oh, it's all more or less the same length." But if we were to zoom in with a microscope, we would see that there are a lot of hairs down there in between the other hairs that are very, very short or even tiny, tiny, tiny. Those are coming in as the other ones are finishing their anagen phase. That's the anagen or growth phase. After the anagen phase comes the catagen phase. Again, this resembles the word catabolic or the breakdown phase. During the catagen phase, the hair is actually receding not from the top down to the skin surface and then into the root, but the other way. It's actually receding from that bulb region up toward the surface. That catagen phase is going to also be of different duration depending on which area of the body you're in. It will vary a little bit depending on who you are, meaning from person to person. We'll talk about the influences on the anagen and catagen phase in a moment. Why is it important that it actually recedes from the inside out? Well, that's important because as it does that, there's actually a change in that bulb region down below, because normally, there's an interface, there's a conversation that's occurring between the stem cell population, the melanocytes, and the hair itself, and they support each other. Remember, there's blood vessels going into that area or rather capillaries that are feeding that area as well. After the catagen phase comes the telogen phase, which means rest. The telogen phase is a period in which no new hair proteins are being added by those stem cells. During that telogen phase, that bulb down there at the bottom, instead of being nice and oval and really having a lot of space in it with all these different things like stem cells, starts to pinch off from the little tube that comes down from the surface of the skin that normally would have a hair in it. It starts to pinch off. At some point, many hair follicles pinch off that bulb region, and it recedes and dies. When it recedes and dies, the stem cell population and the melanocytes go with it. In other words, there is no longer a population of stem cells to give rise to more hair after that telogen phase. There's no longer melanocytes to pigment the hair, and in fact, the hair isn't there anymore, so there's no hair even to pigment, after that telogen phase, unless it's a hair of a particular type such as the hair on your scalp, which can then reenter the cell cycle, and get back into an anagen phase and regrow more hair from stem cells. There are three critical stages of the life cycle of a hair that are relevant to today's conversation. There's the anagen phase during which the hair grows, there's the catagen phase during which the hair actually starts to recede and die. The protein is actually disappearing from the bottom up. Then we have the telogen phase, which is the phase in which the stem cell population is what's called a semi quiescent, semiquiet, or completely quiescent, where it's not active at all. Those three phases make up the life cycle of a hair, keeping in mind that for some hairs, they can reenter the life cycle and go back into the anagen phase, if there's stem cells there, and if there is oxygen there, and if there is sufficient blood support, and—and this is a very important and— if there are the appropriate hormonal signals to support growth, and there is a reduction or an absence in the hormone signals that actually trigger that telogen phase. I make this point now because much of the rest of today's discussion is going to focus on why particular hormones such as dihydrotestosterone cause hair loss and why inhibiting things like dihydrotestosterone can support the preservation of hair that you have and the regrowth of hair. To make a long story very short, and then we'll get into some additional details that are relevant, and that I hope you'll stick around to listen to, dihydrotestosterone, which is a derivative of testosterone, causes changes in that bulb region where the stem cells reside. It shortens or halt the anagen phase of hair growth, and it extends and promotes the catagen and telogen phase. When we hear that, "Oh dihydrotestosterone makes your hair fall out, or estrogen makes your hair grow," there are real chemical people, or we should say biochemical legitimate reasons as to why that is. But it all comes back to this three phases of hair growth: the anagen growth phase, the catagen, catabolic or hair loss phase, and the telogen phase, which is a rest period in which the hairs can either come back, if it reenters the anagen phase or maybe it's over for good. Hormones are the accelerator and the brake on each one of those phases. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens, now called AG1, is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or usually twice a day is that it gets me the probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important. It's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health. Those probiotics and Athletic Greens are optimal and vital for macrobiotic health. In addition, Athletic Greens contains a number of adaptogens, vitamins, and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met, and it tastes great. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to AthleticGreens .com/ huberman, and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road in the car, on the plane, et cetera, and they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Now you have in mind the anatomy of the hair and the area from which it grows, and the stem cells, et cetera. The fact that there's capillary innervation delivering oxygen and blood flow to the stem cells that give rise to the hair, and that there are these three critical phases of hair growth: anagen, catagen, and telogen. Now, let's talk about the accelerators on hair growth and the brakes on hair growth. There are many accelerators on hair growth, but the first one that I really want to underscore is blood flow itself, which equates to the delivery of nutrients and oxygen. This is very important, and it explains a lot of the treatments for halting and reversing hair loss. For instance, one of the longest standing treatments for halting and reversing hair loss is so-called minoxidil. Minoxidil, sometimes also referred to by the brand name ROGAINE, was actually a drug that was developed to treat hypertension. This is a cardiac drug that lowers blood pressure, and it does that by causing vasodilation. It allows more blood flow, not just to the hairs on your scalp, but to hairs everywhere on your body. Indeed, most people don't realize this, but minoxidil won't just slow the loss of hair from your scalp, it is also effective at slowing the loss of hair elsewhere in your body. How does it do that? Well, you now know one of the major ways it does that. It does that by extending the anagen phase, so it basically makes that phase a bit longer, and does it make it much longer, which is why for most people who are losing their hair quickly or who have already lost their hair, minoxidil alone is not going to be a sufficient treatment. However, minoxidil has been shown to be effective at slowing rates of hair loss in people that are starting to experience some hair loss. I'll get into dosages and things of that sort a little bit later, but right now I just want to really focus on the logic of why people would take this drug, which is lowering hypertension at all as it relates to hair loss. That might seem like crazy until you understand the anatomy and the growth of hairs, which you now do. That's what minoxidil is doing. It's creating more blood flow to the hairs, which because minoxidil does have this positive effect, at least most people would like to slow their rates of hair loss on their scalp anyway, it tells you that blood flow and delivery of oxygen and other nutrients from the blood is pretty critical, if not very critical, for the support of the hair growth cycle itself. Now, again, we haven't talked at all about the sorts of chemicals or the signals within the body, such as hormones that actually direct the growth of hairs. Here, we're just talking about a mechanical change, allow more blood flow to the region, and thereby extend the anagen phase, which is exactly what happens with minoxidil. Now, minoxidil does have other effects, and this is why dosing of minoxidil becomes a little bit complicated and can be a little bit tricky to troubleshoot. It can greatly lower blood pressure or lower blood pressure just a little bit, depending on how sensitive somebody is to that particular drug. Oftentimes physicians will start people on Minoxidil dosages that are very low. Ideally, that would be the case and then ratchet it up in order to figure out where the minimal effective dose or the critical threshold is beyond which they start experiencing some pretty uncomfortable side effects, such as swelling of the ankles or headaches or dizziness. These things can happen with the use of Rogaine, aka Minoxidil. Now, Minoxidil has also been associated with increases in the hormone prolactin. Prolactin is a hormone that's released from the pituitary. It is a hormone that acts also as a bit of a neurotransmitter, like many hormones, and it tends to be antagonistic or an opposite to dopamine. Dopamine is a neurochemical. It's actually a neuromodulator, meaning it modulates the activity of a bunch of neural circuits in the brain. It also controls the release of various hormones in the body. Dopamine is almost always associated with states of motivation, pursuit, and drive. It has a little bit of a feel- good element to it, which is why a lot of people think dopamine is associated with reward and pleasure. But it's really about energy, motivation, and drive. Dopamine and prolactin are, as I mentioned before, antagonistic to one another. They're in sort of a push-pull. People who take Minoxidil, especially if they're very sensitive to it or they take dosages that are too high, will experience increases in prolactin that in turn can cause things like reductions in libido, reductions in overall feelings of well-being, apathy, and in some cases where the elevations in prolactin are more extreme, they can experience, for instance, increase in male breast tissue gynecomastia or even small bits of milk letdown, things of that sort. In women who take Minoxidil, the side effects are much like the ones in experienced in men. So there can be swelling, edema of the tissues because if you get too much vasodilation and too, too much lowering of blood pressure, that's not good. Headaches, dizziness and so on. Dosing of Minoxidil is really important. If somebody is going to use Minoxidil in order to try and slow or reverse hair loss, again, it mainly is going to be used to slow rates of hair loss, not to actually reverse hair loss. The really key thing is to get that dosage right. The ranges of Minoxidil that you'll see suggested and that people use out there are vast. I should also mention that there are two major routes by which people get Minoxidil to the hair follicle. One is to take it systemically as a pill where it goes into the general circulation. The other is to take it topically as a cream. There are prescription and non- prescription forms of Minoxidil just to further complicate things. But the ranges of oral Minoxidil that you'll see out there and that people take range anywhere from 0.25 milligrams all the way up to five milligrams per day. That's an enormous range. It's like a 20-fold range. The topical Minoxidil is also found in various concentrations. The typical concentration is going to be a 5% concentration that people will use once per day. Topical treatment with Minoxidil at 5% concentration is thought to just stay at the scalp, but we now know that it can go systemically, it can get into the general bloodstream. Why that is should make complete sense to you because when you put something on your scalp, I've already told you that these little pits, these little tubes that go down to those bulb regions below the skin that have direct access to the blood supply. When you massage something into your scalp, it not only has the opportunity to get into your general circulation, it often does, especially if it's something that's very water-soluble and that way can get into the capillaries and into the general bloodstream, although topical treatments of which we're going to discuss, a number of them today don't tend to get into the general circulation as robustly as taking something by way of pill or capsule. Minoxidil works by way of increasing blood flow to the stem cell niche below the hair. The dosage ranges of the oral Minoxidil are tremendous, 0.25 milligrams, all the way up to five milligrams once per day. The dosage range of the topical solutions tends to be a little bit more confined. Typically, it's a 5% solution and it's recommended that people use it one time daily, maybe twice daily. It's also important, by the way, if you're going to take this route, that you actually leave that solution on the scalp for 3-5 minutes. This is important and should make complete sense as to why it's important. You can't just rub the stuff into your head and then rinse it off and expect it to be absorbed. It actually needs to seep down into those hair follicles and access the niche. How do people arrive at the correct dosage for Minoxidil? Well, for better or for worse, really, in some cases, it's accomplished by finding out that you have an unwanted side effect, like dizziness or swelling of your ankles or edema or I would hope this wouldn't be the case, but something that suggests there's hyperprolactinemia. You could get a blood test to measure your prolactin or you perhaps notice a drop in libido or some lethargy. These sorts of things that are common to reduce levels of dopamine, increased levels of prolactin. I would hope that if people are working with a physician or if they're not in taking Minoxidil, that they would start with the lowest possible dose. For oral Minoxidil, that would be 0.25 milligrams and then increase it as needed rather than jumping in right at five milligrams because some of those side effects, in particular the fluid retention and the hyper prolactinemia can be pretty uncomfortable and can disrupt a lot of aspects of life that most all of us consider desirable. We're really focusing right now on treatments that relate to the critical requirement for hair stem cells to receive blood flow in order to receive oxygen and nutrients, to get the hair to grow. That's really what Minoxidil is about. It's also what all of those anecdotes you hear are all about, like massaging the scalp or putting red light on the scalp. Although red light might do some other things, in general, heating or lighting of the scalp or massaging of the scalp is really designed to increase blood flow to the scalp. Now, the reason Minoxidil works at all is because it is going to increase blood flow around the clock, and that's because people are taking it topically and it's seeping into the general circulation, or at least it stings somewhat restricted to the hair cell niche. Or they're taking it orally and it makes it to that hair cell niche below the follicle. When we massage our scalp, however, that's a transient thing, like I massage my scalp right now, I'm no doubt increasing blood flow to certain areas and probably decreasing blood flow to the areas I'm pushing down on. But it's all temporary. I don't know many people that can massage their scalp enough during the day or long enough during the day rather that it would sufficiently increase blood flow. With that said, it is clear that increasing blood flow to the scalp by way of reducing hypertension, which is effectively accomplished by broadening by expanding the blood vessels and capillaries, is an effective way to at least hold on to the hair that you have. Is it going to completely halt hair loss if you have a strong genetic bias towards hair loss? No. Is it going to reverse hair loss? Very unlikely that it will. But it can slow hair loss or even maintain the hair that you have. If we were to take a step back and ask ourselves what other sorts of drug treatments are out there besides Minoxidil, that increase blood flow and that might increase the rates of hair growth or more likely increase maintenance of hair that one already has by increasing blood flow to the niche. Nowadays, there are more and more doctors who are familiar with this requirement for blood flow. Understand the mechanisms by which Minoxidil works and understand the vast desire out there for people to hold on to the hair they have and regrow hair and they are prescribing things like low-dose tadalafil, so 2.5 milligram to five milligram tadalafil. Tadalafil was initially discovered as a drug to treat prostate health. It was a drug that we now know can increase blood flow to the prostate and thereby offset some of the issues associated with an aging prostate. Higher doses of tadalafil sometimes also referred to by its brand name, which is Cialis, are used to treat erectile dysfunction, but at the dosages that are used to increase blood flow to the prostate and that now a number of doctors are using to increase blood flow not just to the prostate but to all regions of the body, including the scalp, such as 2.5-5 milligram tadalafil. This is something that I think deserves attention because it falls under the umbrella of increasing blood flow to the hair stem cell niche in order to maintain hair. It is not something that most doctors are going to be familiar with as the way to reverse hair loss because it won't do that. But the use of low-dose tadalafil to slow rates of hair loss is very much in a logical mechanistic sense, exactly the same as the logic of using Minoxidil to slow rates of hair loss. It's all about increasing blood flow to support the stem cell niche below the hair follicle. The critical requirement for blood flow, oxygen and nutrients to the stem cell niche is also why you hear a lot nowadays about the use of PRP, platelet-rich plasma for trying to offset hair loss or even reverse hair loss. We're going to do an entire episode about PRP. It is pretty controversial in certain circles and well- accepted in other circles. A couple of key things to understand about PRP. First of all, it is being used in multiple tissues for different purposes in different clinics. For instance, board-certified physicians in the United States, Canada, and Europe are doing PRP injections into ovaries to try and expand the number of healthy follicles and eggs so that people can conceive later in life or even earlier in life if they don't have many follicles. People are getting PRP injections into their joints in order to try and support joint health. People are getting PRP injections into just about every tissue you can think of. However, PRP, despite what you may have heard, is not stem cells. Somebody tells you they're injecting stem cells, they're either outside the US, Canada, or Northern Europe, or they're injecting something else. So you want to really look into that. The safety issues there are subject totally deserving of an entire episode. I'm not necessarily opposed to the future of stem cells as a treatment, but keep in mind that stem cells are cells that can give rise to lots of other cell types, and they are cells that divide and replicate. There's a name for that when it happens in the adult body when you don't want that. That's called cancer. Tumors are over-production of cells from stem cells when those stem cells ordinarily should be quiescent. Keep in mind the difference between stem cells and PRP. PRP, platelet-rich plasma, again, is legal in the US and many other places because it involves drawing somebody's blood, spinning it down at a particular speed, which separates out different components within the blood. Then taking the platelets and re- injecting those in a solution back into the person's body. Platelet-rich plasma or PRP is platelet enriched plasma from that person. But the basis of PRP is really to encourage nutrient delivery to a particular region in the body using somebody's own platelets, because those platelets are enriched for various nutrients. People are getting PRP injections into their scalp. Those are not stem cell injections. Those are PRP injections into the scalp with some moderate success. These are very expensive treatments. They tend to be transiently successful. I'm sure there are people out there who are going to say, "PRP worked fabulously well for me." That might be the case. I'm not going to dispute that. And I'm happy for you. Although there are not sufficient clinical data to suggest PRP as a treatment right now, especially given the cost, many thousands of dollars, many, many treatments. It's also the case that the PRP injections, when they work, might work for reasons independent of the platelets. What do I mean by that? Well, soon, we're going to talk about a different type of treatment, which is a mechanical manipulation of the hair follicle, typically, on the scalp, because that's typically where people want to regrow hair. I don't know many people who are trying to maintain or accelerate or regrow their back hair, for instance. They might be out there, but I don't think there are a lot of them or their leg hair, for that matter. Almost always, it's going to be scalp hair. And one way that people are doing that is through mechanical stimulation of the hair follicle and the stem cell niche using what's called micro-needling. Micro-needling, as the name suggests, is taking a bunch of little needles either in a little stamp. A little square or nowadays, typically, it's a roller. It looks like a paint roller, except it's got tons of little needles in rows all over that roller. Those needles range in length from half a millimeter to 2.5 millimeters. Millimeters and one rolls that over the scalp. If you're thinking, ouch, that probably hurts. Indeed, it can hurt a little bit or a lot, depending on the thickness and the length of those needles. Micro-needling has been shown to do two things. It has been shown to reactivate semi- quiescent populations of stem cells that are in that telogen phase, putting them back in antigen phase and thereby stimulate more hair growth. It has also, and this is I think, the best use of micro-needling. It has also been shown to be a very effective augment for some of the hormone- based hair regrowth tools and pharmacology that we're going to talk about in a few minutes. Micro-needling and PRP have something very critical in common, which is the needle, the actual injection into the skin. For those of you that are hearing this and thinking, why would disrupting the skin with needles actually, support hair growth or regrowth, wouldn't that just damage the follicle? Well, this gets into some of the, I think, interesting, if not fascinating aspects of our biology, which is that all of the cells in our body really can respond to both chemical and mechanical cues. When we hear needle injected into skin, we think, oh, that must just be damaging everything, causing all sorts of inflammation. But it turns out that low levels of inflammation caused by things like micro-needling or PRP injections or even the introduction of any kind of fluid. For instance, saline fluid injected into a region can cause changes in the cells in that region, causing, for instance, stem cell populations that were waning to reactivate again, causing telogen phase follicles that have melanocytes and stem cells that are dying off but not completely gone to reenter the cell cycle. Micro-needling procedures, PRP injections, things like Minoxidil, they all kind of center around this same general theme of increasing blood flow, increasing oxygen, delivery of nutrients, or in the case of micro-needling, increasing inflammation just enough at that local site that certain cascades of biological function that relate to proliferation of stem cells or maintenance of stem cell populations are kicked off. It's sort of like reminding the cells in that area that they need to stay alive in order to replenish whatever is lost. Sometimes a wound can actually induce some healing. Although I do want to point out that the micro part of micro-needling is absolutely key and this should be obvious to you when you think about scars. I don't know about you, but I've never seen a scar with hair growing out of it, or if there was, it was probably like one hair. But if you've ever seen a scar, someone had their appendix out or if someone had a brain surgery, you see that scar because there is no hair growing out of it. So the micro portion of micro-needling is extremely important. We are not talking about causing significant damage to a tissue in order to activate that stem cell population. We're talking about causing microdamage and micro levels of inflammation to stimulate growth. For those of you that are interested in using micro-needling or micro-needling in combination with chemical treatments like Minoxidil or some of the other treatments we'll talk about in a little bit. Like finasteride and caffeine. Yes, believe it or not, caffeine is being used to regrow hair. Very interesting. Get into that in a moment. But if you're interested in using m icro-needling alone or in combination with some of these other treatments, there's a wonderful review that was just published this last year. Wonderful, because it's very comprehensive. Not so wonderful. Not to the fault of the authors because most of the studies out there on micro-needling are not superb. There are ways of gauging the strength of a study mainly relate to their duration, whether or not they were control groups et cetera. But the review itself is excellent and the title of the review is M icro-needling and its Use in Hair Loss Disorders: A Systematic Review. We will provide a link to this in the show note captions and this review did a very good job of highlighting both the strengths and drawbacks of the various studies looking at micro-needling. It also explored the use of micro-needling in both men and women and of various ages, and it does appear to be the case that micro-needling shows some positive benefit in both men and women, regardless of age, especially when used in combination with the various other treatments that we're talking about. I was also able to glean from this review and some of the papers described within it that needle lengths of about one millimeter to 2.5 millimeters seem to be more effective than shorter needle lengths. So if you're scared of the needles and the needle lengths, keep in mind that done properly, micro-needling shouldn't be too painful. Some people experience a little bit more pain than others, but it's not considered a very painful procedure. It is, however, a procedure that can cause some bleeding of the scalp, and that bleeding of the scalp can be very apparent, especially if it's in the front of the head as opposed to in the top of the head and hidden by some hair or if you're already quite bald in a given region. Keep that in mind. I suppose one could wear a hat or a wig or something of that sort if they were really self-conscious about it. But the micro-needling itself is causing a physical disruption to the scalp, some degree of bleeding, inflammation. And again, all of that is part of the process by which micro-needling can actually improve hair growth. Of course, there's healing that occurs of the bleeding and the damage to the follicle. This is a transient thing, but understanding the cosmetic implications in the short term as well as in the long-term is certainly worth knowing. One thing that's very clear is that the combination of micro-needling and Minoxidil treatment together is far more effective than either of those treatments alone. In addition, the combination of micro-needling and Minoxidil has been shown to be effective in recovering what are called dead zones. These are regions of the scalp that are either completely bald or mostly bald, for which there is essentially no stem cell population there. The combination of Minoxidil plus micro-needling is somehow able to recover those stem cell populations and allow new hair to grow, although the growth of that hair in those dead zone regions can take a very long time, 30 to even 50 weeks. Neither Minoxidil treatment alone nor micro-needling alone has been shown to be effective in recovering these so-called dead zones when those treatments are done separately. This, I would say, is a strong reason to consider combining micro-needling and Minoxidil as opposed to just doing Minoxidil or just micro-needling. I should also mention that Minoxidil treatment, if you pursue it, is likely something that you are going to have to do for the rest of your life. If you want to hold on to the hair growth that you obtain with Minoxidil or if you want to maintain the hair that you are already maintaining with Minoxidil. Some people have been successful in taking Minoxidil, maintaining some hair growth or even stimulating some hair growth and then coming off Minoxidil. But most everyone who goes on Minoxidil has to stay on Minoxidil because when they cease taking Minoxidil, even if they're doing other treatments, they lose the hair that they gained with Minoxidil, so that is an important consideration. The decision to go on Minoxidil is likely a decision to be on Minoxidil for the rest of your life. I'd like to just take a brief break and thank one of our sponsors, which is LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means plenty of salt, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, the so-called electrolytes, and no sugar. Salt, magnesium, and potassium are critical to the function of all the cells in your body, in particular to the function of your nerve cells, also called neurons. We now know that even slight reductions in electrolyte concentrations or dehydration of the body can lead to deficits in cognitive and physical performance. LMNT contains a science-backed electrolyte ratio of 1,000 milligrams, that's one gram, of sodium, 200 milligrams of potassium, and 60 milligrams of magnesium. I typically drink LMNT first thing in the morning when I wake up in order to hydrate my body and make sure I have enough electrolytes, and while I do any kind of physical training and after physical training as well, especially if I have been sweating a lot, and certainly I drink LMNT in my water when I'm in the sauna and after going in the sauna because that causes quite a lot of sweating. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt, that's drinklmnt.com/huberman. To claim a free element sample pack with your purchase. Again, that's drinklmnt , drinklmnt.com/huberman. So, as you're probably starting to realize, there's a relationship between mechanical stimulation of the follicle and blood flow, both of which turn out to be critical for maintaining hair and for stimulating hair growth. Not surprisingly then, an increasingly c ommon treatment for hair loss is Botox. Botox is the brand name for what is otherwise known as botulinum neurotoxin. What is botulinum neurotoxin? Botulinum neurotoxin, sometimes just called botulinum for short, is a toxin that's a bacterial toxin that serves to cut the protein that leads to synaptic vesicle release. What in the world did I just say? Well, when your nerve cells communicate with one another, they do that by way of electricity, but the electricity within those nerve cells, those neurons, triggers the release of chemicals from neurons into the synapse, the little gap between neurons. The release of those chemicals allows the next neuron to be chemically active, or in some cases, it will suppress the electrical activity of that next neuron. Botulinum neurotoxin serves to cut a protein present in neurons so that neurons cannot release the chemicals that cause other neurons to be active. This actually is pretty serious. If you were to get botulinum neurotoxin injected into your muscle you would be paralyzed because the nerves that control contraction of the muscles would not be able to control the release of that chemical onto the muscle, which makes it contract. Botulinum neurotoxin is commonly used in what's called Botox. Botox is something most people are familiar with because people get it injected in and around their wrinkles because many wrinkles are triggered by not just loss of tensile strength in the skin, but rather, the nerves around the skin and in the skin are hyper contracted, which causes wrinkles. For instance, I have crow's feet. I like to think that's because I've laughed a lot and smiled a lot, and it's probably also because I've squinted a lot in my lifetime. I have crow's feet because the nerves there have pinched the skin on either side of my eyes and that's given me little creases there that are sometimes referred to as crow's feet. Botox injections can be applied to the scalp in order to relieve tension of the scalp. In hearing that, it should be obvious why Botox is being used to try and offset hair loss. It's decreasing the squinting, if you will, or the tensile nature of the scalp skin so that more blood flow can arrive at that stem cell follicle area. Botox treatment to the scalp is actually becoming pretty common. There are a couple requirements with this Botox treatment. First of all, it has to be done by somebody who's really skilled. There are numerous images online and websites online of so-called Botox fails, where people have gotten too much Botox or the injections have been done too deep or not at the correct locations on people's face or scalp, and it can give them droopy scalp or droopy eyes. All sorts of cosmetic nightmares can occur with Botox. The second thing to understand is that Botox does eventually wear off. That botulinum neurotoxin doesn't stick around forever. Provided it's done correctly at the correct dosages, it doesn't actually kill the neurons that cause that tension of the skin, so Botox injections have to be done repeatedly. The efficacy of Botox for offsetting hair loss is not clear. There aren't a lot of large- scale clinical studies on this just yet, but it does seem to be at least one reasonably safe alternative to things like Minoxidil, although I think if one were to just want to increase blood flow to the scalp, things like low- dose Tadalafil, which doesn't seem to carry any of the side effects that Minoxidil can carry, we talked about those side effects earlier, that would probably be the better alternative. Botox is a fairly invasive procedure, but some people opt for Botox treatment. In fact, there is a syndrome called cutis verticis gyrata. Some of you have probably seen this. It's more typical in men, although it does occur in women. It literally means a lumping of the skin on the scalp, or gyri of the scalp. Gyri or gyrus pertains to the Latin word knee, so it means bump or knee. Any time you hear the word gyrus in neuroscience or in biology, you're talking about a bump. You'll sometimes see people will have ridges in the back where it looks as if the skin was pushed together, kind of like a Shar-Pei dog, but on the scalp. People with cutis verticis gyrata almost always experience pattern hair loss. Now, part of the reason for that is cutis verticis gyrata is also associated with some androgen or testosterone- related hormone issues that we'll talk about in a little bit. But in addition to that, it has been shown that relieving some of those gyrata by injections of Botox to allow those folds to sit flatter, A, is effective. It can lead to less of those gyri, those bumps, and can improve hair growth in those regions, even if those people don't take on any additional treatments to address the hormone issues. That's really how people arrived at this understanding that Botox might be a good treatment in general for reducing the squinting of the scalp that can occur and the resulting hair loss in those regions. I'd now like to turn our attention to the chemical variables that control the duration of the growth phase of hair, the duration of that catagen phase, which is when that hair essentially recedes from the inside out, and the quiescent or semi- quiescent telogen phase. There are a couple of key chemical players here that we should all be aware of. First of all, the growth factor IGF-1, insulin growth factor 1, which is produced by the liver, but that receives stimulation from the brain and pituitary to be released, is a strong regulator of hair growth. We can think of it as the accelerator on hair growth. It does that by extending that anagen, or growth phase, for longer. It doesn't necessarily speed up growth, but it extends it for a longer period of time. In addition, cyclic AMP, which is part of what's called a second messenger pathway, in fact, cyclic AMP is a second messenger, is also a key player in stimulating growth of the hair follicle. Now, cyclic AMP does many different things in many different cell types in the body. It really acts, as the name suggests, as a messenger between signals that arrive at the surface of cells and transmitting or conveying those signals to things that happen deep within the cells, such as the turning on and off of various genes. When you hear second messenger, don't let that confuse you or overwhelm you. Just understand that the whole process of getting signals from the outside of cells into the center of cells and controlling gene expression, for instance, causing a stem cell to continue to give off daughter cells, or causing a hair cell to continue growing for longer, that whole process is a bit like a bucket brigade of handing off water or a bucket from one component to the next, or along a chain. It's like an assembly line. I think that's probably the simplest way to think about it. For sake of this discussion, IGF-1 is known to increase the growth of hair by extending that anagen phase, as is cyclic AMP. Those are going to be considered the accelerators, at least in this conversation. The brakes on hair growth are going to be the things that either shorten the anagen phase or that extend the catagen phase or this quiescent phase, which is the telogen phase. The two major brakes on hair growth that we want to think about are PDE, which is a phosphodiesterase, anytime you hear -ase it's likely to be an enzyme, and TGF-beta-2. This is a particular growth factor that, somewhat counterintuitively, doesn't stimulate growth, it actually stimulates lack of growth, or shortens growth. With all of that in mind, and please do also keep in mind that you don't need to remember all those specific terms, just understand that there are some factors, like insulin growth factor 1, that act as accelerators on growth, and there are factors that act as brakes on growth. We can start to think about why, for instance, half of all people by age 50 start to lose their hair. Well, they start to lose their hair because of something called androgen- related alopecia, which, translated to English, means testosterone and testosterone- derivative induced hair loss. This is true in men and women. Hearing that, you should probably be wondering the following thing: Young men have higher levels of testosterone than old men, right? Well, the answer is yes, although some older men in their 40s, 50s, even 80s, maintain testosterone levels similar to many men in their 20s, but most don't. It's a downward slope starting at about age 40. How steep that downward slope is depends. Women, too, have testosterone. In fact, women have higher levels of testosterone than they do estrogen. That's right. A healthy woman has higher levels of testosterone than she does estrogen. However, women, on average, have lower testosterone than most men, so they still have far more estrogen and far less testosterone than most men, but the level of testosterone that they have within their body is higher than the level of estrogen they have. Androgens such as testosterone and its derivatives, such as dihydrotestosterone, which will be much the topic of what we're getting into next, inhibit IGF-1 and cyclic AMP. Again, androgens such as dihydrotestosterone inhibit, prevent the action of IGF-1 and cyclic AMP, which you just learned a few moments ago, act to extend the anagen or growth phase of hair. Which then raises the question, well, if young people, both male and female, have higher levels of testosterone than they do when they're older, why would people lose their hair when they're older and not younger? The answer lies in the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. Testosterone most people have heard of. Dihydrotestosterone, or DHT, is made from testosterone. There's an enzyme called 5-alpha reductase that converts testosterone into dihydrotestosterone in both men and women. Dihydrotestosterone binds to the androgen receptor at five times the affinity of testosterone, so it is the most powerful androgen in humans, and it is responsible for a number of things that we all really want and like, such as mental vigor, physical vigor, strength, healing capacity, drive, libido, and on and on. DHT itself is not bad. If we take a step back and we acknowledge testosterone levels are higher in males and females at younger ages as opposed to older, but as they get older, there is more 5-alpha reductase activity, which is converting more of that testosterone to dihydrotestosterone and dihydrotestosterone inhibits hair growth by reducing IGF-1 and cyclic AMP, well, then we should all be aboard why it is that by age 50, about 50% of people experience pattern hair loss. That is androgen-dependent alopecia, but translated to normal English is pattern hair loss. In a moment you'll understand why some people lose their hair from the crown region in the back of the head, or back and top of the head, whereas other people lose their hair in the front of their head, in the flanks, right on either side of the midline, or maybe in the midline and front altogether. That's because different people, depending on their genetic lineage, have different patterns of androgen receptors on their scalp. The pattern of androgen receptors that you inherit indeed does come from your mother's side. This is what gave rise to the the myth that if you want to know if you're going to go bald or not, just look at your mother's father. Doesn't quite work that way. In fact, if you think about the logic, you should really look at your mother's mother if you want to know your pattern of androgen receptors on your scalp. However, most women don't lose as much hair from their scalp, or they have ways of covering up the hair loss in their scalp because their hair is just generally longer or they're using other approaches, so that you never really get a clear picture of what the androgen- dependent hair loss was in your grandmother. Now, we don't want to go too far down the genetics rabbit hole because, as you know, you can't select your parents anyway, but if you want to know why, for instance, I'm losing a bit of hair on either side of the midline in the front, it almost certainly has to do with the fact that I have a higher density of androgen receptors there, as opposed to, say, on the crown of my head where, for whatever reason, my hair seems to grow thickest. Other people lose hair on the crown, in the back and top, but not in the front, and some people will lose it all over. Now you understand why hair loss occurs in certain regions of the body. You should also understand that the androgen receptors on the face are also what are responsible for beard growth. This is where it can get a little bit tricky, but a lot of things will start to make sense if you can understand this and internalize this. If you have a high density of androgen receptors on your face, well then as your DHT levels go up with age, you will be able to grow a thicker and thicker beard. In fact, it is rare to see someone who can grow a thick beard in their youth, but not so much as they get older. In fact, the reverse tends to be true. The pattern of androgen receptors differs between the scalp and the face and the back. On your back you have androgen receptors and their DHT stimulates hair growth. If you know someone who has a very hairy back, or if you have a very hairy back, that means you have a high density of androgen receptors on your back. If you have a beard and that beard is thick, well then you have a high density of androgen receptors on your face. However, a high density of androgen receptors anywhere on your scalp is going to predispose those regions to androgen- dependent alopecia, or hair loss in those particular regions, which is going to allow us to understand why all of the rest of the treatments for halting hair loss and for stimulating hair growth, almost all of those center on inhibiting either DHT directly, or 5-alpha reductase, the conversion of testosterone to DHT. Now I'd like to discuss the ways that one can chemically adjust certain things within the hair growth pathway, things like IGF-1, PDE, TGF beta, etc, in order to stimulate hair growth or halt hair loss. The first thing on this list is actually going to be pretty surprising to a number of you, and that's caffeine. We all think of caffeine as a stimulant that we drink. I certainly drink coffee in Yerba Mate, the occasional energy drink, things of that sort. Caffeine does many things besides stimulate our central nervous system and make us feel less sleepy, however. One of the things that caffeine does is it is a fairly potent PDE inhibitor. By being a potent PDE inhibitor, it indirectly stimulates IGF-1. Why? Well, because PDE can suppress IGF-1, and by ingesting caffeine, or by applying topical caffeine ointment or cream to the scalp, you can suppress PDE sufficiently enough to increase IGF-1 and increase some hair growth, or at least maintain hair growth in that region. This may come as a shock, it might seem a little bit esoteric or even outside the margins of typical treatments, but head to head, topical caffeine application can be as effective as Minoxidil application without actually lowering things like blood pressure and potentially increasing prolactin and some of the other negative, let's call them negative because they are, side effects of Minoxidil. Caffeine ointments, and caffeine present in various hair treatments and creams, etc, is starting to become a more prominent theme out there. I will include a reference to caffeine and its uses for offsetting hair loss. Keep in mind that topical caffeine ointments shouldn't necessarily be applied every single day, so this is the sort of thing you might do three times a week. The concentration of caffeine in different ointments varies tremendously. Most of the studies of caffeine on the stem cell niches that control hair growth and extension of the anagen phase of hair growth have been performed in vitro in a dish. Although there are some clinical studies exploring this, they are not nearly as extensive in number or duration as the studies of Minoxidil because this approach just hasn't been around quite as long. However, when comparing side effects of Minoxidil, cost of Minoxidil, comparing the efficacy of caffeine and Minoxidil, I think caffeine as a topical treatment for offsetting hair loss stands as a pretty good choice if you're going to start exploring this pathway. There's no reason to think that if you were to try the caffeine ointment and it didn't work for you or you didn't like it for some reason or you needed to stop it for some reason, that you couldn't stop it safely, because it doesn't carry all the other blood pressure- related effects and prolactin emia effects that Minoxidil does. If you look out there into the hair maintenance and hair replacement literature, and you look at thetreatments that are being sold, don't be surprised to see caffeine there. Also, don't be surprised when I tell you what I'm about to tell you now, which is, no, you can't simply just drink more caffeine in order to accomplish the goal of offsetting hair loss. It is true that when you ingest caffeine, it goes systemically. However, you have so many adenosine receptors throughout your body. Those adenosine receptors, and the parking of caffeine in those adenosine receptors, is the main way in which caffeine exerts its stimulatory effects, making you feel less sleepy. It does that because then adenosine can't have its effects, which are to make you sleepy. Well, those adenosine receptors soak up so much of the caffeine that you would ingest orally that very, very little would make it to the scalp and to the hair follicles at the concentrations that you would want, so that's why you have to rely on the application of these caffeine ointments about three times a week. Keep in mind that no one has really explored the dosages of caffeine in these ointments in a systematic way. We are still in the early stages of all this, but I do think it's important to mention caffeine because of the lower incidence of side effects, at least reported side effects, and the general safety margins, and the head to head essentially comparable efficacy with Minoxidil because Minoxidil has a bunch of other issues. Now keep in mind that both Minoxidil and caffeine are generally used as a preventative for reducing hair loss over time. They are not expected, and they do not, as far- as far as we know, create new hair growth to any sufficient degree. If any of you have used caffeine, ointments or minoxidil and observed new hair growth that was robust, please put that in the comment section. I'd be curious about those experiences, but as far as I know and from the clinical literature that I read, there's no examples of that. One other point about caffeine. It does appear that caffeine can not only indirectly stimulate IGF-1 and the antigen phase of hair cell growth by way of reducing PD and TGF beta. But it also seems to reduce apoptosis which is naturally occurring cell death of that stem cell niche. We've been talking a lot about the antigen or growth phase of hair. We also talked about the catagen or the recession of that hair from the inside out. But remember that third phase, the telogen phase, where that whole bulb down at the bottom, the bulge, as it's called, gets pinched off and the whole thing dies and takes the stem cells off to the grave with it. It appears that caffeine can offset the death of that niche and potentially maintain the stem cell population longer, making caffeine a really good choice to think about in conjunction with the various chemical treatments aimed at directly attacking the DHT pathway that we'll talk about next. So there's one very direct way to increase hair growth and maintain the hair that you have on your head, and that's to increase IGF-1. That can be accomplished through prescription drugs such as growth hormone and things that stimulate the release of growth hormone and IGF-1. Keep in mind, growth hormone is released from the anterior pituitary during the first hours of sleep, especially when you haven't eaten anything for the two hours prior to sleep, and especially when you get regular bedtimes. Yes, this is a real thing. If you are going to sleep at variable bedtimes, especially if you go to sleep much later than your usual habitual bedtime, you will miss that growth hormone pulse that normally occurs in the first 2-3 hours of sleep. This does not mean that you need to be neurotic about getting to sleep at the exact same time every night. There's probably a plus or minus 30- minute window, and it doesn't mean that you can't stay out late or have a bad night's sleep every once in a while or get woken up. Your hair isn't going to fall out. My dad's story notwithstanding, your hair isn't going to all fallout because of that. But you do want to try and get that natural growth hormone release each night. And as I mentioned, there are prescription approaches and those are growth hormone itself. Things like sermorelin, which is a peptide that increases growth hormone. It's actually a secreted dog. It causes the secretion of growth hormone and thereby increases in IGF-1. This is well documented. Both growth hormone and IGF-1, as I mentioned, are available by prescription. They are not without their side effects. They do cause growth of all tissues. They do increase height in children, They increase bone mass and density. They can increase mainly fat loss, not so much muscle size, but they can increase leanness and they increase hair growth, They can increase turnover of skin, they can make skin look more youthful. All these things sound wonderful. And yet they also have problems because they can increase growth of small tumors that normally might be eliminated. So there is an increased cancer risk with growth hormone treatments and IGF-1 or anything that increases IGF-1 such as sermorelin or ipamorelin, any of the peptides that you hear about nowadays. That said, a number of people are using sermorelin as an indirect way to increase IGF-1 and thereby to increase hair growth. It does seem to be fairly effective in doing that, especially when done in conjunction with other treatments that we'll talk about. But keep in mind, these are prescription drugs and they do carry their own risks. The other thing about stimulating the natural production of IGF-1 is that, as its name suggests, insulin growth factor one, it is insulin dependent in many ways, if not for its secretion, then for its action at the hair follicle and stem cell. So one of the things you really want to pay attention to is to avoid being insulin resistant, or rather you want to try to be insulin sensitive. So if you're carrying a lot of excess body fat, if you're obese or if you have type two diabetes, meaning your insulin resistant, you're going to want to deal with that. There are a number of prescription treatments to deal with that nowadays. People are very excited about all the GLP one agonists, but in addition to that, regular cardiovascular exercise and resistance exercise, making sure that your body fat percentage is not in excess of where it needs to be. Everyone has a slightly different idea of where it needs to be, both cosmetically and for health. So that's a conversation between you and your doctor and you and you frankly. But you want to avoid being insulin resistant because being insulin resistant and being obese can indeed lead to hair loss. There are many people out there who are not obese who nonetheless are experiencing hair thinning and hair loss because they are insulin resistant by way of reduced IGF-1 activity. There are a few supplements. So these are over-the-counter supplements such as myo-i nositol, taken at dosages of about 900 milligrams before sleep, which by the way, can also assist in sleep or things like berberine or metformin, which are known to improve insulin sensitivity. Each and every one of these has its own profile of positive and negative effects. The lowest number of side effects is associated with 900 milligram myo-i nositol taken about 30 minutes before sleep, mostly because it can make people a little bit drowsy and it does aid sleep in some really great ways, but really exercise and maintaining a healthy nutritional program are also going to be key. You just can't discard those. Berberine, which is a substance made from tree bark is sometimes called the poor man's metformin. Metformin being the equally effective prescription version of berberine. Or put differently, berberine is the non-prescription but equally effective version of metformin. Keep in mind that both berberine and metformin dramatically reduce blood sugar levels. And so if you're not going to take them with carbohydrates, it can lead to some feelings of discomfort. That's why I'm not a fan of them. But if your goal is to really improve insulin sensitivity, they are considered very potent tools on the list of things that can do that. The other thing that's really important for maintaining proper hair growth, this antigen phase, is that you need sufficient iron. This is because iron and ferritin play a key role in the cell growth pathways that go from the stem cells to the stimulation of keratin within the hair itself. I don't have time to go into this pathway in a lot of detail, but you can have your blood levels of iron measured. This turns out to be pretty important because you don't just want to start popping iron supplements because too much iron can be toxic, too little means you're anemic. For women, the levels of iron that you want are somewhere between 25 and 100. And for men, somewhere between 30 and 150. Fortunately, the tests or the blood tests for iron are usually a very inexpensive add to your current blood panel. So if you're going in for a blood panel for LDL, HDL, typical things, or if you're doing the more elaborate hormone testing, which I do recommend people do if they can afford it or if their insurance covers it, do ask for an iron test as well. And if your iron is low, you may need to supplement your iron. If your iron is too high, that's not good either. But iron plays a key role in the antigen phase of hair growth, so you want to make sure you at least have sufficient iron. And if you don't, you want to make sure that you're getting it from nutrition and or supplementation. Earlier, we were talking about dihydrotestosterone. Dihydrotestosterone, just to jog your memory, is a form of testosterone that combine the androgen receptor at five times the affinity of regular testosterone. Both men and women have a lot of testosterone relative to estrogen. It just so happens that men tend to have more testosterone than women do overall. But both men and women, as they age, convert more of the testosterone they have to dihydrotestosterone and dihydrotestosterone does two things that are bad for hair maintenance and hair growth. First of all, it shortens the antigen phase, that growth phase. Whatever hair is going to grow is going to occur over a shorter period of time. Second of all, because of the presence of androgen receptors on the stem cell niche area and around it, it actually miniaturize the follicle and the stem cell niche. In other words, it makes the population of cells that give rise to more hair protein smaller and can eliminate it altogether. And that is why anything that reduces 5- alpha reductase is going to reduce DHT, is going to maintain or extend the growth phase, the antigen phase of hair growth and is going to offset or prevent some of the telogen phase, the pinching off and the removal of that stem cell niche. Now, one substance that we know can inhibit 5-alpha reductase, although it does it pretty weakly is saw palmetto, which is an extract of the saw palmetto berry. To be honest, I don't know how this was initially discovered. If anyone knows, please put it in the show note captions. When I looked online I found a bunch of conflicting stories about who was the first person to start extracting the extract of the saw palmetto berries. So I have no idea which one of those is true. Maybe somebody can tell me. The good thing about saw palmetto treatment is that it is known to have very few, if any, side effects. There might be some side effects in about 1% of people, but it's not associated with a lot of side effects. It's also known that when taken at about 300 milligrams per day and here it doesn't have to be that strict. Most of the studies that I explored involved taking anywhere from 200- 500 milligrams of saw palmetto, but most of them focused on about 300 milligrams of saw palmetto per day, divided into two or three doses. Why? Well, it has a relatively short half-life, meaning it's going to get cleared from the bloodstream and more importantly, its biological action is going to be very short-lived. So if you can get a hold of 50 or 100- milligram capsules or tablets of saw palmetto and divide those up, take them in the morning, afternoon and evening, or even just in the morning and evening to achieve a total of about 300 milligrams per day. That's going to very likely help you hold on to some of the hair that you would have otherwise lost, maybe even grow some new hair. And I say maybe give you some new hair growth because saw palmetto is not known to be a particularly robust treatment for the reversal of hair loss. It's known to have some effect, but it's generally taken in conjunction with a bunch of other things. And so it's really hard to tease out just what amount of hair growth or prevention of hair loss is due to saw palmetto specifically. But I mention it here because the mechanism of action is logical and fairly well-known, which is this week effect in reducing 5- alpha reductase and thereby reducing DHT. So again, because it has relatively low side effects, even though it's not super effective and because it's fairly low cost and it's available over the counter, I felt it was important to include. Now, as soon as people hear things like saw palmetto berry, they're probably also thinking, "Oh boy, here comes all the herbals." Now keep in mind that there are some herbal compounds that have pretty robust biological effects. And we talked before in our optimizing testosterone episodes about things like Tongkat Ali and Fadogia agrestis, which taken incorrect dosages and in the correct way, can be pretty potent for increasing luteinizing hormone and free testosterone that can have huge effects. It's not like taking exogenous anabolic steroids, but they can have real effects. And so herbal compounds can be potent. However, I do acknowledge that there is a vast market out there of herbal compounds and plant-based compounds that people are arguing. Mostly the people who sell them are arguing can increase hair growth. There are some decent studies of these things. The hard part about studying these herbal compounds and these plant-derived compounds for increasing hair growth is that they are often taken in combination with one another. In fact, most of the hair growth supplements that involve these herbal compounds and plant compounds include 5 or 10, sometimes even more things altogether. So teasing out which ones are effective and which dosages are effective is nearly impossible. There are just too many variables. You will hear, for instance, that green tea extract, Reishi Mushroom, pumpkin oil, zinc, curcumin, all of these things can increase hair growth. Perhaps the only thing on that list that makes logical sense with respect to the biochemistry is that curcumin is known to, in some people, be a potent inhibitor of 5-alpha reductase and DHD so much so that I can personally say for me I once took curcumin, turmeric, it's also called in high dosage. This is about a gram to 2 gram capsules and I felt absolutely terrible. I mean, just dreadful. I don't care if it allowed me to keep my hair forever, I would rather lose all my hair three times over. I guess that means it would have grown back. I'd rather lose all my hair. Let's just put it that way than ever take curcumin or turmeric in high dosages again. In saying that, I know that many people take turmeric and curcumin and really like its anti-inflammatory properties and don't experience any side effects. I just happen to be particularly sensitive to curcumin by way of this DHT pathway. I know this by way of blood work, so I'm never going to hear that stuff again. That said, a lot of these herbal compounds and cocktails probably will have some minor marginal, infinitesimally small, somewhere in that range effect on maintaining hair growth or in stimulating new hair growth. It's just that there really aren't clinical studies to support any one of them. And that's why I singled out saw palmetto as one of the few for which the biochemical pathway of inhibiting 5-alpha reductase and the low incidence of side effects and the fact that many people have used it with some degree of success makes it a standalone. I wouldn't say recommendation, but a consideration. Another commonly discussed and use commercial compound for offsetting hair loss and stimulating hair growth is ketoconazole. Sometimes this is known as Nizoral where Nizoral is the brand name of a shampoo. Ketoconazole is an antifungal that was initially developed to treat dandruff and severe psoriasis. Ketoconazole has been shown to be effective in increasing hair number. It's also been shown to be effective in increasing hair diameter, which is somewhat surprising because one of the common side effects of ketoconazole is drying, thinning and brittle hair. So what's going on there is a little unclear. We'll return to that in a moment. The mechanism of action for ketoconazole is pretty interesting. Remember earlier we were talking about the sebaceous gland and the production of sebum, that oily stuff whose very name seems to evoke disgust in certain people. Well, ketoconazole can disrupt some of the fungal growth that frankly, we all have on our scalp all the time. I know this is a surprise to many of you, but you are constantly bombarded with viruses, bacteria and funguses all the time. But we managed to battle those off with our immune system, either by physical barriers such as an oil barrier like the sebum or through antimicrobial action. Chemical approaches our immune system, the sebum, etc, ketoconazole acts as an antifungal that in some way seems to reinforce the properties of sebum at keeping out other fungal infections. And the net effect, at least as far as we know, is a mild reduction in DHT. Now exactly how this happens isn't really clear. What is clear is that the use of ketoconazole shampoo is 2-4 times per week with a scalp contact time of about 3-5 minutes has been shown to give about an 80% response rate of maintaining hair that would otherwise be lost. So that's pretty dramatic, 80%. What is less clear is whether or not ketoconazole shampoo can actually stimulate new hair growth. But as you're probably starting to realize, this is always a bit of a tough thing to disentangle maintenance of hair that you would have lost versus new hair growth. Certainly, that's an easy thing to disambiguate if you have a patch of scalp where there is absolutely no hair, these so-called dead zones that you can resurrect with certain treatments. But what about areas of your scalp where hair is thinning? So, for instance, on the top of your head, this is where many women will first experience pattern, hair loss. Alopecia is right at their midline, especially if they have a part right there. They'll start to notice that under very bright light, fluorescent lights in particular, they'll notice a thinning of their hair there or in the forehead region. They'll start using ketoconazole shampoo. Again, the typical recommendation is 2-4 times per week with a scalp contact time of 3-5 minutes and really rubbing it in and then rinsing it out. You don't need to be super vigorous, but you want to make sure that it gets down into the follicle and around the follicles, not just sitting on top of the hair, which is going to be especially important for people who have long hair to really massage it in. Well, they will experience a growth of hair in that particular region that almost certainly were due to miniaturization of the hair follicle and reduction of the total population of stem cells in that follicle as opposed to complete loss of the stem cell population. The reason we say this is that there's no reason to think that ketoconazole can actually stimulate IGF-1 or activate growth itself. It's probably offsetting some of the reductions in the antigen phase and some of the exacerbation of the telogen phase. Now, if you decide to use ketoconazole as an approach to offsetting hair loss, it's very important that you get a hold of a shampoo that's at least 2% concentration of ketoconazole. This is important because a lot of the ones that are available out there, especially online, are going to be 1% or lower. So you want to try and obtain a ketoconazole shampoo of 2% or higher concentration of ketoconazole because it has other things in it, of course. I should mention that there are occasional side effects with ketoconazole. The rates of side effects from the meta analyzes and reviews that I read were somewhere between 1% and 8% of people will experience some side effects, but those side effects tend to be pretty mild. Things like irritation of the scalp, things like thinning and brittleness of the hair that sometimes can be offset by using shampoos that contain things like biotin. I know many people are probably curious about biotin, which is a protein that can be incorporated into the keratin. Whether or not different biotin enriched shampoos can really enhance the total amount of biotin that gets incorporated into the hair isn't clear, but it is clear that having sufficient biotin around is important. So if you get a little bit extra from your shampoo, you can imagine how that would "tap off" the amount of biotin in that hair. And there are people out there saying that by biotin-enriched shampoos have done wonders for them. Who knows? I'm not going to dispute their experience. So if you're going to use ketoconazole, keep in mind that the more typical brand names that are out there, you know which ones they are, oftentimes don't have 2% or if they do have 2%, they can be very drying and lead to brittle hair. There are newer and now fortunately, a greater variety of ketoconazole containing shampoos. We as a podcast and I don't have any affiliation to any of these, but I will provide a links to a couple of the more prominent ones that are known to have 2% concentration of ketoconazole, as well as some other things in them known to offset some of that dryness and brittleness that ketoconazole shampoos can trigger. So by now, I think it will be abundantly clear why inhibiting 5-alpha reductase and thereby reducing DHT should increase hair growth because of the negative impact that DHT has on the hair follicle. The major player in this whole story around inhibiting 5-alpha reductase and reducing DHT to maintain or increase hair growth is going to be finasteride and its close cousin, dutasteride. Finasteride is effective in reducing DHT because of its actions in reducing the type two isoenzyme or isoform of 5-alpha reductase. It turns out there's three different isoforms or what are sometimes called isoenzymes of 5-alpha reductase. This is getting pretty far down in the weeds. What I think most of you just need to know is that finasteride reduces DHT, that's the net product of finasteride and in doing so, it can increase hair count by as much as 20%. Pretty remarkable if you think about it. In addition, finasteride treatment done properly, which we'll define in a moment, can reduce hair loss in 90% of all people that take it. That is near staggering. I mean, there aren't many pharmaceuticals Out there that have that efficacy, really dramatic. In addition, it's known to increase hair thickness by about 20- 30% overall, so not just create new growth of hairs, and thicker hairs, but whatever hair you do happen to have on your head, it can further thicken those. The finasteride story is one, I think, of general success. It really seems to improve hair growth, and help you hold on to the hair that you have. The issue with finasteride is twofold. First of all, it is known to have some pretty significant side effects if it's not dosed properly, and in particular populations of people. This is because there is a wide variation in the amount of the different Isozymes that people make. This is why I brought up the Isozymes earlier. Some people make more of Isozyme one and three, some people make more of Isozyme two and three, and every variation thereof. When people take finasteride, some people are very strong responders, and they achieve really effective hair regrowth and maintenance of hair. Other people less effective, although still pretty impressive. But the catalog of side effects that people experience at a given dose, varies widely. There's a lot of trial and error that has to take place. Also, I should point out that finasteride comes in two major forms. There's an oral form and there's a topical form. This is not unlike our discussion of minoxidil earlier. Topical finasteride is typically taken in 1% solution or ointment and rubbed into the head, sometimes it's now also incorporated into shampoos, but typically it's put into a solution that people rub into their head, and it is thought that the 1% solutions are equivalent to one mg of systemic finasteride. Now we need to take a step back and ask why was finasteride developed in the first place? Well, finasteride, as a fairly potent five alpha reductase inhibitor, it's great at lowering DHT. It was developed for treatment of prostate enlargement and various issues of the prostate that are associated with elevated DHT that occurs with age. The topical finasteride were designed with the hope that the finasteride would make it into the hair follicle, and would inhibit DHT there and allow for more growth of the hair, which apparently it does, but not make it into the systemic circulation, or at least not at concentrations sufficient enough to cause as many side effects as with the oral dosing. Now, the problem is, it does make it into systemic circulation. The issue is also, that topical application of finasteride is harder to dose than oral finasteride. I'm not saying you should be taking oral rather than topical finasteride, but keep in mind that the dosages of finasteride that have been shown to be effective for inducing hair growth, cover an enormous range. As low as 0.01mg per day and as high as five mg per day, which is a just staggering range. Now, when trying to simplify the problem of how much finasteride to take, either by way of oral tablet, or by way of topical solution, we can get a bit of leverage on this by thinking about how much DHT reduction occurs as a function of dose. There, finasteride shows this really interesting, what's called logarithmic distribution. What it means is that, for a dosage of 0.01mg of finasteride, you're going to achieve approximately 50% reduction in DHT, and that's systemic DHT, so this is a blood draw measuring your DHT, then taking 0.01mg of finasteride. Again, 0.01, very low dose of finasteride, repeated a couple of weeks, measure people's DHT in their blood again, and you see that it's reduced by 50%. However, at increasing dosages of 0.2mg, one mg, five mg of oral finasteride per day, over the same period of time, the increase or I should say the reduction in dihydrotestosterone, doesn't increase linearly. It's not that you go from 50%-6 0%-75%- 100% with each increasing dose, it tapers off, it flattens out. It tends to increase a little bit, but it's a gradual slope increasing as you head from 0.2mg out to five mg. What this means is that given that reducing DHT can cause various side effects, sexual side effects, reductions in either sexual function or sexual drive, as well as overall drive and motivation, sometimes even some depressive symptoms that everything points to taking the lowest effective dose of finasteride and starting with a very low dose of finasteride because low doses of finasteride, even at that 0.01mg taken orally daily, are already leading to a 50% reduction in dihydrotestosterone and thereby taken for a long enough period of time, should offset hair loss and stimulate hair growth. One of the problems, however, is that people will start taking finasteride at a low dose 0.1mg or 0.2mg, maybe even 0.01mg, and there will be a reduction in their DHT, but because of the long duration of that antigen phase, they don't see a lot of change in hair growth in the first month or even two months, and so what they end up doing is increasing their dosage and then they start to see hair growth, but then they start to experience more side effects. Now the side effects of oral finasteride are serious enough and common enough in people that take finasteride that the topical solutions were developed, but there are two one needs to exercise caution because if we are going to translate between topical finasteride and oral finasteride, with the understanding that topical finasteride can actually make it into the systemic circulation, we need to look at what's been shown in clinical studies, which is that for instance, taking one ml of 0.25% finasteride applied to the scalp, this is a very typical recommendation, translates to the same thing that would be achieved with 2.5mg of oral finasteride. When I say translates to the same thing, what I mean is it leads to the same concentrations in the blood. Now consider that 0.2mg, 0.2mg of finasteride in the blood is known to be effective in generating new hair growth and maintaining hair that one already has when they start the treatment. If you think that the topical finasterides are actually creating lower overall systemic concentrations of finasteride, that is not necessarily the case. Again, one ml of topical finasteride at 0.25% leads to a 2.5mg concentration in the blood, when the effective dose within the bloodstream by taking it orally as a pill is 0.2mg. That might not seem like a big deal to you, although it is a big deal, right? We're talking 2.5mg versus 0.2, but it is a huge deal when you consider that the side effects of finasteride increase as you increase the concentration of finasteride in the bloodstream. Where does this leave us? Should people who are interested in taking finasteride take the oral form at low dose or take the topical form and simply try and apply it less often or guess at what their systemic concentration of finasteride is. Well, it's going to vary from person to person. Some people are very sensitive to finasteride and not in the good sense. The side effects just really show up quickly and they tend to be dramatic. Other people, not so much. The dosage recommendations that I was able to arrive at based on the clinical studies and frankly in discussion with some doctors who prescribe finasteride were the following: 0.5mg to one mg of finasteride as a tablet per day seems to be an effective and pretty safe starting place for most people. Now some people will find that even that 0.5mg dosage is just going to cause side effects that are not going to work for them, and they're going to either have to reduce their dosage of finasteride or move to the topical or maybe cease taking finasteride altogether. But for many people out there, that's going to be pretty well tolerated. The key thing here is that one is going to have to wait some period of time to see whether or not any hair growth occurs. It is a naive and frankly foolish approach based on what we know about the duration of that antigen phase of the hair to do one of these treatments, wait a week or two and then decide to up your dose. Now, it is not foolish to reduce your dose if you're experiencing bad side effects, but to simply increase your dose because you're not getting results quickly enough, that's not going to be the best approach. I really encourage people who are going to explore the finasteride route, to think of this as a long-term project and to really ratchet up slowly if at all, starting initially with a low dose taken for a long period of time, maybe even as long as 25 weeks before considering going up any further. Certainly, as I mentioned before, if you need to go down further, that's not going to be a problem, at least not in terms of reducing side effects, you're not going to get additional hair growth, but you're certainly not going to increase your side effects if you reduce your dose. However, I will talk a little bit later about post-finasteride syndrome, which is something that's getting increasing attention nowadays. That's something that occurs after people have taken finasteride for an extended period of time. Now some of you have perhaps heard and I'll just tell you right here, that the topical forms of finasteride are associated with far less side effects. Now that might come as surprising given that topical application of finasteride can lead to systemic distribution of finasteride. But the numbers that are out there right now, it's that topical finasteride is associated with 30-50% fewer side effects or 30-5 0% less severe side effects than oral finasteride. There are several things probably responsible for that. One is that people tend to ratchet up their dose of oral finasteride pretty quickly. But keep in mind that the effective dose of finasteride in the blood is 0.2mg. Earlier I said the typical topical finasteride solutions are 0.25%. People are taking one ml of it, that equates to 2.5mg, and so it seems like a massive overdosing but here's the discrepancy and here's where we can arrive at some reasonable recommendations. If you decide that finasteride is right for you, you get a prescription. I would hope that you're monitoring your DHT levels and other hormone levels that would be ideal, and working with a doctor, please. 0.5mg to one mg per day of oral finasteride seems to be the best starting place. For topical finasteride. It's going to be that one ml of 0.25% that we talked about earlier, but that's taken only one time per week, and you can fully expect that right after the application you will have higher levels of finasteride in your bloodstream, and therefore lower levels of DHT and that will alter across the week. Most people are not going to be able to measure their DHT on a day by day or even weekly basis. It's just too expensive and labor intensive. But I think those dosing regimens ought to get people into more or less the same category of optimizing hair maintenance and hair growth while minimizing finasteride side effects. One point about finasteride taken either alone or in combination is that in recent years, really in the last five or so years, there's been increasing discussion about so-called post- finasteride syndrome. Now post-finasteride syndrome is indeed a new phenomenon in the sense that finasteride has been prescribed for a very long period of time for treatment of the prostate, at dosages of about five mg per day. That's a very high dose. Sometimes lower, but as high as five mg per day, and for many years there was no discussion about this post-finasteride syndrome. What is post-finasteride syndrome? Post-finasteride syndrome is when typically it's males. This is where it's been described. We'll take finasteride at any range of dosages, from 1mg to 5mg per day. They're either doing this for prostate or more likely they're doing it to offset hair loss and increase hair growth, and then they stop taking finasteride for whatever reason, financial or it wasn't working for them or the side effects were not to their liking, and they start to experience some very severe what can only be called syndrome effects, such as very reduced libido, very reduced erectile function, very reduced mood to the point of depression, even suicidal depression. This is pretty scary stuff, especially since it's occurring at an age when most of these things are not typically occurring in males. They can occur, but they're not typical of younger males in their 20s and 30s and early 40s. We have to ask ourselves what's going on here? After all, people have taken finasteride for the prostate at fairly high dosages without this post-finasteride syndrome when they've stopped. Now these young males are taking finasteride, they're coming off finasteride and they're getting this very severe, very debilitating post-finasteride syndrome. This has become a hot topic, enough so that medical doctors who have been prescribing finasteride for a very long time, have been forced to address this. I think at first they were perplexed and thought, I don't know, this might be psychosomatic, whatever that means. As a neuroscientist who works on mind-body connection, we know that nothing is truly psychosomatic. Everything is of the mind and body. But the point is that enough medical attention has been placed on post- finasteride syndrome and trying to unravel exactly what that is. Where there are now a few general conclusions about what might be going on. First of all, it seems that younger males taking finasteride in particular high dosages to improve hair growth or offset hair loss seems to be one of the key variables. We're not seeing this post-finasteride syndrome as much in older males. In fact, it seems to occur more in males in their 20s and 30s than males in their 40s and older. One thing and it may relate to the ways in which Dihydrotestosterone, we know, has a very key role in early embryonic development. It's actually what's responsible for the male genitalia. It's also responsible for certain things in female development, but mainly in utero, it's responsible for male development and development of the penis in particular. Then around the time of puberty, Dihydrotestosterone acts again, in what's called its activating effects to further increase growth of the genitalia, increase the musculature bone growth, et cetera, and increase libido and a number of other things. It's probably also involved in the activation of puberty. It's certainly not the only hormone involved in the activation of male puberty but it's certainly one of the key players. Dihydrotestosterone has these known early roles in embryonic development and in puberty, but what post-finasteride syndrome seems to indicate is that Dihydrotestosterone is likely having further effects on male maturation, in particular, maturation of the hypothalamus in areas of the brain that continue well into one's 20s and maybe even one's 30s. Here I just want everyone to keep in mind that we tend to think about development as childhood, teenage years, young adulthood, adulthood, but really development never stops. Development is something that starts at conception and birth, of course, and then extends all the way out until the point when we die, so even if we live to be in our late 90s or achieve 100 years of age, development is occurring that entire time, and these different hormones such as Dihydrotestosterone are having different impact for across the lifespan and in different ways across the lifespan. There isn't a clear conclusion about what post-finasteride syndrome is really all about, but it points to the fact that DHT is likely to be involved in development of the brain and the brain to genital axis, because I mentioned that because so many of the side effects that are associated with this post-finasteride syndrome seem to center on sexual side effects, although there are also the depressive side effects. Of course, those can be related to one another in either direction. While I do understand that loss of one's hair, or potential loss of one's hair can be particularly troubling and anxiety- provoking, even cause depression in some cases, I am sensitive to that. You also want to be sensitive to the fact that some of these treatments, such as finasteride, can carry very serious side effects even if you come off them AKA post-finasteride syndrome. As long as we're talking about finasteride and this general pathway of 5α-Reductase inhibition and thereby DHT inhibition and on and on topics and themes and nomenclature you are now very familiar with, we have to talk about dutasteride. Dutasteride is yet another molecule similar to finasteride, but remember those three isoforms of the 5α-Reductase enzyme? Well, it inhibits all three, mainly type one and type two, but also type three, and it does it very potently. As a consequence, the typical dosage of oral d utasteride, get this, 0.5mg to 2.5mg taken orally, works 2-5 times faster than typical finasteride at inducing hair regrowth and reduces DHT by, get this, 95%. It's just near flatlines DHT, and that can occur at concentrations as low as 0.5mg, although you will see prescriptions and people taking d utasteride anywhere from 0.5 mg all the way to 2.5mg orally. Now, not surprisingly, dutasteride is associated with a lot of side effects related to the DHT pathway. Things like reduction in sex drive, reduction in overall drive, it also tends to impact other hormone pathways, so it increases in estrogen prolactin. That's why gynecomastia, growth of male breast tissue sometimes occurs when people take dutasteride and so you're probably asking, why would anyone take dutasteride? Why not just take finasteride and wait for that hair growth? Well, the answer is that people are often very impatient, and it turns out that d utasteride works, about 2-5 times faster than finasteride. Some people don't want to wait a full 30 weeks or 40 weeks or 50 weeks or more in order to grow their hair back, and they're very concerned about the hair loss that's occurring. They will take what I hope would be a very low dose of dutasteride. I realize that there are ways to take dutasteride that can be safer, off set some of these side effects. But by my read of the literature, if one is going to try to mildly inhibit the DHT pathway, things like saw palmetto, things like topical caffeine, which has some effect on the androgen pathway, but as we talked about earlier, tickles other pathways, things like ketoconazole, mild reduction in androgen receptor pathways in the follicle and very direct because it's applied directly to the scalp. Things like that are going to be the best route for mild reductions in DHT as an attempt to maintain hair or grow hair. Whereas if one really wants a potent stimulus for increasing hair growth, that's very likely going to be finasteride, and hopefully low enough dosages of finasteride and hopefully a patient enough patient person that they are willing to wait the duration of time required for that hair growth to come back because they understand that their antigen phase takes some time. Now the holy grail of all this hair stuff is in understanding that no one specific treatment is magic, and in fact, there are now a number of good meta- analysis comparing the various treatments we've talked about today alone or in combination. We can summarize that pretty easily by saying that combination treatments that involve a mechanical stimulus and a chemical stimulus are always going to be better than either one alone, and within the mechanical category, the stimulus that seems to work best is microneedling. The combination of microneedling and finasteride, can lead to some pretty robust and impressive hair regrowth, so much so that people that were... I would only describe them as pretty bald or bald, can regrow significant amounts of hair. I've never seen examples of people who were completely bald, meaning lacking all scalp hair to grow back a full head of hair, but the combination of microneedling and finasteride is probably the most effective way to go. If you're going to do that, there's no reason why you couldn't also use ketoconazole shampoo, could also use saw palmetto. There's no reason to think that these things collide with one another, although anytime you're inhibiting a DHT pathway, or whether or not you're increasing or decreasing any hormone pathway for that matter, you want to be careful about layering in too many different treatments because you don't want your DHT level to go too low. Let's keep in mind that even if you take a very low dose of finasteride and reduce your DHT and don't have side effects, maybe just the mere addition of saw palmetto, which leads to a slight reduction in DHT combined with some caffeine ointment, would be sufficient enough to start inducing some of the low DHT associated side effects. You really have to see for you, and that's one of the major issues in this whole field of hair growth and regrowth is that people are highly individual in their response, and in their side effect profile to these various treatments. There's an enormous range there and unfortunately, there's no way to know a priori before doing these treatments what your response is going to be in terms of side effects. You're simply going to have to explore, and I would hope that you would explore starting with minimal, possible effective dosages, and to do that in coordination with a medical professional so you could really evaluate these things that the level of blood, and cosmetic changes. In fact, that's a pretty good motivator for thinking about the different treatments that we talked about today. Everything from mechanical treatments, as simple as massage, which we've all heard about, but for which there really aren't a lot of data for supporting hair growth. But certainly things like microneedling, which is a mechanical stimulus for which there are pretty good data that it can improve hair growth. Also things like saw palmetto, a weak DHT antagonist. Also things like ketoconazole shampoo, which again is a weak DHT antagonist and operates through some other pathways as well to stimulate hair growth. My suggestion is that anyone young, old, male, female, who's thinking about embarking on various treatments for offsetting hair loss and stimulating hair growth, consider both mechanical approaches, and the approaches that attack the chemical pathways, that can stimulate hair growth, and can inhibit the inhibitors of hair growth. In fact, that's the reason why we spend so much time on the biology of hair growth and what shuts down hair growth early on in today's episode, and then systematically went through each of the various treatments that relies on and in some cases hinges entirely on either a mechanical stimulus or a chemical stimulus in order to exert its effects. My goal today was not to overwhelm you with a ton of biology about hair, although we did cover a lot of biology of hair and stem cells and hair growth. My goal in describing all that was really for you to be able to hear about various treatments, whether or not it's lasers or PRP or finasteride, dutasteride, or whatever is coming next that we're sure to hear about soon online and from the medical community, and to be able to place those into bins related to their known or potential mechanisms and then to be able to step back and evaluate, which, if any, of those treatments might be right for you. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple, and on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. If you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guess you'd like me to include on the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on youtube. I do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. During today's podcast and on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them, for things like enhancing sleep, hormone support, focus and more. If you'd like to see the supplements discussed on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to live momentous spelled ous live momentous.com/huberman. If you're not already following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn. Especially on Instagram, I cover science and science- related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content of the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn. If you haven't already subscribed to our Huberman Lab podcast Neural Network newsletter, this is a zero-cost newsletter that we send out each month. It includes summaries of podcast episodes and we have what are called tool kits. Those tool kits range from how to optimize your sleep to how to optimize neuroplasticity. We have toolkits for dopamine, we have toolkits for deliberate cold exposure, heat exposure, exercise and much more. Again, it's totally zero cost to sign up. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab, scroll down to newsletter and supply us your email. We do not share your email with anybody. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion. All about the biology of hair and hair growth, how to hold on to the hair you have and to stimulate new hair growth. Last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 214 ---
Video ID: ulHrUVV3Kq4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ulHrUVV3Kq4
Title: Dr. Elissa Epel: Control Stress for Healthy Eating, Metabolism & Aging | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-04-03 12:00:41 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Elissa Epel, Ph.D., professor and vice chair of the department of psychiatry at the University of California San Francisco (UCSF) and the author of a new book entitled “The Stress Prescription.” We discuss her work showing how stress impacts mood, eating behavior, mental health, physical health, and aging. She explains stress intervention tools using “top-down” techniques (e.g., radical acceptance, mindfulness, reframing), body-based methods (e.g., breathwork) including the Wim Hof Method, exercise, meditation, body scans, and environmental shifts proven to help people cease unhealthy rumination patterns. We discuss how stress can positively impact psychology and sense of purpose, how stress affects cellular aging, how our narratives of stressful events impact our mood and biology, and how to effectively reframe stress. She explains science-based techniques to break stress-induced cycles of craving and overeating and thereby improve insulin sensitivity and metabolic health. Dr. Epel provides a wide range of tools shown to be effective in reducing stress and improving various aspects of our health.

#HubermanLab

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
HVMN: https://hvmn.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Elissa Epel
UCSF profile: https://profiles.ucsf.edu/elissa.epel 
Personal website: https://www.elissaepel.com 
Lab Website (Aging, Metabolism & Emotion Center): https://amecenter.ucsf.edu 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/dr_epel 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/elissa.epel 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/elissa-epel 

Articles
The geroscience agenda: Toxic stress, hormetic stress, and the rate of aging: https://bit.ly/3nAgNhD
THE IMPACT OF MEANINGFUL VOLUNTEER ENGAGEMENT IN AGING ADULTS: THE BALTIMORE EXPERIENCE CORPS TRIAL: https://bit.ly/3KpyJoa
Potential role for adult neurogenesis in the encoding of time in new memories: https://go.nature.com/3U0gwkl
The mindful moms training: development of a mindfulness-based intervention to reduce stress and overeating during pregnancy: https://bit.ly/3ZzueM3
Can Meditation Slow Rate of Cellular Aging? Cognitive Stress, Mindfulness, and Telomeres: https://bit.ly/3K4iF9Z
A Mitochondrial Health Index Sensitive to Mood and Caregiving Stress: https://bit.ly/3nKMeWo
Embodying Psychological Thriving: Physical Thriving in Response to Stress: https://bit.ly/3zrBnn5
Brief structured respiration practices enhance mood and reduce physiological arousal: https://bit.ly/3wEvGRf
Stress and telomere shortening: Insights from cellular mechanisms: https://bit.ly/40WYFwD
Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus: https://go.nature.com/3GdG7At
Impact of the Baltimore Experience Corps Trial on cortical and hippocampal volumes: https://bit.ly/3ZBoCkB
Effects of a Mindfulness-Based Intervention on Distress, Weight Gain, and Glucose Control for Pregnant Low-Income Women: A Quasi-Experimental Trial Using the ORBIT Model: https://bit.ly/3U6UBb7

Books
The Telomere Effect: A Revolutionary Approach to Living Younger, Healthier, Longer: https://amzn.to/3m2dHTa
The Stress Prescription: Seven Days to More Joy and Ease (The Seven Days Series): https://amzn.to/3m4zERB

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Elissa Epel
00:02:17 Sponsors: Thesis, Eight Sleep, HVMN, Momentous
00:06:18 Stress; Effects on Body & Mind
00:12:50 Tools: Overthinking & Stress
00:15:37 Acute, Moderate & Chronic Stress, Breathing
00:21:23 Stress Benefits, Aging & Cognition; Stress Challenge Response
00:31:04 Sponsor: AG-1 (Athletic Greens)
00:32:19 Tool: Shifting Stress to Challenge Response, “Stress Shields”
00:37:40 Stress, Overeating, Craving & Opioid System
00:48:55 Tools: Breaking Overeating Cycles, Mindfulness
00:54:44 Soda & Sugary Drinks
01:00:51 Smoking, Processed Food & Rebellion
01:05:29 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:06:47 Tools: Mindfulness, Pregnancy & Metabolic Health
01:14:11 Body Scan & Cravings
01:17:28 Tool: Meditation & Aging; Meditation Retreats
01:23:35 Meditation, Psychedelics & Neuroplasticity
01:26:02 Mitochondrial Health, Stress & Mood
01:29:49 Chronic Stress & Radical Acceptance, “Brick Wall”
01:37:57 Tool: Control, Uncertainty
01:45:25 Stress Management, “Skillful Surfing” 
01:50:25 Narrative, Purpose & Stress
01:52:49 Breathwork, Wim Hof Method, Positivity & Cellular Aging
02:03:11 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today my guest is Dr Alysa eel Dr eel is a professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at the University of California San Francisco she is also the director of the center on Aging metabolism and emotions Dr eel's laboratory focuses on stress and the many impacts that it has on our brain and body both negative and positive for instance her laboratory has shown that particular forms of stress change our tiir which are a component of the genetic Machinery of our cells that impacts how quickly our cells and therefore we age we also discuss exciting work from Dr eel's laboratory exploring how stress impacts our behavioral choices in particular which foods we elect to eat and how we experience those Foods today you'll learn how stress and your interpretation of your stress impacts the different aspects of your biology and psychology you'll also learn about several important stress interventions that Dr eel's laboratory has explored including meditation and breath work can profoundly influence the way that stress impacts your brain and body both For Better or For Worse she's also explored how specific dietary interventions such as omega-3 fatty acid intake impacts stress and our response to stress and a key and important feature I believe of Dr eel's work is how stress and stress interventions vary in their effectiveness depending on whether or not the subjects in her experiments are male versus female and their social status by the end of today's episode I assure you you will have a much more thorough understanding of what stress is and how it changes our biology and psychology as well as the specific stress interventions that are going to be most optimal for you in reducing the negative effects of stress on the aging process and on negative behavioral choices and also how to leverage stress in order to maximize the positive effects that stress can have on cellular metabolism mental health physical health and performance to learn more about the work from Dr eel's laboratory as well as to learn more about her books entitled the tiir effect and now more recently the stress prescription you can find links to those in the show note captions before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the General Public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is thesis thesis makes custom neut tropics and frankly I'm not a fan of the word neut tropics because it translates to Smart drugs and as a neurobiologist I can tell you that our brain has neural circuits and chemicals that underly for instance our ability to focus or to task switch or to be creative there is no one specific circuit or category of chemicals in the brain that allow us to be smart thesis understands this and has developed New Tropics that that are customized to different types of mental operations what do I mean by that well they have formulas that can put your brain into a state of increased Clarity or Focus or creativity or that can give you more overall energy for things like physical exercise I often take the thesis Clarity formula prior to Long bouts of cognitive work and I'll use their energy formula prior to doing any kind of really intense physical exercise if you'd like to try your own personalized neut Tropic starter kit go online to taketh thesis. c/h huberman you'll take a brief three-minute quiz and thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month again that's take thesis. c/h huberman and if you use the code huberman at checkout you'll get 10% off your order today's episode is also brought To Us by eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity I've talked many times before on this podcast on on other podcast about the critical relationship between sleep and body temperature put simply in order order to fall asleep and stay asleep deeply throughout the night your body needs to drop by about 1 to 3° in its core body temperature and conversely waking up involves 1 to 3 degree increases in your core body temperature so it's very important that you control the temperature of your sleeping environment which also includes the temperature of your mattress that's what eight Sleep mattress covers allow you to do so for instance I tend to run hot during the night so I have my mattress set to be pretty cool at the beginning of the night and then to get progressively cooler and then warm toward morning when I want to wake up and in doing this it's allowed me to really optimize my sleep meaning I sleep much more deeply and I get far more rapid eye movement sleep than I ever did prior to using eight sleep if you'd like to try eight sleep you can go to eights sleep.com huberman to save $150 off their pod 3 cover eight sleep currently ships in the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again that's eights sleep.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by hvmn Ketone IQ Ketone IQ is a supplement that increas es blood ketones I think most people out there have heard of the ketogenic diet however most people out there including myself do not follow a ketogenic diet despite not following a ketogenic diet I make it a point to increase my blood ketones through the use of Ketone IQ the reason for that is that ketones are one of the brain's preferred sources of fuel I find that by taking Ketone IQ I have elevated levels of focus for several hours afterwards it also allows me to do physical training or mental work fasted and in addition to that I focus much better when I take Ketone IQ as opposed to fasted alone so many people like me find that whether or not they follow a ketogenic diet or a more typical diet supplementing with Ketone IQ and thereby increasing their blood ketones allows them to do more focused mental work and physical work even when fasted or when a bit hungry so if you'd like to try Ketone IQ go to hmn.com and use the code huberman to get 20% off your order again that's hmn.com and use the code huberman to get 20% off the huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with with momentous supplements to find the supplements we discuss on the hubman Lab podcast you can go to live momentous spelled o us Liv mous.com huberman and I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding again that's liv.com huberman and now for my discussion with Dr Alyssa eel Dr eel welcome thank you so great to have you here we have colleagues in common and topics of Interest related to our Laboratories in common so got a lot of questions today I'd love to just kick off by you explaining a little bit about the different forms of stress you know we hear stress stress is bad stress can kill us no one likes to feel stressed Etc but as you and I both know that's not the entire picture so love for you to just educate us a bit on what stress is and what it isn't uh where it can be problematic and where perhaps it can even be beneficial so as a stress scientist it is a word I use a lot but it has to be broken down because it has so many different kind of dimensions and meaning so there's good and bad stress there's acute and chronic stress and you know technically it just means anytime we feel overwhelmed that we feel like the demands are too much for our resources so that's kind of a a very technical way to put it but really so much of life is about meeting challenges and we're never going to get rid of different stressful situations ations in life if anything they are increasing and so it really comes down to not the stressors of what's happens to us but really how we respond the stress response so that's a distinction that we're still trying to get the field to talk about stress in a more specific way so that we can think about what situations are in your life they might be difficult ongoing situations like caregiving or work stress or worrying about Health your own or someone's and then there's how are you coping with it so when something happens we mount a stress response and we recover and that's beautiful no harm done we need that that's why we're here still alive is that survival response it's it's a problem these days of just we keep it alive in our head we keep it alive with our thoughts our thoughts are the most common form of stress even though I expected we would get into tools to combat stress a little bit later since you have now told us that our thoughts are the biggest um sort of propagator of internal stress what to your knowledge is the best way or what are the best ways for us to manage overthinking and ruminating on stressful topics because I certainly experienced stress and when I do I have tools related to you know breath work running exercise sleep uh non-sleep deep rest I'm huge fan of all these sorts of things but when we succumb to stress and the thinking patterns take over where the gears are turning and they won't stop turning what does the science tell us about ways to manage those thoughts should we work with them in the sense that we try and rationalize um or understand the basis of the stress or should we try and divert our thinking away or is there some other tool that I'm aware unaware of yes yes both and right so I like to bin it in three um three categories so one is we well I'll just say first of all we have to have some awareness of how our mind works or we're just like you know a subject to thinking our thoughts are real thinking that it's helpful to keep ruminating and problem solving because that's our tendency is to go toward whatever we think there's threat or risk and to problem solve but you could just be stuck there all day in this kind of threat mode or redm state and that's just a shame we don't need to turn on that stress response all the time but that's where we are as a society so that's why I I wrote the stress prescription take any survey even pre- pandemic and people feel the majority of people feel an overwhelming amount of stress so even um this past year 46% of adults s report feeling overwhelmed by stress and then you break it down you're like o this is really bad for young adults and women and people of color and so we have these you know groups that are targeted for marginalization that are feeling an extremely high amount of stress in most of those subgroups so bottom wouldn't you argue that most most everyone is feeling more stressed now or is it just or what do the data say yeah so I think that I think that we're we come with different levels of awareness of our stress and so when I find someone who really doesn't feel a lot of stress sometimes I can see right through that and they're just not aware and sometimes it really is true they they're often in a different stage of life and they control their environment a lot and they've been through a lot I mean one of the big patterns in the population levels of stress is that the older people are less stressed period if you're over 65 you have been through so much solv so much you just have a better perspective on life and on stressors and then our adults our young adults have like four times the level of stress as our older adults so so we do you know we don't have to wait till we get older but there certainly is true wisdom and resilience that comes with age for many people um often we're so used to feeling daily stress from our Urban and Modern Life that we're we don't notice it we're just used to it and so we're going through the day with kind of like clenched hands and just you know for listeners just even just taking a check in now and noticing how you might be holding stress in your body that's a huge clue it's a huge place where we accumulate tension so we might not be aware that we're stressed but we're clenching our hands and in fact um my taxi driver who drove me here um let me know that he's exactly that point that he doesn't realize he stress until he realizes that he's tensing his shoulders and his and his fists and so great signal you know doing a check-in to like notice where in our body we're holding stress is step one to releasing it so um going back to this notion of overthinking what are the tools that um are most efficient for dealing with overthinking or ruminating uh when people just sort can't seem to let go of the thing that's the stress or thinking about not the stress in their body but the thing that caused the stress the difficult conversation the thing that irked them on social media or in their personal life or professional life or simply out in the world so I I wish I had one answer but I'm going to say lots of strategies tackle that and so in those three bins one our top- down strategies of awareness and things that we can say to ourselves since our beliefs and mindsets can really help us release stress view stress more positively the second bucket is um not that the Mind changes the body but the body changes the mind and those are the set of strategies that you tend to use the most right we're we're we're working stress out of the body we're metabolizing it we're burning it up and we get relief it changes our you know amydala activity and moves us to more an experience state where we're more in our somat sensory cortex and then the third uh bucket is change the scene just getting away from all the stress triggers that we have in our office or in um in the city and being in environment that we find calming it might even be just be a corner of the house but implanting what I call safety signals we're just these animals that are conditioned to signals whether we're aware of it or not so having having things like comforting pets pictures smells music why not we need those they help they add up yeah I like the idea of having a small physical space or I suppose it could be a large physical space but for most people who don't have the resources some small predesignated physical space that um represents a a safe Zone um and uh creating or I should say populating that safe Zone with things as you said um as a visual neuroscientist originally I guess now I study stress um but uh as a visual neuroscientist we know that photographs are extremely powerful cues for the memory system especially uh actual physical photographs um and I I believe there is some work on this that if people keep a photograph of something that draws positive memories that that photograph actually they keep it with them that actually can be a positive cue for um alleviating stress and just enhancing mood um this is probably done less so nowadays because everyone keeps things on their phones and it's just kind of a scroll through but um in any event you know when we talk about stress uh it's clear that there's short-term medium-term long-term stress you studied all these different forms of stress um if you would be so kind as to just give us an overview of the different forms of stress uh how we can learn to recognize those and then I'd love to trans I from there into talking about uh some of the work that you've been doing on stress and stress related eating and stress and how it uh relates to Aging in particular but before we do that um to get make sure everyone's on the same page um if you could just uh pepper our minds with knowledge about stress in all its um beautiful and um not so beautiful forms so when we think about stress we usually think feeling stress you know reporting stress and that's important what are bodies doing is also important and it's not always related to our mind so measuring levels of the nervous system and how Vigilant we are is another way that we can understand stress and that's particularly important and interesting because that's how stress gets under the skin we might not be aware we might report stress but we're still holding tension and being much more sympathetically dominated meaning that we're our body is Vigilant and scanning for cues and we don't feel safe and so we're mobilizing a lot more energy than we need to and stress is so expensive to the body the stress response uses a tremendous amount of energy ATP that's made by your mitochondria and if we have that kind of vigilant stress response on all day we're just going to feel exhausted and we all feel exhausted at the stage of the kind of long shadow of the pandemic and it's really no mystery because we're not good at turning the stress response off and that's what we want to really focus on is understanding we need to mount a big stress response to cope with things when we need extra energy but then we can actually let our body relax and we can turn it off and that's where the rumination comes and we want to catch ourselves rehearsing and reliving stress or worrying about the next thing saying right now I'm safe and you know there's the breathing strategies I'm right with you where those are the most direct and fast path to reducing stress in the body period yeah our colleague David Spiegel associate chair of Psychiatry at Stanford and also a colleague of yours um as well um has I think said it best which is that breathing is unique among the functions of the brain because it really originates as a brain function and then extends of course to the body in that it represents a bridge between the conscious and the unconscious because at any given moment we're breathing and of course at any given moment we can take control of our breathing there are very few brain circuits that impact the body in that way like I can't suddenly just change my rate of digestion because I decide to but we can do that with breathing we will definitely get into some of the um work that you've been doing on breath work particular um I know you have a study that's actually explored the Wim Hoff method quite directly one of the few studies that I'm aware of that's done that so we'll get to that a little bit later um so you describe stress as a way that the body and mind mobilize energy yeah and I didn't quite answer your question so there's there's that acute stress response when everything every hormone and um cell in our body is having a stress response and that is allowing us to reorient focus problem solve it's really beautiful how much we can um increase our capacity to do things during stress and then if it you know lasts minutes or hours we eventually recover and that is um what happens all day in small you know to small extents with daily stressors we don't necessarily get so threatened that we release a lot of cortisol but our nervous system is going up and down all day then there are then there's kind of moderate stressful events that maybe take days or months to cope with and what's important there is that noticing like right now am I really coping acutely with something or can I restore so that kind of daily restoration is very important and then there are chronically stressful situations that go on for years many of us not all of us but many of us have those in our life These are situations I'll just use caregiving as an example that we can't change we we can't change other people we can't change certain situations or resources and we can be thinking about them chronically problem solving trying to wish things were different or we can use acceptance radical acceptance strategies and other strategies to live well with them and and so that's a really important strategy for people who feel like their their life is going to be stressful forever because of X or Y that that's not true you have a harder life you're going to do more coping but you can actually be dealing with with uncontrollable chronic stress in ways that it's not going to take that toll on your body I mean I study chronic stress and how it accelerate cell aging and I can tell you there's so much variance between people people are so different so among caregivers some of them look as biologically young or younger than our controls people with no identifiable big tough situation in their life I love to hear about the um lack of inevitability around aging and stret I I realized that there's a big landscape of of discussion around aging and stress for us to cover but since you brought it up um in one of your papers there's a beautiful graph and since a lot of people are listening not watching and we don't use visual diagrams for that reason I'll try and explain this as best I can um you distinguish between optimal aging typical aging and accelerated aging I think everyone I can imagine would want optimal aging right certainly not accelerated aging and what's interesting about this graph in your paper is that while of course it appears that toxic stress chronically unmitigated stress that's makes us feel like we are at the world's Mercy or the other people's Mercy will accelerate aging turns out that underexposure to stress leads to more rapid aging than what you describe as ideal amounts of stress in other words words that no stress is not the answer rather to have some stress is ideal if you want to have so-called optimal aging could you maybe explain a little bit about the mechanisms behind that maybe this is a good opportunity also to um tell us about your tiir work um so the questions are how does one measure optimal versus accelerated aging and why would it be that some stress is better than no stress when it comes to aging uh ideally MH so having no stress means we're not really living like we're not engaging in the gifts of Life which are inevitably have some challenging risk and let me give you an example one study took um elderly people who have retired and they you know Society kind of labels them as you're kind of done with your meaningful work in life and um you're you know you are pretty much not able to contribute to society I mean there's so many negative stereotypes of people then kind of embody and then live um and this program brought them to work in schools and tutor Young At Risk students and what happened to them is they went from feeling maybe safe and under stressed to feeling challenged but generative they they were feeling more purpose they were feeling like they were growing and they were feeling like their day had more meaning they had more relationships they had these caring relationships with the students the students had all sorts of issues and troubles drugs and and maybe not having lunch poverty and so they felt the stress of that but they also saw how much they could help with their support and their tutoring and in the study they they took images of the hippocampus and those who engaged in the program particularly the men actually had growth of their hippocampus during this program so at any stage in life we can be growing and challenging ourselves even in our much later years and growing our brain and you know more than anyone like what does that hippocampal growth mean for their well-being and their cognitive functioning yeah it's interesting that hippocampus of course a brain area involved in formation and recall of memories mostly formation of memories um it's super interesting because it's so plastic it's so amenable to the addition of new memories I think the most striking study to me is the one and I should point out that most of the data say that the addition of new neurons is not the main reason for improvements in memory but it is one of them um but Rusty Gage down at the sulk Institute did a study in I think the early 2000s where they took terminally ill people and these people agreed to have their bodies injected with a Dy that would label new neurons and then after they died their brains were processed um and they didn't die from the D injection by the way folks they died from other causes they were terminally ill and what they discovered was that even in terminally ill or or and some of these people were uh quite old those people were still generating new neurons especially in the context of still trying to learn and and acquire new information so wow um course they're dead so they can't apply that information after that but of course none of us can right none of the information that but why not up to when you die right absolutely absolutely one other example of this my colleague Dave Almeida he measures you know daily stressful events in huge National populations and a small percentage of people report no stressors and so you wonder like what's happening are they not engaging in life are they really not having stressors it it looks like they are it's not just that they're not getting stressed by things they're not they're not really going out doing much and what he found is that their level of kind of memory and cognition their cognitive Health was significantly lower so you can imagine the hippocampal you know the lack of those um neuroprogenitor cells they're just not being stimulated it's super interesting I wasn't aware of that result so I appreciate you sharing it I almost have to wonder if it's like exercise where you know so many people I think now everybody hopefully understands that exercise is going to lower blood pressure reduce resting heart rate improve muscus skeletal function and bone density all that stuff but that if you took a snapshot of the bodily response during exercise blood pressure is way way up heart rate is way way up stress hormones are way up cortisol is through the roof during a hard workout and immediately afterwards and yet that sets in motion a series of adaptations that brings you to a better place most of the time I almost wonder if stress is the same is there any evidence that short bouts of stress provided that they're managed well meaning that we don't spend the next 24 or 48 Hours ruminating on the stressor but that we're able to move through the stressor and resolve it in some way that that's actually beneficial for us because of the mobilization of energy stores and maybe maybe even changing our threshold for reacting to stressors in the future it's a great question and it's one that I have been chewing on for a while because we we know as you said that physical stressors when they're short and repeated like high-intensity interval training They are promoting not just aerobic fitness but stress Fitness people feel less rumination less depression less anxiety so they're kind of tuning up the nervous system what about psychological stressors and we we we know two things so one is I do think that there is a level of Engagement with moderate stressors that when we are used to them we get fit and our stress resilience builds meaning we're less threatened by them so let me go deep onto that we can two people can approach the exact same stressor and one person is having a pretty um overreactive stress response where they basically are feeling their survival is threatened so it's high cortisol High Vaso constriction and uh blood pressure goes up equally in both but the person who's feeling super threatened either their survival or their social survival of their ego their blood pressure went up because of the Vaso constriction the other person who is viewing the same stressor as I can do this this is a great Challenge and opportunity I have what it takes those types of thoughts generate a different hemodynamic response which is actually more cardiac output so blood pressure is going up but in this healthier way more oxygenation to the brain better problem solving they're able to maintain this positive outlook so we've measured the threat challenge response in many lab studies and we know lots of things so if you're having more of the challenge response at the end of it you're less inflamed so just in the lab within an hour or two we see that they they didn't trigger all that pro-inflammatory response and their ters tend to be longer which is a measure we can talk more about but basically it looks like they have a slower speed of Aging that is super interesting you call this a stress uh challenge resp response so we could call this kind of a um two to be really simplistic two types of psychological stress response feeling threatened like you're going to fail you're embarrassed um you know that social pain response we know well that feels terrible um but that also that huge stress response when we you know we feel it in our stomach our heart is pounding it's just an ere exaggerated response that response biologically is different and the thoughts that go with it are different and we recover a lot slower and then there's the challenge response which is this it's more of that kind of activated um excited response and the beauty is that there are lots of studies out there done by emotions and social psychologists that tilt people toward the challenge response we can actually promote that challenge response and so when you asked about like is it good to have a repeated stress response yes if it's if it's manageable right then we're kind of building the muscle of stress resilience I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors athletic greens athletic greens now called ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs I've been taking athletic green since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast the reason I started taking athletic greens and the reason I still take athletic greens once or usually twice a day is that it gets me the probiotics that I need for gut health our gut is very important it's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain the immune system and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health and those probiotics and athletic greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health in addition athletic greens contains a number of adaptogens vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met and it tastes great if you'd like to try athletic greens you can go to athletic greens.com huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road in the car on the plane Etc and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's athletic greens.com huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 what are the sorts of things that people I can do in order including me I should say um can do in order to um wage that challenge response is this purely based on mindset like instead of saying why me why this why now I can't believe this is happening is it a mental pivot to okay this is a great opportunity for growth I don't know how I'm going to manage this but I'll manage this um you know you want to stop me you got to kill me type of type of mindset is that is that the the switch that then the body follows because this is an interesting instance where the uh most all the stress mitigation work that my lab does is focused on using the body to control the mind but here we're talking about the Mind controlling the body first and then the body following suit which I find um equally fascinating um so are there some specific mental scripts that people follow and are we all able to follow those those scripts yes to some extent we control the script we can use that script to prepare ourselves going into a stressful situ ation and we can use it at any point during the stress or so some of us are just wired to have a big threat response period maybe it's you know it's h epigenetics we've inherited maybe it's tra early trauma that has shaped us to be ex have this exaggerated emotional response and yes we and others have found that trauma sensitizes our emotional stress response so that we are feeling more threatened but that's okay because that's the part we can't control and we just have to have a lot of self-compassion and awareness that okay this is what I do my body reacts like this but what happens next that's when we can start to use those statements self-comforting self-compassion distancing there's all sorts of statements that allow us to then recover more quickly so when we want to shift from a uh threatened response to a kind of challenge response are there any data that dictate whether whether or not we should keep those statements in our head write them down say them out loud I guess what I'm trying to do here is trying to get to a little bit more of the the meat of the the actionable since since a lot of our listeners I think we'll be um as I am very excited about the idea that a mere shift in our mentality about stress can give us the opposite outcome I mean before you were talking about Vaso constriction and inflammation and all these bad things to um put it lightly and then in the challenge response to stress getting the exact opposite more vasod dilation more resources used and more positive effects on the brain and body so what are some um if if you can recall from the papers if not that's fine but I'm just curious what what those specific tools might every statement you said Andrew is good it's a good one the whole trick here is that people need to find the the strength statements the stress Shields I call them that fit them that that feels right and that they believe and so they I know I list a bunch of options in chapter 3 which is called be the lion instead of the gazelle so the the Li and gazelle are both you know high blood pressure high stress and the Lion's chasing the gazelle but the G gazelle's having this total threat basal constriction response because um she might die lion might get dinner right so it's needing to mount the stress response because it's so excited to get the tasty dinner for you know the next few days and so the lion is having that challenge response and so we can remind ourselves be the lion we it's it's not that we're always Ling or gazelle we get to shape that and so some of those statements are well let's say right when when we're going into it list your resources why have you ever dealt with any situation like this remind yourself of past successes remind yourself of someone you can call or text or feel supported by remind yourself that this outcome is not going to ffect your life in 10 years or five years that's a distancing kind of um perspective taking so there's all these strategies and and you got to use what works for you telling yourself I got this I can do it I can get through it I have what it takes those are all good Shields and another set is you know we some of us feel really stressed out by stress like once we get feel our heart racing that leads to oh no you know this is bad for me and so rather than than getting stressed by stress we actually want to remind ourselves that this stress response is empowering this is going to help me cope my body is excited my body is doing just what it should right now so that reframing in Studies by Wendy Mendes and others my my colleagues who do this reappraisal research they have basically train people to view stress as positive during the stressful situations in the lab people do better they perform better they feel more positive emotion they problem solve better they recover more quickly so pretty powerful stuff yeah that is powerful stuff I'm wondering if we can talk about the relationship between stress and eating and I think that's also a great opportunity for us to talk about the opioid system a lot of people are familiar with the so-called um opioid epidemic and opioid crisis um you know sadly you know far too many people are dying a feny overdose and we all know about the oxy conton epidemic and all these people addicted to opioids and um that's not really what this is about um what we're about to talk about is the fact that we have an opioid system within us that is neurons and other cell types that can red excuse me can release substances into our brain and body that make us feel less pain and make us feel sedated but at a healthy level right and yet there are a lot of things besides drugs that can activate this opioid system um I think sex activates the endogenous opioid system as far as I I last read there was a paper out recently but also food can do it um and again to healthy levels um provided the context is healthy of course what is the relationship between stress and eating and eating and the opioid system stress and eating is an interesting one so most people when they feel stressed or you know I'm just going to ask you do you eat more or less when you're stressed less definitely I feel like I can go two three days without food when I'm when I'm really stressed but I came up in a profession where um sadly for me all nighters were part of the regular until pretty recently a couple years ago when I just called an end to that um and no it wasn't just because of procrastination it was just work overload um but I can go a long period of time without eating although I love to eat mhm uh so I do point out that I do love to eat and what does the body feel like when you're in that stress State when you're not even hungry you're kind of shut down in your digestion that I have enough energy from my neural resources from adrenaline and generally those periods of time when I'm not hungry coincide with a uh hyperfocus on the stressor the deadline whatever it is in life that that needs tending to and um food just doesn't appeal to me as much it doesn't taste as good and it's not as enticing yeah so we think that your type of um body temperament is high sympathetic and so when you have a big stress response your digestion is is pretty much shut down like it's would be the opposite eating would be the opposite of what your body is telling you to do I should I'm just going to forgive me for interrupting uh for those of you hearing sympathetic we're we're not talking about sympathy we're talking about the the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system which is the so-call fight ORF flight arm as opposed to the parasympathetic in any event sorry to interrupt but want to make sure that um sometimes people hear sympathy and then they think emotional sympathy um I like to think I have that too but um okay so I so I tend to lean more towards the sympathetic meaning um more alertness arousal yeah on the Seesaw of the autonomic nervous system and I I'm a High um sympathetic Rector I lose weight when I go through like writing my dissertation I look like a skeleton at the end um but that's not what most people complain about it's not weight loss most people complain about overeating or binge eating when they're emotional when they're stressed and so that's the more common pattern and what that that looks different both in the brain and biologically and so what it looks like is that the stress response is driving cravings and also let's say high insulin or an an insulin resistance State and what goes along with that is tending to be over away or have obesity and so just by whe whether it's through conditioning or genetics having that kind of larger body with a big stress eating temperament that is a challenge in life and I've been you know I've worked with people with different eating conditions Eating Disorders Bing eating and it is a um what's hard about it is number one it's very common and normative to just feel like you can't feel safe iated so it's this compulsive eating tendency that stress brings you to and so the so what it mean we measure this it's very easy to measure it means that people feel like um they can't control their eating they don't get full um they think about food a lot and so stress kind of exacerbates that tendency and that is a you know it's a it's a common phenotype like we've studied it and maybe 50% of people with obesity have that um do lean people have that some not many like less than 20% but what they also have is this tremendous kind of uh diet what we call dietary strand or control over their eating so they're they are able to to um not overeat even though they're thinking about food a lot so that's that is you know that explains that unusual body of someone who's really more um still has those compulsive traits so why does this matter this makes it really hard to eat well because when you're stressed you're D you're craving the comfort food the high fat high sugar high salt uh depending on your temperament and that is that means with repeated bouts of stress you're just going to be gaining weight and particularly in the intraabdominal area that's what we've seen we've seen it cross-sectionally we've seen it in Rat studies and mice studies and now we've seen it in people in many St for about 10 years I studied this and the question was is what's happening in people people the same thing that's happening in mice if you stress them out and you give them Oreos the mice develop binge eating they get really compulsive and they get this you know terrible metabolic Health profile metabolic syndrome where they're they're round you know their in their belly fat basically expands like a cushion and that's because that's this really good immediate source of energy during stress so like we're really well-wired to if our body thinks we're under chronic stress we're going to store stress fat or abdominal fat so we can mobilize that in a second and then the second question we've asked is can you reverse that with different interventions can you can you block the compulsive eating um so I can I can tell you what we found there but the opioid system that you mentioned is certainly involved and in studies with um people lean people and people with obesity my colleague Raji sinat yel it's basically found that when you stress them out people with obesity are having a different reward response and they're having they're the more insulin resistant they are the more their Reward Center lights up during stress and what's causal there like what's the chicken what's the egg so because I can imagine these were people that at one time were not obese who got stressed um the opioid system reacted in a particularly uh potent way to food and they were able to clamp their stress and so then they become or binge eaters in the context of stress yeah um and that leads to insulin insensitivity exactly I could also imagine that they were insulin and sensitive therefore they need to eat more in order to feel kind of an increase in uh satiety because we know this um now uh B based on brain and body mechanisms and then that set off a Cascade of things leading to obesity um not that it necessarily matters but what's causal do we know if I think it really does matter I think there's been a you know a mistake of kind of confounding all obesity with food addiction and um and metabolic disease and it's completely heterogenous so I I think it's the developmental path that you're describing which is that um there's a tendency toward having bigger reward response and hunger during stress so it becomes a way of coping a lifestyle and and that is a pathway toward obesity and so some obese people have a disregulated stress response but I but not all of them I mean it really is a certain type of person so that's why we target people with Cravings in all of our intervention studies now we want to know who has more of the compulsive eating type because they need a different set of skills to cope with stress and to lose weight if that's their goal there's a drug I'm sure you're familiar with nxone which is can block the opioid receptor it's used to block the opioid receptor in the context of different types of addiction have people tried to use ultraone in the context of binge eating and does it help people lose weight because it presumably reduces some of the rewarding properties of of food that's one of the very few drug combinations that has been used for Bing eting so it was a combination of nxone and Wellbutrin and I'm not sure at this moment how much um that's favored for Bing eating but certainly the early trials showed that it it really does damp down on the compulsive eating interesting so is that a commonly prescribed uh kit of drugs now for for obesity I know there's a lot of excitement nowadays about these semaglutide yeah um analoges because they do seem very effective in blocking hunger especially in type two diabetics I don't know if you're familiar with but right there s of all the rage um mostly because people saw the before and after photos of Elon he had his shirt off on a boat and there were some not so nice comments made about him and then sometime later he was quite a bit lighter and um he announced that he had been taking one of these semaglutide agonists yeah yeah I really hope that we come up with um safe and effective drugs and one thing to think about is that the the challenge that we all have um particularly if we're prone to obesity is the toxic food environment and particularly the refined sugar and regardless of what we're on Metformin or one of these drugs we override it with our diet and and really the improved nutrition is the only way to solve it as a public health problem I mean the drug companies are saying everyone should be you know everyone with a certain BMI should be on one of these new drugs and it's just rubbish and it's not going to lead to long-term Health well I I know you have a colleague there at UCSF um Dr Robert lustig who's been talking about sugars and hidden sugars for years and the problems with that and and we don't want to demonize sugar is the only cause of the Obesity epidemic but it's certainly one of them at least that that's my belief to the data yes and and Rob is the biggest proponent of you know of helping people understand the big problem in the root is in the processed food and the sugar and that the drugs don't touch that we just we override effects of any drugs with our diet and and so it's um it's been a a losing battle really because of the force of big food and big Pharma so let me go back to the the the compulsive eating so we've we've we've um there are some clues about how to break that cycle so one is in our weight loss trials or healthy mindful eating trials we find that mindful eating is not going to cause a lot of weight loss period but the people who benefit most from learning this kind of calm self-regulation where you check in with your hunger you slow down you increase your awareness of your body so interceptive awareness that um type of skill is really critical for people with compulsive eating and so in our trials we find that if they people with compulsive eating if they get that if they get randomized to the mindful eating they do better in terms of their insulin resistance and their glucose and their long-term weight loss so that's one good clue and another is the positive stress pathway looks important for breaking the compulsive eating cycle so EX high-intensity interval training or you know maybe um some of these other ways that we've been been talking about to increase the Bly stress in these short-term ways to metabolize stress in our body can help with the Cravings so what would that look like in the context of let's say somebody um has the opposite phenotype to me they get stress and they find themselves reaching for snack food or that they simply can't reach satiety they just want to eat and eat and eat um what are some of the aside from n treone and W Butrin and some of these Pres approaches because I always say while I value certainly value prescription drugs in certain context I always feel like Behavior should come first dos and don'ts then nutrition then supplementation and then if and only if it's still needed prescription drugs but that's just my bias based on my observation reasonable I like to think so uh it also is a uh it starts at a zero cost um Endeavor I mean behaviors require time but it certainly um includes everybody not just those that have insurance or that live in a particular region of the US or the world so anyway um that's my bias and at least for the time being I'm sticking with it um it's the basis of a lot of what we talk about on this podcast but nonetheless if somebody is uh finding themselves in that category of of binge eating or heading towards binge eating or using food to comfort or alleviate stress how should they intervene in their own thoughts and behavior we talked about the the bins top down strategies changing the body changing the scene we need all of those I mean the the compulsive drive to eat is one of our you know strongest impulses if we've developed that pathway and so the we train people for example in mindful awareness of separating out emotions from Hunger so they get really wrapped up together so just labeling how you're feeling labeling your H hunger from one to 10 and figuring out is it am I really hungry or as a boredom that helps people and if you do that checkin right before you eat that helps the most so that's the top down mindful check-in the uh other thing we help people do is like ride the craving surf the herbs so we deal a lot with soda Drinkers and it is addictive and there is nothing worse than drinking sugared soda for our body so we help people by help um having them water watch their craving pass and and knowing that it's a matter of time that they can surf the urge without jumping to consuming and so that practice helps some people especially with practice the push-ups the taking a walk the changing the scene getting away from food is always going to be a huge strong strategy if you can get yourself away from it the the problem is as you know is that the Cravings get you to the buffet they drive you to the the soda ET and so just you know creating safe environments both at home and in the workplace where you don't have soda is really important so we tried that at UCSF my colleagues and I um including Rob lastig the anti-sugar doctor we just saw the absurdity of being a medical center people come with these chronic diseases and what are they served in the cafeteria or even at their bedside sugared Coke in the hospital in the hospital and so my colleague laor Schmidt who's uh partly responsible for the soda tax she rallied the all the um we went top down to Administration but bottom up to vendors got rid of all the soda in all of our hospitals and campuses and we found two things number one people who were heavy drinkers lost weight in the most important Place their waste heavy soda drinkers mhm so when we took it out of the workplace they actually their health improved and number two those with compulsive eating they score high on our our little scale for um reward-based drive it didn't help them so then we randomized half of them to get some extra boost we call it motivational interviewing where we're really supporting them more and helping them you know think of goals like being with their grandchildren not getting diabetes and and that little bit of support helped them TR tremendously and so now we're trying to roll that out in you know a big controlled trial but at least 100 hospitals have adopted the um stop selling sugary drinks because people don't want to be sick but they can't help it if they have the reward drive and if they have the compulsivity and it's right there at work we're just working against Health that's super interesting I I think that um for most of us we think about soda as the kind of thing that maybe we have every once in a while or that we drank more when we were kids I seem to have lost my appetite for soda at some point you just know too much teen years maybe or just at some point I I I started to feel like there were better Alternatives um and you know like what well okay well people want ideas yeah well full confession I mean okay most of my nonwater uh beverage consumption is going to be either coffee um usually black coffee or nowadays I sometimes we throw some ketones in there not cuz I'm on a ketogenic diet but for I do feel like it makes my uh level of focus and cognition better pouring in this morning yeah I do use it before podcast and we're prepping for podcast it it um there are good data showing that uh we can all utilize ketones as a as a brain fuel even if we're not on ketogenic diet that's um clear to me based on my experience and the data as I see them and understand them um or Yer bate tea which is just a caffeinated uh tea from um South America which I like very much um however I am guilty of drinking the occasional diet soda every once in a while and I know that you know some of my audience will just gasp how could I do that but we're talking about the occasional diet coke diet soda the occasional Diet Coke mostly because I I don't like the taste of sugary soda and I actually really like the taste of diet soda Aspartame is a particularly rewarding taste for me um and as a consequence I try and avoid drinking it more than I might have a can of Diet Coke once a month maximum usually on a plane or something like that so that's the extent of it but if I have the choice between a really great coffee and a soda it's going to be coffee or yerbamate and a soda it's gonna be yerbamate um or food and soda I'm going to eat instead and so that's me but I do recall you know as a teenager soda was kind of a default you just kind of like go to the soda fountain and fill the drink it felt like such a rewarding thing um and I think the reason we're drilling into this more deeply is it sounds to me based on what you said earlier in my read of the literature also brings me the idea that that drinking sugar in the form of liquid is one of the worst things that we can do in terms of our bodily regulation of insulin and glucose um it's I don't want to use the words empty calories because that's kind of a loaded phrase but it is essentially empty calories it doesn't well it's harmful calories they're not empty yeah I mean there no amino acids in there they're no essential fatty acids and there aren't many carbohydrates you can really utilize for um long-term bouts of mental or physical work so so do you view soda as one of the um the worst certainly not the best but one of the worst culprits out there I mean it is really prominent especially nowadays also we should include energy drinks a lot of kids especially males by the way it's it's almost this is crazy it's almost 95% of energy drink consumption is males interesting and I don't know what what is maybe it's the packaging or who how the marketing has been pitched but by the way as soon as I say that someone will be in the YouTube comments telling me that that's completely false but we can point you to the data um so what are your thoughts on sugary drinks and what that's doing um how it do you think this is a reaction to how much stress people people are experiencing is this like people's attempt to to inoculate their stress or is it simply that it tastes good and it's easy to consume and it's relatively inexpensive people have not and we have not really studied the sugary drinks in the same way we have studied the comfort food and the binge eating and so um my guess is that it is part of a stress response but even more than that it's part of the honic cycle so when you get the sugar especially if it's packed with caffeine that's going to be a more addictive drink you get this you know really feel-good response right away and then you get the low and it's the hedonic withdrawal so which is this you actually feel bad when it's been a while since you've had it and so then it drives the compulsivity you want it again because you want to not because you want to feel good you want to get rid of feeling bad so that's what happens with both food addiction and we think that happens with sugary drinks now let me tell you that when you asked is is a sugary drink one of the worst things we can do for our health yes because sugary food doesn't go to our brain as quickly as a liquid liquid sugar a sugary drink so think about cocaine and crack crack goes to the brain immediately and it's that much more addictive that's how we think of liquid sugar The View on sugar I think is starting to change and I think in the years to come provided um folks like you and Dr lustig continue to uh be vocal about it which I hope you will um I think it's going to shift things quite a bit I look at it a little bit like trans fats you know I was growing up people ate margarine and now like trans fats are banned in many cities um it's kind of incredible how these things have have changed um over time and it requires an effort not just on social media but podcast and I think also lobbying uh lobbying our politicians really getting them to understand um just how pricious the stuff is there's a lot of social norms that go into like what's good for for all of us as a as a group or community and what's personal choice it's very fiery you know I just I've heard uh colleague talking about how bringing junk food or soda to work is like passive smoking you're like you're bringing something in that's going to pollute other people's health and you shouldn't do it so that's that's much more edgy and people will fight them on that um but the the the basic reality is yeah we're going to eat the donuts if they're in front of us and so in it is much more considerate to bring a bowl of fruit I do love a good donut every once a while myute a certain circuit in my brain I'm glad you brought up smoking I don't want to take us off topic but as long as we're venturing into these general or I should say more General and yet really important themes around public health and food you know I learned something interesting about smoking and why so few people now smoke um I always thought that the campaigns around smoking and how terrible it is for us showing pictures of lungs that are you know caked with all this tar and like you know cancer and all this stuff was the effective message but what I learned was that one of the most effective messaging systems in the in the the battle against smoking was to get young people to stop smoking not by telling them it was bad for them but by showing them videos of these um rich men sitting around tables cackling about the fact that they're making so much money on the health problems of other people because of smoking in other words what they did is they made being a non-smoker anti-establishment MH and so I find it very interesting anytime there's something like soda or highly processed foods that are so woven into the establishment it seems like the you can we can tell people until you know we're bleue in the face about all the health concerns with with these things you know sugar is bad and this is bad highly processed food is bad some people might change their behavior but it seems like for the younger generation the thing that's most effective is to activate their sense of rebellion this has been true for probably hundreds of thousands of years but it's certainly true in the last hundred years and let them see that there is a very strong um big food sometimes big Pharma but certainly big food system that is working against them and that it in order to take control of their health actually we want to activate their sense of rebellion so that they're like no I'm going to take excellent care of myself I'm not going to fall victim to this monetary scheme and here I'm not pointing to any conspiracy I mean this has been seen with smoking this has been seen with a number of different Pharmaceuticals again not all Pharmaceuticals are bad this is true of of a number of different aspects of of kind of Big Marketing absolutely it's like pull the blinders off let people know that we're vulnerable to all the marketing and that there's there really are suppression of data behind a lot of it so it had it's happening with um with eating disorders too Eric stce who's at at Stanford with you has been using this method we call it dissonance showing people with eating disorders how the food industry has been manipulative and has tried to design foods for addiction for the highest bang for the buck with dopamine Etc and so that has helped reduce eating disorders in these studies and it has even helped reduce reward drive that isn't that amazing that the dissonance could do that so interesting yeah I think uh what it's telling us is that um few things are as strong as the um no I won't I refuse to response in terms of changing behavior um especially when there's something to push against so it's not just a battle with ourselves I want the soda but I'm not going to drink it and it becomes a well I want it but I want it because you are making me think I want it I don't actually want that so um I don't know maybe this is getting me back into my teenage mindset but I think a sense of rebellion provided it's in the direction of Health one's own health and the health of others of course um can be a positive thing yeah well we do that with the mindful eating we really we have them bring in the junkiest processed food they can think of like a Twinkie and eat that really slowly and mindfully and few people finish it they're like that actually wasn't nearly as good as the picture of it and the idea of it and so it's like that reward predictive error that you've talked about where they they think the brain is driving them to have it because of the advertising and their expectation that they'll feel good but if they're really paying attention it's that it's a very disappointing experience versus we also have people Savor a piece of good chocolate whichever they like milk or dark and that experience teaches them to eat slowly and really enjoy small amounts of rewarding food so that they're not they don't need to feel full and binge oh so interesting um dark or milk chocolate dark yeah like us I actually like the 100% chocolate there's one brand of Venezuelan chocolate that's 100% which sound it might sound awful but it's actually quite good it has it I think that was the first time I could actually taste the the real elements of chocolate interesting yeah that is not rewarding it's way too bitter for me I need the mouth feel you know give me some fat in it oh my well yeah it's hard to find but um it's out there I'd like to just take a brief moment and thank one of our podcast sponsors which is insid tracker inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that blood work is the only way that you can monitor the markers such as hormone markers lipids metabolic factors Etc that impact your immediate and long-term Health one one major challenge with blood work however is that most of the time it does not come back with any information about what to do in order to move the values for hormones metabolic factors lipids Etc into the ranges that you want with insid tracker changing those values becomes very straightforward because it has a personalized dashboard that you can use to address the nutrition-based behavior-based supplement based approaches that you can use in order to move those values into the ranges that are optimal for you Your vitality and your longevity inside tracker now includes a measurement of APO lipoprotein B so-call apob in their ultimate plan apob is a key marker of cardiovascular health and therefore there's extreme value to knowing your apob levels if you'd like to try insid tracker you can go to insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off any of insid tracker's plans again that's insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off so while we're talking about stress eating obesity and um here we've also broaden the discussion to include different Generations we're talking about teens and adults um I'd love for you to share with us your findings around this study that you did of pregnant women and how stress and pregnancy and different patterns of eating and uh physiological changes that people experience during pregnancy uh could you share with us what those findings were because I think those are relevant not just to people who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant but to everybody because I think they shed light on how we manage stress and sometimes how we fail to manage yeah so with overweight and obesity we know we can't just change calories it's just not going to work the next stressful events going to come along and people will you know go back to what their brain is driving them to do is to you know binge on comfort food and so we've done these interventions with uh men and women that show that we can help them regulate using some of these mindful eating strategies checking in we wanted to do this with pregnant women because when you have excess weight and you're pregnant you're really vulnerable to gaining excessive weight during pregnancy which is not healthy for the mom or the the The Offspring so we we did this study it took us probably 10 years total to you know get the Grand and recruit groups of 10 women who are pregnant in the same stage and give them this training in mindful eating mindful nutrition stress reduction and then my colleague Nikki B bush has been following the babies for I think it's been almost 10 years since then and here's what we found first of all we couldn't stop excess weight gain the women in the control group gained about about 60% of them gained excess weight during pregnancy and same with our mindful group so maybe it's end of story you'd stop there and say it fails don't do it there have been so many beautiful developments in the women who got the training that we we just keep are you know being shocked by how impactful this stress reduction training was it was just two months of their life but but pregnancy is a very critical period when these women were uh changing their habits and they're very motivated to help their baby so here's what we found within that first month of the intervention they all got this oral glucose tolerance test so they all got a they got a blood test to see how well their body was metabolizing food sugar and so it's like a by diabetes test and what we found was that twice as many women in the no treatment control group had impaired glucose tolerance during pregnancy it's a it's a common high risk and half that many women had this in the mindfulness group so by reducing stress they improved their insulin sensitivity during pregnancy so imagine what that's doing to the baby too then the the babies have come out with less obesity less illnesses in their first year of life and more of this kind of healthy stress response when they've been stressed out in in the lab study and so then 10 eight years later we looked at the mental health of the mom so right after the intervention eight weeks later everyone in our mindfulness stress Direction group felt great they felt less depressed they had less stress and less anxiety that's what you'd expect right I mean they just gone to a weekly class they got all the support but eight years later they still showed improved mental health every year that we measured them they still looked better so it's probably one of the longest studies looking at long-term effects of a mindfulness training and I don't think it was a coincidence that was during pregnancy I think this is a very important time to have these skills and being in a group adds that social support piece that we know is powerful it's an incredible result uh could you share with us what the mindfulness intervention was and when it was initiated when it was stopped so we're talking about 10 minutes a day of meditation as many details as you can possibly give us because I know um even though I don't think I'll ever be pregnant um I don't plan on it and uh uh you never know well um yeah High 0o minus one probability in my mind but anyway maybe other people have other ideas for me but um zero minus one probability in my mind and yet I'm very interested in this mindfulness intervention because it sounds like a very potent one mhm um so much so that it's multi having a multigenerational impact so how many minutes a day um how many days per week um we had them they met once a week we they had little reminder cards I mean we need all the reminders we can you know Post-its on the fridge timers in our phone to do this mindful check-in and so they were during the week doing this check-in and it was simply um a a mindful check in closing their eyes and feeling their body feeling their labeling their emotions so it was mindful breathing and then it was some movement and we taught them prenatal yoga but really any mindbody movement people like different things there's Chiang um there's there's um even just slow walking would have worked um so it was uh mindful check-in breathe move my body that's what the reminder card Said So Close Your Eyes and look inside do slow breathing they also put their hands on their belly and so they felt that they were taking care of their baby and then more movement so they they did increase their walking and the mindful checkins are as we were talking about at the very beginning I would say necessary but not sufficient we've got to stop during the day and check in and look inside if we're not aware of where our mind is we are just subject to the you know believing the stressful thoughts thinking that we need to keep ruminating their sticky thoughts so the mindful checken is really important and then I think the breathing as we've talked about is is probably the more direct way that they're influencing the prenatal environment the uterine environment to reduce the stress in that the baby's being exposed to and the movement refocuses us from our mind and our ruminative thoughts to the experiences to what we feel in the body there's even been a study that showed that overweight people with a lot of Cravings if they do the body scan that's simply focusing on the body from the head to the toe you know just reminding ourselves to focus on each part of the body breathe into it release tension it's very basic and simple the body scan significantly reduced Cravings I mean to me that's it's really hard to reduce cravings so like just that refocusing on the body took away stress anxiety self-referential thoughts that kind of our favorite topic thinking about ourself thinking negative thoughts about oursel to relaxing feeling ease feeling well-being I can't help but ask about what that body skin might have been doing at a little bit more of a me mechanistic level um some of the listeners might be familiar with these terms but some won't so I'll just um briefly Define them uh we can perceive things in terms of exteroception or basically paying attention to and focusing on things beyond the confines of our skin or interception I I realize you know all this uh but for their sake um no one really understands interception go for it so an interception essentially the sensory the sensory ination of the of the internal organs of our own skin that includes proception and which is our knowledge or our sense of where our limbs are where we are relative to gravity all that stuff and you know it raises this body scan result that that is the fact that a brief body scan can reduce Cravings raises this question in my mind which is is craving a um heighten sense of interception or heighten sense of extra reception so I could think of one form of craving where for instance the dut again donuts for me is in front of me and I'm thinking that I want that and so I'm almost in complete exteroception but I'm Tethered to it like my internal world is Tethered to the dut it's almost like the dut is in control of me briefly okay and then I eat it um but it's hijacked your prefrontal cortex it's it's hijacked everything yeah and then if I do a body scan so I'm putting myself in this experiment in it's kind of uh hypothetical scenario I'm putting myself into this experiment I do a body scan which without question is Shifting me more towards interoception right I'm focusing on my skin my heart rate all these things interception so I could see how that would draw my attention off of the external stimulus and reduce craving and that makes me wonder whether or not craving is a form of exteroception where our interception is just exquisitly locked to exteroception and if so you know because I do think this is a remarkable result it is very hard to stop Cravings I mean we had a guest on here a former colleague of mine at at Stanford who's now the chair of neur surgery at upen uh School of Medicine which is Casey Halper I mean they do they literally drill down through the skull of people who have been cheating disorder and start stimulating different brain areas because these people are so out of control in terms of their binge eating I mean that's the kind of intervention that is considered necessary for a lot of folks who binge so here you're telling me a body scan in some individuals can reduce that and I have to wonder whether or not it's um somehow breaking that inter receptive EXT receptive tether anyway um I'm speculating here but I'd love your thoughts on on Bing on craving and binging and breaking binging um do you think that there are behavioral interventions um that could be layered on top of body scans should we all be doing body scans routinely yes why not you know and some people aren't going to like that lying down is maybe not comfortable and so any Mind Body activity is going to do the same it's going to be you know I think breaking that link that you talked about yeah I I find this whole interceptive EXT receptive balance thing um one of the more interesting conversations these days in Neuroscience because we're starting finally starting to understand what some of the the circuitries are and they do link to these reward Pathways in any event um getting back to the relationship between stress and food and maybe even just weaving back a little bit to the uh opioid system have there been any long-term studies of stress intervention you know in the studies that we do in our laboratory we get people for a month they do one intervention we swap them to another intervention a month we analyze data takes a couple years to do all that but we write papers and we move on um sounds like your lab labatory has been involved in doing a lot of studies where you're examining people over a very long period of time even their children uh what can we learn about the long-term outcomes of things like body scans meditation and then we'll get into breath work there haven't been that many long-term studies of stress interventions now that you mention it I think the meditation studies are probably the best example there are some studies that have either followed people who have um taken up medic meditation or just these cross-sectional studies where you compare a long-term meditator to someone who's never meditated and they they are interesting I mean let's talk about the cross-sectional studies you're already you know studying someone who eats like kale chips instead of potato chips there's a lot of differences in who decides to be a meditator we in terms of the health and biology we have found that there is slower biological aging and other people have found that um in these meditation interventions we do the short-term ones the inflammatory Pathways of gene expression are dampened way down and cross-sectionally other people like Elizabeth hoi have found longer tiir in the meditators versus the controls um so we we haven't really found tiir lengthening in our short-term meditation studies but we do find boosts in tarase activity which is this enzyme that protects our cell aging slows our cell aging rilds the tiir so those are um those are those are studies that suggest if someone were to continue meditating they might keep up that slower rate of Aging so there's one study we did which I think was particularly um fun we went to a retreat center where deepo choer leads this one we Transcendental Meditation Retreat so people got a mantra and they were um focusing for probably eight hours a day on different uh yoga meditation and reflective exercises and then we had half the group just walk around the resorts take walks hear some boring Health talks so that was our control group and what we found from that study was that in the short run run a week later everyone felt fantastic after the week right they weren't allowed to bring their laptop and work and they uh ate this great anti inflammatory diet an ayurvedic diet and then the gene expression Pathways were like night and day from day one to the last day and our model of um machine learning model was able to identify people over 90% it could say whether they were on day one or day seven and the difference really emerged over the long run we went and we followed them about 10 months later and we found that not everyone felt great 10 months later the group who learned meditation still had lower depression but the control group bounced right back up and then we looked a little bit further and we saw that people with early adversity benefited the most from the meditation condition uh what was the meditation condition how long uh per day yeah it well so they did they learned transcendental Med sound primordial sound meditation which is similar to TM where you have a you're focused attention on your on a word over and over but there's also more awareness of the um the body and that was you know I I couldn't say how many minutes a day but it was on and off during the day okay so repeatedly but for a fairly short period of time one week yeah right yeah I've never done one of these extended meditation Retreats are you interested well various people in my life have told me that I needed to go do a silent meditation but they probably were emphasizing the silent part the um uh still I recommend them I think they're amazing ways to get to the mind and to really calm the body in ways like a a you know a Quantum shift in our level of stress that we don't get it's very hard to get in short belts I do a daily meditation practice but it's a relatively brief meditation practice I do tend to focus more on things like deliberate cold exposure and breath work and exercise and sunlight and all all the things I talk about in the podcast but I'm certainly not averse to uh doing a longer meditation are all of these um uh TM meditations are they silent meditations and they range from what two days to a week is that well the Retreats you can always find a retreat that's you know half a day one day a week two weeks so you don't go right into a two we you work up to it so the longest I've ever done is a two week silent Meditation Retreat and that was after you know 10 years of doing yearly shorter Retreats and then when you you know I think it would be too hard and stressful if you haven't been able to I mean meditation can be stressful if it you know you think that you're failing at it and um so you need to have kind of developed the skill a little bit before you go on the the Retreats and so lots of classes can do that in online but I think the short bouts every day are that is what is the most important message for people for for managing daily stress and that's the in the stress prescription it's very much about how we can do short daily nudges to reduce our stress arousal so breathing is the one of the best body-based examples of getting right there but there are other ways so being in nature that's a really strong stimulus an environment that sends all sorts of safety signals to us yeah certainly it's not an either or but it seems like nowadays A lot of the discussion that used to be had around meditation and its ability to evoke neuroplasticity and things of that sort has shifted over to a um an increased focus on psychedelics a common theme on this podcast but it just seems like in you know taking the pulse of social media and the landscape out there there's so much excitement about psilocybin both in micro do and macro do and MDMA and some of the other trials that are out there that many people are starting to forget the incredibly rich and vast literature supporting the use of even brief meditation practices for reshaping the mind so I'm glad that um we're talking about meditation but I mean even going into plant medicine experiences is enhanced if you have a little bit of training in how to in metacognition how to view the mind and thoughts you can observe the whole experience with that much more kind of calmness skill and wisdom knowing this is just the mind doing these cool things so it's not they're not separate and then I think the the psilocybin experiences enhance daily meditation so they really go well together yeah and just as a little editorial on uh psychedelics um what's interesting I think about the clinical data is that um you know we think of the the Psychedelic Journey as the time in which all the changes occur because it has all these properties of hallucinations and altered thinking Etc that acts as kind of a gravitational pull around our our ideas about what psychedelics do but it's actually in the window after the Psychedelic Journey that the actual rewiring of the brain takes place so when people talk about integration afterwards they're not just talking about the few hours where they're you know I'm parachuting back down to to uh uh typical consciousness let's call it that but that there's this long perhaps even weeks or monthl long tale of plasticity and that's actually when most of the rewiring is happening and which I find really interesting which is not unlike meditation where sure in one bout of meditation you might see a adjustment or rewiring of the brain but at least from the book altered traits which I'm a big fan of um talked about these daily repeated short meditations or these longer TM Retreats as they're sometimes called um in inducing uh this big time brain plastic all right well now I'm going to have to do it and I'll report back to everybody what my experience was although I might do it silently um I'd love to talk a little bit about some of the other health metrics that you've explored not just in the context of mindfulness but um I'm particularly intrigued by uh a graph here I'm showing my really nerdy side there's a graph in one of your papers it's the peard paper 2018 we will provide a link to to this in the show note captions if people want to take a look but it essentially describes the relationship between mitochondrial health and mood um in the context of people who have different type of mood Tendencies if you um if you would be willing to just kind of describe the top Contour of that study and some of the the points that that you find most interesting I think it's a fascinating study and and I I'm so glad you did it but I'll let you tell us about it yeah we've we've done these in-depth studies where we are looking at people under a lot of daily demand caregivers and then we look un look at you know normal people parents of neurotypical children who still have a lot of stress but we that we then ask you know does do people under chronic stress have accelerated aging so we look at tiir epigenetics mitochondrial health and then what explains those who look really good who look resilient and don't look vulnerable and so then we can find out like what's the magic sauce in the day that protects them from chronic stress so Martin Bard my colleague who has been obsessed with mitochondrial Health as a pathway to understanding both stress and really health and disease he has developed a way to measure mitochondrial Health in humans so we can measure a bunch of enzymes and then we can adjust it for how many mitochondria we have so we have this really nice index we can get from the blood and in this study of uh young mothers who were who had either typical children or children with autism we found that the caregiving moms had significantly lower or dampened mitochondrial activity what that means is they can't produce as much energy so if they're feeling more exhausted from the chronic stress we know why I mean it's it really is a it was quite dramatic Martin commented some of those low levels even looked like people with some genetic reasons to have low mitochondrial activity but here's the beauty of that study we then get to look with within their day at their mood and ask what about the caregivers who have really great mitochondrial enzymes and and thus should be making a lot of ATP they had more positive emotions both waking up and in the evening but especially in the evening and what's so interesting that is all of these daily diary studies of stress and mood one of the things we know that matters for long-term health is how positive you feel at night so especially on a stressful day so at the end of a stressful day can you muster some feelings of content ease confidence Joy do you have any of that or has it just wiped out your positivity and so for people who feel either low lower negative or higher positive they tend to have better health trajectories so like a decade later less depression less heart disease less early death so what so that's why we care so much about daily moods and in in our study it looked like the daily mood was really quite correlated with the mitochondria levels that same day then we measured mood like you know days away from that it was much less correlated so that it's just our first study on this but it really leads us to think that our mitochondria are sensitive to our thoughts and our feelings probably on a daily basis incredible so for those of us that find ourselves in a in a state St of chronic stress um and here I'm talking about the kind of stress that you mentioned before which is you know there is unlikely to be a Simple Solution like we're just going to be grappling with this thing um and you mentioned the words radical acceptance which I'd like to uh drill into a little bit too because this is a a theme in the self-help literature and it's a a theme in that now I think in the formal psychology literature I actually um was talking to a dialectical TR dialectical psychology expert recently I think that's the the the correct title dialectical behavioral therapy correct yeah thank you that's common great one yeah you're you're correct I I was I was grasping and um that's correct and they were um talking about um some of the misconceptions about radical acceptance because I think a lot of people hear the words radical acceptance at least is what they they told me and think oh that means that you have to just accept what is and deal with it there's another form of radical acceptance which is I radically accept the fact that I'm not going to deal with this right I'm going to walk away from it but what you're talking about is chronic stress of the sort that really the stressor the fact that a very close relative or family member is dealing with a lifelong condition or the fact that um we can't extract ourselves from a situation that we are not in full agency to remove the stress or that radical acceptance of that fact then can ratchet into an understanding of okay and yet there are tools that we can use to not just offset the negative health effects but maybe even thrive in the context of this essentially turning what initially was thought of as a curse into a blessing at least biologically speaking what are the data around the practices that can help make that conversion possible I realize there's a lot of psychological work that needs to be done ongoing people need coping mechanism support groups always better to have more social support than less of course but are we again talking about a daily mindfulness practice or is it daily mindfulness of a certain type um what do we know about best practices for mitigating these essentially non-negotiable stressors it's it's a great question and it's not a quick answer I think it is partly how we view life and our our purpose in our own life what's this game that we know we were born into and even just the idea that bad things shouldn't happen sets us up for vulnerability to feel victimized to feel um like we can't you know accept bad things that have happened so so just stepping back and asking everyone listening do you have a situation in your life that is unwanted and you can't change it could be small it could be huge how much time do you spend thinking about this the more we spend time trying to problem solve or worry or just wishing things were different the more we are creating a chronic stress State and so just even taking that first kind of step back to get perspective on what are the situations in my life that stress me out and and which of these can I Circle those that I can't change they're still they're on my list so they're they're on my mind they're still upsetting they haven't receded in the background they haven't gone away just that recognition of this isn't going to go away is incredibly powerful because we can as I say put the baggage down and give ourselves some relief and some freedom from from the big space it holds in our mind and in our body and this is not a one-time thing it's a practice radical acceptance is something we practice over and over to help us loosen our grip on unwanted situations on letting them control our well-being and taking up you know this mental real estate that's so precious our attention so I would um there are statements that we can say that help us and it's I have you know there are a few metaphors so I'm an expert at this because I have I'm a caregiver and I often need to refocus from wishing things were different trying to solve things to really um radical acceptance of this is how things are right now this is the reality and by just reminding ourselves that there is freedom within that that there are things that you can do you can actually live better live well with these situations so let me tell you what we've found from our caregivers we measure where their mind is at night we we we ping them and we say in the last five minutes how much have you been wishing things were different how much have you been engaged and focused in what you're doing right right before we pinged you and just those two questions tell us so much about that person's well-being so people and actually yes the caregivers are doing more of what I'll call suffering wishing things were different not being present for their lives but regardless of that difference whether people are caregiver or not this negative mind wandering state of not being present for your your evening wishing things were different instead of being engaged predicts more unhappiness it predicts shorter tares so it it suggests that it's a pattern that has gone on for days months and years that has been wearing on them and so some of the metaphors that I think are helpful for this are thinking of yourself think of this unwanted situation and think of how you're you're pulling a rope that's attached to a brick wall and you're doing that because you care you want things to be better for yourself or this person and or a group I mean it's it's something you're passionate about and so you're pulling and pulling and every day you're pulling and and you can't move that brick wall so the only thing that's happening is that you're chafing your hands that tens that chronic tension what if you just drop the Rope I say that to myself drop the Rope when I start get you know getting going on trying to solve unsolvable problems the brick wall is still there it's never going to move yet my hands are free and so I can be freed up to live in the ways that I do have control over to do things that help around the edges so I was just talking with someone who is just so concerned about about their aging parents and you know them not getting the care they need not taking care of themselves you know things aren't going well but there was so little that they could do to help their parents and so by dropping the Rope for them meant realizing there were things they could do being present being loving uh doing the little bit of care that they could from a distance was all they could do and that's enough that's that loving presence is like a gift that we don't realize that we we always have that to give where do you think the tendency for us to try and pull on brick walls comes from I mean it's so non-adaptive um and I've also heard it St that uh people do this in the reverse Direction too meaning in time trying to control the past through current behaviors as well as trying and control the future um it's kind of so give me an example of that yeah this is something I learned from a guest we had on here Dr Paul kti's a psychiatrist Who U extremely skilled psychiatrist who wrote a book on trauma which I think is the best book on trauma frankly um and he talked about how the lyic system that engages these fight ORF flight responses has no sense of time and that's why developmental scripts get reactivated in particular parent child or caretaker child uh neural circuits that were engaged in those relationships when we were really young get reactivated in adult relationships I mean in some sense it doesn't make any sense like why would the human mind have separate circuits for adult like romantic attachment versus child parent attachment this all sounding very Freudian And yet when you look at the the Neuro Imaging it's like you get one set of circuits for understanding of relationship of course you adjust according to context and they get repurposed you don't just set that aside say that was for childhood what he said was that the lyic system and the stress system when activated um distorts our perception of time and that um this is what he was uh saying leads to the what's sometimes called the repetition compulsion people try and will repeat the same uh Place themselves into mildly to severely traumatic circumstances over and over again despite the presence of a of a trauma doesn't have to be childhood trauma you think well that doesn't make any sense is like the most illogical thing in the world like you get burned on the stove and you keep going back to the stove and the idea is that these circuits when they get activated really engage entire like cognitive scripts that make it very hard to escape it's like it pulls you into a story that is exquisitly hard to to to get away from and so that this repetition compulsion is an attempt to try and rewrite the story and this is this is the theory not just of Freudian psychology but kind of modern trauma and Neuroscience informed trauma Therapies in any event as you describe the this pulling on a brick wall I find a very compelling image um and one that uh makes total sense to try and drop the Rope as you describe it because of the incredibly High energetic demand that pulling on that rope represents as you said it's sort of a way of diverting resources toward something that has no conclusion right and in dropping the Rope you can divert those resources toward other things um so I was just curious again I wasn't consulted the design phase and I'm assuming you weren't either but you know I wonder what in us uh as scientists I'm just kind of doing the gunkan experiment here like I wonder what in US as human beings compels us to um try and change what we the unchangeable we really really really love control and we want to control the future not just because it makes us feel powerful and happy but because then we can relax if we know what's going to happen next if it's predictable we're that much happier we're not Vigilant and looking ahead and being prepared for what might happen so let me ask you that so I have two whole chapters in the stress prescription one is on uncertainty and one is on control and these drive us crazy until we can somewhat master and understand how little control we have and how much uncertainty there is and will always be so let me ask you this if you couldn't plan your day tomorrow and you wanted to know with certainty what your plans were what was going to happen how much ease and relaxation would you feel at the not knowing what's going to happen tomorrow very little so like on a 1 through 10 scale how much would that drive you crazy tomorrow tomorrow Saturday so I'm a little more flexible Monday oh no Mondays I Mondays are mine I own Monday no I'm kidding I'm just kidding I love Mondays it's always been my favorite day of the week um uh even when I was in school uh yeah that would be on that would be a six yeah six out of 10 and that's not unusual and we have a scale to measure how comfortable people are with certainty and what we already knew was that being comfortable with uncertainty is a beautiful but rare resilience Factor people who tolerate uncertainty have much less anxiety and depression and when stressful things happen they get over it more quickly so we measured this during the pandemic and what we found was that intolerance of uncertainty pretty strongly predicted pandemic anxiety PTSD depression and distress about the fires the climate the climate situation in in California so this is interest interesting I mean is this like a fixed personality and we're just stuck with our rigidity around wanting certainty or is this something that we like a muscle that we can build so I think it's a ladder and I think there are practices we can do that help us feel ease with the uncertain future some of these mindful check-ins noticing that we are carrying around uncertainty stress is one way and then reframing uncertainty as the beauty of the mystery of life and the freedom that we can feel when we realize we don't control tomorrow we just go with it and we you know we do our best and what Delight there is in just viewing things with curiosity and just seeing what emerges so even just our posture here's an exercise for dealing with uncertainty instead of like kind of that alert posture when we're like trying to take it all in and predict the next Second and like just lean back and take some slow breaths we know that's going to help Orient us and realize that we can actually face time in that way by letting it come to us and receiving what happens and that's a completely different body stance than our usual go mode during the day and that's just a way of saying I am in a you know receptive mode and I'm going to just be curious about what arises and so I actually learned that on a Meditation Retreat because I tend to be type A and I leave a retreat going from like very relaxed to like that leaning forward tense of like where's the to-do list and so carrying with me that posture of like just see let time unfold as it will without try to control things it's really interesting it gets right to the heart of something that I spent a lot of time thinking about in the context of Stress Management and also just general thriving which is that I think that um about half of the messages that we get related to stress and Mind Body interventions relate to adopting this forward Center of mass um you know this idea of okay stress can give us early dementia stress can limit our sleep stress can impair our cognition or stress can make us more resilient stress can activate all sorts of positive anti-inflammatory Pathways as well that the mindset matters and here I'm I'm doing a terrible job of it but I'm trying to scrape off and um capture the top uh Contour of the beautiful work of my colleague uh Dr Aaliyah Crum who's you know love her work been on this podcast and is I'm a huge fan of her work as well and um that mindset matters because it sh ap's physiology for sure it uh her data point to that so there there're these kind of forward Center of mass type uh approaches um and these are abundant on social media um you know different people come to mind um different archetypes really have emerged you know millions and millions of followers that are the archetypes of when challenge arises you smash into it you go through it right um and then on the other hand there are these stress ation techniques both mental and physical body oriented mind oriented Etc that are more of the sort that you described that are um they're not um being back on your heels so to speak like letting things bulldoze you but are more of this uh receptive mode and a more of an awareness mode exactly and I think that um since here we are at the table to researchers who uh focus on these issues a lot do you think it's fair for us to adopt a sort of a general framework and model that that perhaps people can adopt for themselves if they like that that of course it's not an either or but that having both of these in one's kit of tools could be valuable um because one is less energetically demanding but of course offers less opportunity for agency um at least apparently so that's the leaning back and then the the other is um certainly gives an opportunity for agency but we know from 100 years or more of psychology and psychiat atric literature and from the emerging literature on stress mitigation that it's work it's not something that is without a cost it can get you far better results than it were you to just let stress bulldoze you but that it's work and so we have to emphasize that work um in very deliberate ways exactly I couldn't agree more it's work when we know it's productive we should work and when we know there's a brick wall we should let go so I think of it I like this forward Mass idea I think of it as you muscle it and or you release it and we need both and so that letting go is a really important wise you know Discerning way to mitigate stress in the right situations and the right time and you know we can't muscle through everything right so another way I like to think about it is just the waves of life like I mean we are in an ocean and we have small waves we have big waves some of these tidal waves are going to hit all of us the global stressors the the climate disasters that will come and so when we're not in the middle of a wave which is when we need to muscle it we're between waves how much control do we have to fight the tide there some it's not black or white we we are we we can't fight a rip tide we need to go the direction of the tide but we can have some control on our Direction and it kind of goes back to um our colleague Robert spolsky's very biologically based idea of us having you know he's a little bit extreme with a no free will we are we are influenced by all of these things around us as well as all of our biological you know I'll say um brilliant evolutionary animal instincts so given all of that we have have some deterministic forces on us and within that we get to ease up between the waves when we can we get to change our Direction but we're always going to be hit by the next wave and so it's this skillful surfing or navigating that we can do better when we realize when we control things when we can't when we can truly feel safe and have ease versus when we need to kind of gently padle what do you think is the value of of journaling and and placing one's own narrative on stressful circumstances especially these non-negotiable circumstances again I'm I'm fascinated by these because I think it's a category of stress that's not often talked about and yet is so prominent so people will say okay you know dealing with short-term stress okay well well I would say like use physiological size or raise your stress threshold and we'll get back to that in a little bit um as it relates to the work you're doing with breath work but so many stressors are going to take a year five years we don't know you know that the uncertainty that you mentioned earlier or the the certainty that this is going to go on forever and so you know what is the um you know for people that are listening to this and that and want to start to adopt practices um do you think that spending some time creating a written or a spoken narrative is helpful we hear this but are there any data that support the use of journaling as a as a tool I seem to recall that there there are a few studies out there but I can't I can't remember exactly yeah definitely creating a coherent n narrative is critical to our ability to make sense Find meaning find resolution have a social identity around our lived experience what happens to us so narrative is kind of everything right in stress research it's it's not what happens to us it's how we're interpreting it and how we're um how we're responding to it and I've I've heard you say the exact same thing when you've talked about what is stress it's it's really what narrative we're creating around it so I think a narrative of purpose fill in the blank about what you're what's meaningful to you but that is why we're different than just the the um the rats that we study or the monkeys like they have these amazing stress responses that are we have them too and we can't control that but we have the ability to do this projection to the Future to ask what is our purpose in life to see and know that we are going to die and we can have some control over how we live and maybe even how we die and how we want to be remembered that is so beautiful that helps us Rise Above This being monkeys and clothes I'd love before we wrap for us to return to this uh question about breath work and the study that you're doing one of the I've known about your work for a very long time admired it for a very long time and one of the things that um excited me about being able to sit down with you today is that uh our laboratory has studied breath work your laboratory is studying breath work and um and I know that you've been doing a study on the so-called Wim Hoff method um which I'll let you familiarize our listeners to some of them are familiar with the Wim Hoff method others are not I think a lot of people think of whim in terms of his is the ican because of cold exposure but of course he has um breath work practices that mirror um things like Tumo breathing and other things but U maybe you could tell us a little bit about what you're doing there and U what you're interested in discovering I realize it's too early to give us the results but um hopefully they'll come back and do that at another time but what is the study uh what motivated the study and and maybe I can convince you to give us a little teaser of what you're discovering so for I I for many years I mean I think my um first paper when I was a graduate student with Bruce mckuin was about this idea of positive physiological stress and so I've always been wanting to really understand what's positive stress how can we induce it and instead for many many too many years I've been studying the dark side toxic stress trauma caregiving and how that is can take a toll on the body without the right resilience and resources and now I'm very excited about the the opportunity to just focus on different ways that we can stress out our body and mind in short-term bursts that might promote stress resilience and the body based strategies are concrete they're quick they're um they're also my favorite strategies I I probably have internalized a lot of the mindsets and the you know the that I've learned from meditation and what I feel the biggest bang for the buck is you know if I'm um waking up like super jittery with a big stress response because of X or Y it is actually something like a a hit type workout or taking the dogs for like a really brisk walk or like burning up that energy in my body is um a very big effect size for me personally everyone has their you know different ways that they can see the the biggest shifts in Daily stress so I've been looking for ways to create positive stress besides exercise we all know about exercise and I met whm Hoff at a uh a meeting where we talked kind of back toback and so we hadn't I had kind of heard something about you know crazy Iceman climbing up the Himalayas I really had he has 27 or more World Records yeah for that sort of thing yeah so he so I got to hear I got to do the breathing with him during this conference and I just felt like Elation afterward I was like what was that and then he heard about tiir and he was like I need to know if my method is affecting cell aging he loves research and so we he helped us design a study that we've been working on at UCSF um with my colleagues Wendy Mendes and Eric prayther it's been many years and it's funded by the John W brick Foundation which is very focused on what are non-drug way ways that we can help mental health so it was a very good fit for all of us to come together design the study and we have been basically comparing low arousal relaxation methods mindfulness slow breathing to positive stress exercise and whim Hoff method and one of the things that we've learned in a big way is that regardless of whether we're creating deep states of ease or hormetic stress in the body that short-term burst of either aerobic activity or the extreme breathing people feel better period so three weeks later after this experiment of doing their practice every day they were either randomly assigned to the higher rle or the low rle the level of stress anxiety and depression fell dramatically in everyone so many paths to changes in stress there are probably very different physiological paths ways and and we can talk about that more when we um get to really look in depth at our physiological data as well as our blood-based data but what we do know is that the Wim Hoff method did create daily positive emotion that increased over time just like your study on sighing and so even though there are different mechanisms they were selectively boosting feelings of positivity I love that you know that's very unusual to get a very selective positive effect super interesting I can't wait to hear more about the data so I I gather and by the way no is a perfectly fine answer I gather that you're not going to tell us about the whether or not there are tiir changes yet or maybe that's not possible um to detect in this kind of short-term study so what we're going to look at we don't really think that ters can change very quickly and and tase May so we're going to look at mitochondrial enzymes tase and gene expression patterns and as you know we can look at many different mechanisms and Pathways with gene expression patterns especially with these new kind of assays where you can look at you know 7,000 different uh proteins like the somalogic and so we'll get to see well what's the patter you know did we really change patterns of acute stress with these different types of stress resilience intervention and in terms of the physiological reactivity there are ways that we can examine both the stress response system parasym the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic response system and I will tell you that um while we're still preparing the results there were very different profiles from the different interventions that make us think that there's a lot of specificity even though everyone feels better the the way that they got there is very different ways that we're impacting both the nervous system and the Brain incredible and um I have to say when I heard that you were studying whim Hoff method I was positively uh delighted because I uh I find that there are so few serious researchers in the realm of of modern science that are both explorers and then take what they've um you know glean from those Explorations and then take it to the laboratory and and put rigor on those and really try and parse mechanism with with of course all the open-mindedness to whatever the outcome happens to be right I mean good science involves um not necessarily asking questions alone but um raising hypotheses and being comfortable for those hypoth hypotheses to be correct or not correct and I find your work to be just so incredibly creative and brave in that way and I love the way that you've meshed different aspects of your own personal um journey into these different practices I don't know what came first the science of the practices but I I I have uh I have my guesses but um I must say it's it's very refreshing and I think it's exactly exactly what the world needs right now in terms of tools for mental health and physical health because um far too many studies uh try and isolate variables without understanding a larger context of like what are the different types of stressors and clearly you're addressing that or you know there's this thing breath work that some people might think oh you know the Iceman whm Hoff it's really esoteric and you know kind of crazy um I'm certainly not saying that but that you say well what are the critical elements from that that we might be able to extract to understand this positive ESS phenomenon so I just um for I want to first of all just say thank you for doing the incredibly important work you do and thank you I mean we were so delighted to um see the paper you did with David Spiegel and to know that you're pursuing this path and um it's very reassuring with your rigor and your you know depth of background I I agree with you this these are the types of studies we need releasing the inherent power of Rejuvenation that's in our body is UNT it's relatively untapped in these rigorous controlled studies and we just can't reduce inflammation with a drug we can't reduce stress with a drug we desperately need to learn how to use you know the whole range of the nervous system from the acute stress to the deep relaxation to heal and to promote these healthy resilient States I couldn't agree more and um UCSF is uh very very fortunate to have you and should they ever forget that please come to Stanford instead maybe we can recruit you away from UCSF and I'm here I'm U being friendly to my colleagues at UCSF but um they better treat you right or else we're coming for you uh and I also just want to thank you for taking the time today to share this information also you've written one F books we will provide a link to the newest one and I'll um of course cue people to that because it sounds like a very rich source of information and actionable tools that people can take in terms of mitigating stress and I I love the idea that there's this um discussion about certainty and control uh to elements that are very prominent in in my life um for better for worse and all of us all of us yeah and so really thank you for the work you're doing thank you for taking the time to share that work through books and through podcasts and especially today on this one I I I know I speak on behalf of many many people and I just really want to extend my gratitude thank you so much and thank you for for your podcast well it's a labor of love and it's days like today and discussions like this that make it worthwhile so thank you thanks Andrew thank you for joining me for today's discussion all about stress aging and Metabolism with Dr Alyssa eel I hope you enjoyed the conversation as much as I did if you'd like to learn more about Dr eel's Laboratories work or if you'd like to learn about her books such as the te miror effect and the stress prescription please see the links in the show note captions if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and apple and in addition on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a fstar review if you have questions for me or topics you'd like me to cover on the hubman Lab podcast or guests that you'd like me to consider inviting on the hubman Lab podcast please put that in the comments on YouTube I do read all the comments in addition please check out the sponsors mentioned the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast not so much on today's episode but on various previous episodes of The hubman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep focus and hormone support the huberman Lab podcast is proud to have partnered with momentous supplements if you'd like to hear more about the supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast please go to Liv momentus spelled o us.com huberman again that's liv.com huberman if you're not already following the hubman Lab podcast on social media we are huberman lab on Instagram Twitter Facebook and Linkedin and on all those places I focus on material that somewhat overlaps with content from the huberman Lab podcast but often is distinct from the content covered on the hubman Lab podcast so again it's huberman lab on all social media channels for those of you that haven't already subscribed to our so-call neural network newsletter this is a completely zero cost monthly newsletter that has summaries of podcast episodes and so-called toolkits toolkits are lists of about a page to two pages long that give the critical tools for instance for optimizing sleep or for neuroplasticity or deliberate cold exposure deliberate heat exposure optimizing dopamine again all available to you at zero cost you simply go to hubman lab.com go to the menu tab in the corner scroll down to newsletter you provide us your email we do not share your email with anybody and in addition to that there are samples of toolkits on the hubin lab.com webbsite again under newsletter and you don't even have to sign up to access those but I think most people do end up signing up for the newsletter because it's rich with useful information and again completely zero cost thank you again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Alyssa eel all about stress aging and metabolism and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 215 ---
Video ID: K-TW2Chpz4k
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K-TW2Chpz4k
Title: Leverage Dopamine to Overcome Procrastination & Optimize Effort | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-03-27 12:00:13 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I explain how dopamine dynamics — meaning changes and interactions between our baseline and peak levels of dopamine drive our cravings and sense of motivation. I also explain how to leverage dopamine dynamics to overcome procrastination. I cover behavioral, cognitive, nutrition-based and supplementation-based tools to optimize baseline and peak dopamine levels to ensure a persistently motivated state. I also discuss how to boost motivation when you are in a rut, why you might not want to stack behaviors/substances that spike dopamine and how to build and maintain a “growth mindset” for pursuing goals of any kind. Dopamine is an incredibly powerful neuromodulator involved in basic functions (e.g., hunger, romantic attraction, etc.) and feats of cognitive and physical performance; by understanding the dynamics of dopamine, listeners ought to be better positioned to overcome procrastination, maintain motivation, and improve confidence.

#HubermanLab #Dopamine #Motivation 

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman
WHOOP: https://join.whoop.com/huberman 
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Pain modulates dopamine neurons via a spinal–parabrachial–mesencephalic circuit: https://go.nature.com/3FPaFIH
Dopamine, Updated: Reward Prediction Error and Beyond: https://bit.ly/3Gha0A7
Human physiological responses to immersion into water of different temperatures: https://bit.ly/3IumXX1
Effect of tyrosine on cognitive function and blood pressure under stress: https://bit.ly/3LSSHZq
Tyrosine Improves Working Memory in a Multitasking Environment: https://bit.ly/3LSgCZ6

Books
Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence: https://amzn.to/3TIWfj2

Other Resources
Non-Sleep Deep Rest (NSDR): https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLPNW_gerXa4P6-7EC4twzLBjR22rQYk3u

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dopamine
00:02:32 Sponsors: Helix Sleep, WHOOP, ROKA, Momentous
00:06:27 Dopamine Brain Circuits 
00:14:53 Goals & Addiction
00:17:13 Dopamine Dynamics, “Wave Pool” analogy
00:20:28 Craving, Motivation, Pursuit & Reward Prediction Error
00:28:26 Sponsor: AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:29:40 Feedback Cues & Reward Contingent Learning, “Scoreboard”
00:37:40 Addiction; Pleasure & Pain Imbalance
00:44:55 Dopamine Release & Addictive Substances/Behaviors
00:50:43 Addiction Recovery, Binding Behaviors
00:53:25 Tools: Maintain Baseline Dopamine Levels
01:02:08 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:03:26 Tool: Deliberate Cold Exposure & Dopamine
01:09:38 Prescriptions & Supplementation: L-Tyrosine, Mucuna Pruriens
01:18:58 Dopamine Trough Recovery, Postpartum Depression
01:23:31 Dopamine Dynamics, “Dopamine Stacking”; Intrinsic Motivation
01:38:10 Making Effort the Reward, Growth Mindset
01:41:49 Tool: Overcome Procrastination
01:52:16 Tool: Meditation & Procrastination
01:57:01 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous, Neural Network Newsletter, Social Media

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today we are discussing dopamine dopamine is a topic that I've covered before on this podcast and many people have heard of dopamine most people know that dopamine is involved in pleasure to some extent or another and nowadays people are starting to appreciate that dopamine is also intimately involved with motivation drive and pursuit well today you're going to learn that indeed dopamine is responsible for all of those things but you are also going to learn that dopamine is critical for overcoming procrastination for ensuring ongoing motivation and indeed for ensuring confidence in fact we are going to talk about the relationship between dopamine and motivation and confidence at the level of neurobiological circuitry and we are going to cover tools that will allow you to leverage your dopamine in order to have a maximum motivation to overcome sticking points which include things like procrastination but also by understanding the neural circuits in the brain and body that release and use dopamine but more importantly by understanding what are called dopamine dynamics that is what gives rise to Big peaks in dopamine or troughs in dopamine or what's referred to as our Baseline level of dopamine which turns out to be our Baseline levels of motivation and feelings of well-being by understanding how those things relate to one another I assure you that by the end of today's episode you will be in a far better position to understand why you become a motivated why you procrastinate how to ensure motivation on an ongoing basis and even how to leverage effort and the desire to become motivated as a way to do just that to become more motivated today's discussion is not about psychology although I will center around practical everyday examples and offer many many tools that you can Implement if you choose today's discussion is really about pulling apart these things that we call motivation reward pleasure procrastination and understanding them in terms of their dopamine Dynamics so whether you've heard me or others talk about dopamine before or whether or not today is your first exposure to the topic of dopamine today's episode is really designed to give you the biological and practical knowledge so that you can leverage your dopamine circuitry and your dopamine levels as well as tools to adjust dopamine circuitry and levels in order to optimize mental health physical health and performance before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is Helix sleep Helix sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are the absolute highest quality I've talked many times before on this and other podcasts about the critical role that sleep plays in allowing you to be awake and alert and have a good elevated mood throughout the day sleep is just fundamental to our mental health physical health and performance and there's no replacing great sleep a key thing we all need in order to get excellent sleep is to have an ideal sleep environment Helix mattresses are designed for your unique sleep needs in order to ensure that you get the best possible night's sleep so if you go to the Helix site and you take their very brief two or three minute quiz it will ask you questions such as do you sleep on your side your back or your stomach do you tend to run hot or cold throughout the night and they will match you to a mattress that's specific to your sleep needs I match to the dusk mattress that's the one that works for me and since sleeping on the dusk mattress now for well over two years I've been sleeping better than I ever have before so if you go to their site you take the quiz and you figure out what's the ideal mattress for you just go to helixsleep.com huberman take their two-minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress and you'll get up to 350 off any mattress order and two free pillows again if interested you can go to helixsleep.com huberman for up to 350 off and two free pillows today's episode is also brought To Us by whoop whoop is a fitness wearable device that tracks your daily activity and sleep but also goes beyond that by providing real-time feedback on how to adjust your physical training and sleep schedule and other activities throughout your day in order to optimize your health I've been working with whoop on their scientific advisory Council to help Advance whoops technology and mission of unlocking Human Performance not just for athletes but for everybody as a whoop user I've experienced the health benefits of their technology firsthand for instance it tells me of course whether or not I had a good night's sleep or a poor night sleep by giving me a sleep score it tells me the percentage of rapid eye movement sleep to slow wave sleep but whoop also tells me for instance whether or not certain activities during my day time such as naps or training or training of a certain amount of intensity how that's impacting my sleep and vice versa if you're interested in trying whoop you can go to join.woop.com huberman again that join.woop.com huberman today and you'll get your first month free today's episode is also brought To Us by Roka Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are uniquely tailored to the needs of athletes and everyday people the company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with the biology the visual system in mind I've spent a lifetime working on the biology of the visual system and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with enormous number of challenges in order for you to be able to see clearly Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses are designed such that when you go from one environment to the next like a brightly lit environment to a less a brightly lit environment you don't notice that transition you always see with perfect clarity another terrific thing about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses is that many of the performance glasses out there that are designed for sport make people look like cyborgs which if you want that they do have those options the cyborg options as I call them but they also have many options where the aesthetic is more of the sort that you would wear to dinner or to work or anywhere that you happen to be if you'd like to try Roca eyeglasses or sunglasses go to Roka that's Roka Dot com and enter the code huberman to save 20 off your first order again that's Roca roka.com and enter the code huberman at checkout the huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with momentous supplements to find the supplements we discussed on the huberman Lab podcast you can go to live momentous spelled ous live momentous.com huberman and I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding again that's livmomentis.com huberman okay let's talk about dopamine what is dopamine dopamine is what's called a neuromodulator which simply refers to the fact that it's a chemical that modulates or changes the electrical activity of other cells and the cells I'm referring to are neurons neurons are just nerve cells so you have a brain and a spinal cord and the neurons in your brain and spinal cord connect to one another and they connect to different areas of the body including basically every organ of your body and every organ of your body communicates back to your brain and spinal cord through Direct act or indirect Pathways for instance you have neurons in your gut that sense what sorts of nutrients you've eaten or drank and then send neural signals electrical signals up to the brain and indeed that whole process happens to be modulated by dopamine dopamine as a neuromodulator has the basic property of either ramping up increasing or decreasing the activity of other neurons and that's done by adjusting things like electrical potentials and things of that sort that we really won't go into this episode but that I promise to get into in detail in a future episode if you're interested in the biochemistry and biophysics of neurons and things of that sort so we have this neuromodulator dopamine and we know that that neuromodulator can increase or decrease the activity of other neurons so then we have to ask ourselves where is dopamine released in the brain and body and what specific types of neurons is it impacting in other words what specific types of functions does dopamine have so there are basically five circuits within the brain that use dopamine as the primary neuromodulator and those five circuits engage different but related functions so I'm going to go through them one by one relatively quickly giving you a little bit of nomenclature and some sense of what each of those circuits looks like and what it does the first circuit is the so-called Nigro striatal pathway so in the back of the brain there's an area called substantia so named because the neurons that are actually very dark they actually contain pigment you'd be able to see this if I were to slice up a brain you'd see two dark regions in the back that substantia Niagara substantia Niagara contains neurons that are chock a block full of dopamine but they release that dopamine in a brain structure called the striatum the striatum is involved in movement both the initiation of movements and the suppression of movements in so-called go action and no go suppress action pathways topic for a future podcast the second brain circuit that uses and leverages dopamine to a great extent is the so-called mesolimbic pathway now you'll also in a moment hear about the mesocortical pathway so today I'm going to talk about these somewhat interchangeably at times but where it's important for me to differentiate between them I will do that both of these Pathways initiate from a set of neurons in the so-called ventral tegmental area or VTA I will use that acronym VTA the VTA functions in close partnership with a different brain structure called the nucleus accumbens or n a i don't think I'll call it n a today I'll talk about VTA ventral tegmental area and I'll talk about nucleus accumbens for sake of today's discussion you can lump those together if you want neurons in those areas project a bunch of different places but in the mesolimbic pathway those neurons are projecting to areas of the brain like the hypothalamus which sits right above the roof of your mouth and is responsible for a lot of basic functions things like maintaining your body temperature for libido in the pursuit of sex for Hunger for the generation of signals to the pituitary gland that cause the release of hormones and other things into the bloodstream so the connections which I sometimes refer to as projections from the neurons in the VTA and nucleus accumbens to the hypothalamus are basically using dopamine to modulate the output of a lot of different things that happen in this hypothalamus that controls a lot of we could call them primitive functions but they're really basic functions for survival now the other pathway out of the VTA and nucleus accumbens is to the cortex that's why it's called mesocortical pathway so this is a very different pathway out of the VTA and nucleus accumbens than the one I just described a moment ago the pathway I'm talking about now the mesocortical pathway projects to the prefrontal cortex which is a structure that many of you have perhaps heard of but even if you haven't it's important to know this is an area that resides right behind your forehead and that in humans compared to other species is greatly expanded in terms of its size and complexity of function so it's involved in everything from planning and executing of action to making good or bad decisions depending on context in fact one of the primary functions of prefrontal Cortex is to really understand context whether or not for instance you are alone in your room where certain behaviors are appropriate whether or not you are at work where other behaviors are appropriate understanding what the context is and therefore what sorts of actions need to be generated and suppressed in fact a guest on the huberman Lab podcast and this is a guess whose episode hasn't aired yet described this beautifully he's a neurosurgeon and he said the way to think about the prefrontal cortex is it's basically an area of the brain that says or no not now to other brain regions in order to suppress action we know this because people that have damage to the prefrontal cortex often can't suppress their impulses okay so the pathway from VTA and nucleus accumbens to the prefrontal cortex is absolutely critical for today's discussion because we are largely going to be discussing motivation Drive Pursuit procrastination and all sorts of things that have to do with our feelings about context whether or not we want to do something or not whether or not we feel we should or we shouldn't whether or not we feel we failed the last time or there's a high probability of success the next time prefrontal cortex does many many things but when thinking about dopamine's role in the prefrontal cortex that is when thinking about this mesocortical pathway we really want to think about how dopamine is activating or changing our propensity to do certain things and get us into action or prevent us from doing certain things and prevent action so basically you can think about the mesocortical pathway as a circuit that really governs all of the major choices that you're going to make in life about what to do and what not to do toward your goals and away from the things that you want to avoid now the fourth dopamine pathway in the brain is the so-called tubero infundibular pathway and this is not one we're going to focus on too much today this is a pathway that relates to connections between the brain and your pituitary gland your pituitary gland being that gland that's as I mentioned a moment ago is also receiving input from the hypothalamus and is releasing a bunch of hormones into your bloodstream things like luteinizing hormone follicle stimulating hormone things like melanocortin hormone these are hormones that are impacting everything from the function of the ovary and females to the function of the testes and males it's governing things like cortisol release under stress thyroid hormone meaning it's regulating thyroid hormone release and on and on dopamine has a very powerful impact on the output of the pituitary so again that's probably a topic for a future episode but it's important in reviewing the different brain circuits that use dopamine as a neuromodulator that I mentioned that one then there's a fifth one and this fifth one is not often discussed and again won't be the main topic of today's discussion but for thoroughness and for clarity it's important that we mention it this is the circuit within your retina that is the pie crust-like lining of neural tissue on the back of your eye because remember your eye is actually part of your brain that got extruded from your brain during development you know those two eyes that you see in the mirror and that you see in other people are actually two pieces of central nervous system and within the retina which is the neural portion of the eye within the neural retina dopamine is responsible for adapting to different light conditions so that you can see clearly both in the evening and when it gets darker you can still see a bit and in the morning when it's very bright you don't really have to make adjustments to your visual system in order to see clearly your visual system does it for you and one of the ways that it does that is through the neuromodulator dopamine so today we are not going to discuss the retinal dopamine Pathways or the tuberinfrendibular dopamine Pathways and we won't really talk so much about the Nigro striatal pathway I'll say one more thing about it and then I'll leave it alone we are going to talk about the mesocortical pathway and we might touch on the mesolimic pathway a little bit as well so today we're mostly going to talk about mesocortical circuitry and function and dopamine within the mesocortical circuit and the reason that we're doing that is that today's discussion is really about motivation procrastination goal setting and pursuit it's very important to understand that neither dopamine nor the mesocortical circuit cares about any specific goal or Pursuit this is a circuit that uses dopamine in order to pursue anything now of course some people have a greater propensity to pursue things like work or goals and Athletics or relationships or a combination of those other people unfortunately have a greater propensity to pursue things like drugs of abuse what are drugs of abuse drugs of abuse tend to be drugs that increase levels of dopamine to the extent that other types of Pursuits in life that are adaptive for us like work relationship School Etc become Irrelevant in fact the definition of addiction that I use and that I believe really matches the neurobiology very well is that addiction is a progressive narrowing of the things that bring us pleasure healthy functioning of the mesocortical pathway however allows us to toggle or switch back and forth between different types of Pursuits of all the sorts that I've mentioned earlier so if we can understand how that means the cortical pathway works just a little bit in particular when dopamine is released and when it's not released what dopamine does when it's released to our sense of motivation and drive and if we can understand a little bit about how our recent dopamine history that is whether or not there is dopamine in our system already dictates whether or not we are going to feel motivated in the next 5 10 15 minutes hours days and weeks that is all very easy to understand I promise I'll explain it to you in a simple way but I want you to get a circuit into your mind I want you to Envision that there are these neurons little nerve cells in the VTA and nucleus accumbens those neurons make dopamine they send their projections that we call axons which are like little wires and they can release dopamine into the prefrontal cortex and now you already know because you learned it a few minutes ago that the prefrontal cortex then can ensure that certain behaviors take place and other behaviors do not take place that or quieting that we talked about earlier with that in mind let's now take a look at how dopamine is released and let's keep two things in mind there are peaks in dopamine that is dopamine is released into the frontal cortex where it has these effects of activating or suppressing action and we can think of those as peaks in dopamine so if I call it a spike that means an increase and then a decrease if I call it a peak it's an increase and then a decrease there can also be troughs in dopamine what do I mean by that well we have Peaks and dopamine and that Peak and dopamine can rise up and then go back to what we call baseline or there can be a trough it can go below Baseline so the two key things to understand about dopamine is that we have dopamine Peaks that are triggered by certain behaviors certain compounds drugs or substances food Etc and that we have a dopamine Baseline our dopamine Baseline is our reservoir of dopamine it's how full or empty our dopamine pool is and that dopamine pool is the pool of dopamine that we use in order to create those dopamine Peaks and when those Peaks come down sometimes they go back to Baseline and sometimes they go to lower the base slime which we call the trough if any of this seems confusing I want you just to imagine a wave pool this is an analogy that was given to me by one of our podcast guests which is Dr Kyle Gillette who's an obesity specialist and works on a number of things related to endocrine hormone function including testosterone estrogen in both men and women you want to check out his episodes on Hormone Health now they're fascinating and actionable he's a tremendous wealth of knowledge and he has this analogy for how dopamine Works in our brain and body and that analogy is this notion of a wave pool if you've ever seen a wave pool it's basically a concrete pool and there are waves within it okay duh those waves can be of different heights so they can be little Ripples and we can think of those as little mini Peaks or they can be big waves they can be really big crashing waves if the height of those waves and the frequency of those waves is very very large so some of that water which here I'm using as an analogy to dopamine can slosh out of the wave pool and the Baseline drops However if those Peaks are small enough or they are seldom enough well then the Baseline that is the water level in that pool stays more or less constant I think this is an excellent analogy for how dopamine works in the mesocortical pathway as it relates to motivation and pursuit and all those sorts of things because we really need to think about how the Peaks and the Baseline relate to one another and this is very important the Peaks on the Baseline are not independent of one another they relate to one another so now you have in your mind a wave pool and just understand that if you get a great big huge wave maybe one of them it will crash out and some of that water will Splash out the Baseline will go down a little bit but if you get big peak after big peak after big peak pretty soon you're going to empty that pool whereas if you have smaller waves or less frequent big waves well then the Baseline will stay relatively constant so let's think about dopamine Peaks and bass lines and let's remember that for every Peak there's a trough what do I mean by that well when you have a wave you also have the bottom of the wave when you have a mountain you have the bottom of the mountain when we think about dopamine Peaks and dopamine baselines we have to include that trough because that trough that is the level of dopamine below Baseline really dictates whether or not you are going to feel motivated to pursue something or not so I'm going to give you a visual in your mind the visual in your mind is an increase in dopamine that's triggered by your desire for something and really could be your desire for anything if you're hungry and you're thinking about I really want a sandwich I really want to let's think what sandwich would I want right now a really nice roast beef sandwich on sourdough with a slice of Swiss Tomatoes slice of pickle here I'm describing the sandwich that I would want so if you're hungry and you're thinking about that dopamine starts Rising this is crucially important to understand dopamine is not just released when we get the reward when we get the thing that we're pursuing dopamine is released in anticipation of what we want that increase in dopamine is by no happenstance no mistake relates also to our propensity and desire to move remember earlier I told you there's a separate Circuit of dopamine that triggers movement and that when it's depleted is causing things like deficits and movement related to Parkinson's or other movement disorders well that's not pure coincidence that's because desire and the need to move in order to pursue and reach goals are one in the same process so if I desire a sandwich or I desire a cup of coffee or I desire some water when I'm thirsty there's an increase in dopamine that we could call a little mini Peak and dopamine but then here's the key thing very soon after I realized my desire for something that Peak that was caused by the desire comes down and drops below Baseline below the level of dopamine that it was prior to even thinking about the sandwich or the coffee or the glass of water and it's that drop below Baseline that triggers my desire to go out and find that sandwich that coffee that water or that blank insert whatever it is that you happen to desire action or substance of any kind or person Etc so that drop below Baseline is fundamental to the whole process and that drop below Baseline was triggered by the preceding Peak so let's say that I desire a sandwich there's an increase in dopamine then very quickly it comes down below Baseline just a little bit now I'm in pursuit of the sandwich I'm looking for where I can get that sandwich I can order it perhaps to be delivered I can go out and find it now is the stage in which I have to think about what are the different stimuli that is the things in my environment that signal whether or not I'm likely to get that sandwich or not okay so for instance if I were to go to my phone and order food on an app or walk down the street and see the sign for a deli that's a cue that I'm likely to relieve that drop in dopamine and get not just back to Baseline but then I'll get a peak in dopamine and indeed that's what happens if I find that Deli I go into the deli they're open they're making the sandwich that I want they make my sandwich and great I get that sandwich and that sandwich will have some degree of inherent reward to it some degree of my liking it or not liking it so let's say I like it it's not the best sandwich I've ever had but all I'm doing is comparing my desire for that sandwich to the sandwich that I actually got and ate and chances are it's going to relieve that craving meaning it will take that dopamine that had fallen below Baseline up up back to Baseline and if I like the sandwich it's going to indeed increase that dopamine again to another Peak now if I love the sandwich like it's the most delicious thing that I've ever tasted in my entire life well then I'll get a big peak in dopamine when I consume that reward however chances are that sandwiches more or less as I expect it to be which is pretty good I'll eat it and I'm fine what do I mean by fine well there's a concept called reward prediction error reward prediction error says that the dopamine that it is experienced that is that's released from the VTA and nucleus accumbens is going to be of a certain value and that value is going to be compared to the desire and expectation of what I thought I was going to get so if you take what you actually got minus what you expected that's reward prediction error so if the sandwich is basically what I expected to get fine dopamine comes down basically to a baseline level that's pretty standard for me and is basically the Baseline level I had before I ever thought about the sandwich at all if the sandwich completely surprises me and is completely amazing just an amazing sandwich well then the level of dopamine that I experience when I consume that sandwich is going to be even greater and it's going to be that minus what I expected so there it's a bigger reward prediction error in the direction of higher Peak by consuming the sandwich and then of course there's the other possibility which is the deli's closed or the sandwich they make me is lousy or doesn't taste good or something happened in the consuming of that sandwich that just makes a bad experience in which case if we take that reward experienced minus reward predicted from the initial craving well then it's going to be less than what I expected and therefore the Baseline drops below where it was prior to even Desiring the sandwich okay so all of this might seem a little bit complicated but it's all very simple desire for things increases dopamine but then our level of dopamine drops below Baseline and it's that drop below Baseline that triggers the motivation to bring that dopamine level back up by going and pursuing the thing that you wanted in the first place now of course as this is happening you're not conscious of your dopamine levels you experience this as context-dependent craving and pursuit because remember the prefrontal cortex is involved in context setting and craving and pursuit because it relates to action and movement which is one of the general features of the dopamine system so you can start to see how this is a beautifully designed system and you can also see how it's a perfect system for desire and pursuit of anything not just sandwiches as I'm giving you in this somewhat trivial but every day and therefore applicable example so just by understanding reward prediction error and especially by understanding that a craving triggers a peak in dopamine that makes you motivated but then drops your level of dopamine below Baseline which makes you even more motivated you are already halfway through the conceptual aspect of today's podcast because if you can understand that you will understand why for instance when you initially want something or you think you want something it puts you into motion but then pretty quickly you're starting to feel the pain of not having that and that is also contributing to your desire to pursue that thing this is a subtle effect but if you watch for it you'll start to see it or experience it within yourself your craving for things is not just about craving for those things per se it's also a desire to relieve the pain of not having those things and if you can internalize that and start to develop an awareness around it you will be in an amazing position to leverage all sorts of aspects of the dopamine system in order to increase your motivation especially when things get really hard or when you have the propensity to procrastinate which is something that we'll get into a little bit later in the podcast I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors athletic greens athletic greens now called ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs I've been taking athletic green since 2012. so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast the reason I started taking athletic greens and the reason I still take athletic greens once are usually twice a day is that it gets to be the probiotics that I need for gut health our gut is very important it's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain the immune system and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health and those probiotics and athletic greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health in addition athletic greens contains a number of adaptogens vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met and it tastes great if you'd like to try athletic greens you can go to athleticgreens.com huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road in the car on the plane Etc and they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin d3k2 again that's athleticgreens.com huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 now I'd like to talk about the Dynamics of dopamine release with a little bit more detail and this is something I've never covered on any social media post or on any podcast either this one or as a guest on other podcasts because on the face of it it might seem a little too detailed like why is he telling me all this isn't it just enough to know that there are Peaks and troughs and bass lines and dopamine well it turns out that if you can understand what that Peak and trough are really about in other words what's really happening when we zoom in on that Peak and trough you'll be in an amazing position to overcome procrastination and essentially pursue any goals in an ongoing basis so I'm very excited to share this information with you because I do think that it has tremendous actionable power what I'm about to describe relates to a number of different findings that have been made mostly over the last five to ten years although to be quite direct mostly within the last five years and it has to do with the fact that the peak and trough and Baseline that I talked about a moment ago that are associated with craving they look like a peak followed by a trough followed by a return to Baseline and maybe another Peak if you get the reward or a drop below Baseline if you don't or you don't like what you got but if we were to zoom in on that Peak and the reward in other words really zoom in on the whole process and start thinking about the circuitry that is the neurons in VTA and nucleus accumbens and how it relates to the frontal cortex in a bit more detail what we discover is nothing short of amazing what we discover is that whenever we're pursuing something we are always looking for cues as to whether or not we are on the right path to achieve that thing and we are also setting a mindset or a context within our brains as to whether or not we are confident or pessimistic as to whether or not we're going to achieve that thing now this is vitally important for anyone out there who finds it hard to get motivated and stay motivated it's also vitally important for anyone who's psychologically minded in any way you don't have to be a psychologist but psychologically minded in any way and wonders why is it that some people are just so motivated and other people have such trouble with motivation why is it that some people require perfect conditions in order to achieve things and other people just seem to manage to pursue things no matter what it also relates to the fact that some of us are very good at achieving our goals in one context and not so much in another so here's what you need to understand I'll stay with the example of the roast beef sandwich just because we already have that in mind but you can replace roast beef sandwich with essentially any goal the cue that we're going to likely get what we want so for instance the sign that there's a deli on the corner or that I open my phone and that there's an app that represents a restaurant that sells the particular sandwich that I like that cue as I mentioned before increases dopamine you see that like oh okay and subconsciously there's already a signal that's initiated by that dopamine that I'm on the right path then as I mentioned dopamine drops below Baseline that's further contributing to my desire to go pursue that sandwich either with my thumbs on my phone through the app or with my feet and walking to the deli standing in line and so forth then as I mentioned before there is a peak in dopamine of varying height depending on how satisfying I find the reward to be when I actually get that sandwich get that goal now keep in mind there is some time delay between the queue the app the deli Etc and when I get my sandwich that Gap is going to be different for different things so in pursuing uh you know four-year degree it's going to be four years if the diploma is your goal if if it's an exam you're studying for it might be a week long and there will be many other signals in between that initial cue that hey the the reward likely lies down this path in this textbook in um on you know this dating app or at that Deli there are many other cues those cues come in subconsciously and involve everything from how long the line is at the deli to you know whether or not you're you know seeing the types of people on a dating app that you'd like to see whether or not they're responding to you whether or not someone's texting you back or not all of those cues are integrated and adjusting your Baseline level of dopamine all the time as you go to pursue that goal so what the dopamine system does is it doesn't just compare the height of the Peak at the beginning right the I desire that to the reward that you got we talked about reward prediction error that's the that's the kind of first grade version of reward prediction error it's also taking into account all the things that happen in between and all of that is serving as a cue for the eventual reward and all of that is funneling into what we call reward prediction error in other words the dopamine system is very good at subconsciously parsing what are the things that happen between wanting and getting and that's part of the learning that dopamine achieves and indeed there are specialized circuits from the VTA and nucleus accumbens that are involved in just the learning of how we achieve or don't achieve specific types of rewards that we desire so this is called reward contingent learning because it's learning the contingencies of what led up to a reward or what didn't lead up to a reward at the same time end in parallel there's an ongoing release of dopamine in the background and that ongoing release of dopamine that has nothing to do with learning is really just sort of a propeller that's driving us in the direction of whatever it is that we're trying to pursue so I realize for some of you this might seem like unnecessary or perhaps even an overwhelming amount of detail but it's actually quite simple your brain is trying to figure out what happened prior to getting or not getting a reward and it's comparing what you wanted compared to what you got at the same time the dopamine system initiates a motivation signal that takes you through that entire round of pursuit and those three things there's the stimulus the desire the I want that that's the first thing that leads to that Peak the peak drops a little bit below Baseline and it triggers motivation the motivation is the second thing the motivation is dopamine release also but from a separate set of neurons within this circuit driving you forward and the entire time that it's driving you forward it's paying attention to what's there along the way even if you don't realize it consciously and then there's the reward itself or the lack of reward itself so those three components the learning contingency which has to do with the stimulus and the reward and everything that happens in between and the propeller nature of dopamine as I'm referring to it those all combine into a total learning so that after you get the sandwich or after you finish the exam or after you go out on a date or after you do anything that you desire to do that system that originates in the VTA and nucleus accumbens and goes up to your cortex it learned it learned many things it learned the contingency between stimulus and desire motivation and whether or not you succeeded or not it's basically a scoreboard for how you did given what just happened so actually it's all very simple in fact if you can understand even just half of what I just said you are now in a far better position to understand everything from addiction to motivation to procrastination and it will make sense of all the tools that I'm going to talk about next which will allow you to overcome procrastination points to overcome deficits in motivation and indeed to reset your motivation in an ongoing way so that you can reach your goals okay so let's take everything that I just told you and set it aside it's still important but let's just say this you don't have to think about any of those details or names or anything let's just think about addiction because in biology and in Psychology frankly it really often pays to think about the extremes first and then work our way towards more typical circumstances and with that said addiction unfortunately is very common nowadays I just heard a statistic in fact that there is an 8080 percent increase in alcohol use disorder among women in the last 30 years I talked a little bit about this in the episode that I did about alcohol and health again I want to be very clear I'm not somebody that is completely against alcohol for adults provided they're not alcoholics turns out two drinks a week probably fine health-wise zero would be better if we're honest zero is better than any alcohol but two drinks a week is probably fine past two drinks you start running into problems and yet many many people out there male and female alike suffer from alcohol use disorder also called alcoholism the same is also true for things like methamphetamine or cocaine or other types of substance addictions and the same is also true for a lot of Behavioral or what are sometimes called process addictions things like sex addiction or video game addiction or any type of behavior that frankly is leveraging the dopamine system but that engages this Progressive narrowing of the things that bring someone pleasure such that nothing else is really Salient nothing else is really pulling them in in the way that they're video games or sex or pornography or alcohol pick your substance or you know behavior that you see out there or hopefully not but that you might suffer from an addiction too so what's happening in addiction well addiction involves dopamine among other things often the opioid system Etc but if we were to think about what's the stimulus in an addiction and what's the peak in dopamine and then what happens after that Peak It all becomes very clear as to why addiction happens and why it's so pernicious so for instance let's take cocaine cocaine causes dramatic increases in dopamine very very fast so if somebody craves cocaine what are they craving they're craving that dopamine Peak they're craving the increased level of alertness they're craving a number of things associated with the feeling of being under the influence of the drug but the stimulus for it simply becomes that line of cocaine or in the case of crack that crack rock that they're going to smoke and God forbid they're mainlining it you know they're shooting into a vein what happens is they snort smoke or inject cocaine and dopamine levels almost immediately go up up up up up up to a very high peak okay so the the time gap between the stimulus and the dopamine is very very short so short in fact that there's really no other contingencies in between that the mesocortical system has to learn in fact what is the system quote unquote learn it learns cocaine equals massive amounts of dopamine equals feeling euphoric and energetic Etc and in doing that it reinforces the whole circuit so that that short we can even say hyper short contingency is really what the system wants so much so that longer contingencies of say putting in the hard work of you know generating a fitness program or a professional program for yourself or a education program which takes not just many days but many weeks and years well none of that is going to lead to peace in dopamine that are as high as the Pekin dopamine associated with cocaine so that tells us something critical it is both the duration between desire end effect and when I say effect I mean the rewarding properties of dopamine that are experienced that's important so very short gaps teach the system to expect and want short gaps makes it very hard to pursue things that take longer so when we say it's the short or in this case hyper short distance or time between the stimulus and the dopamine what we're really talking about if we were to plot this out on a on a board or on a piece of paper is the steepness of the rise of that Peak it's very very steep the peak in dopamine is coming up very fast after the desire and in addition to that and this is very important the higher the peak in dopamine and the faster the rise to that Peak the further below Baseline the dopamine drops after the drug wears off okay so in the case of cocaine it's a very fast and very large rise in dopamine followed by a steep drop and very deep trough in dopamine below Baseline you say okay so there's pleasure then there's lack of pleasure ah but it's worse than that because it's not just lack of pleasure if you recall what we talked about a little bit earlier that drop below Baseline triggers the desire and the pursuit for what for more and so this sets in motion a vicious Loop where people start pursuing peaks in dopamine that can come very fast without much effort and that's one of the ways in which addictions start to take hold there's a simple way to think about this and to remember if you want to avoid this whole thing I mean the first one is obvious don't do cocaine don't try it don't use it certainly don't get addicted to it those are all sort of one in the same frankly I don't know many people that despite opinions to the contrary that use cocaine recreationally that don't at some point run into either a financial psychological physical or some other problem the other thing that's absolutely critical to keep in mind and this was discussed in my colleague Dr Anna lemke's book dopamine nation and on this podcast excellent book by the way I highly recommend it if you haven't read it already it's a fascinating exploration into dopamine as it relates to addiction not just drug addiction but other types of addiction again the name of that book is dopamine Nation we'll provide a link to it in the show note captions the other thing that happens after those big fast increases in dopamine caused by things like cocaine is afterwards when it quickly drops below Baseline it takes a much longer time to get back to the original Baseline than it did prior to using the drug and worse still is that the peaks in dopamine that are created from more consumption of cocaine leads to progressively lower Peaks and deeper troughs below Baseline so the whole system is Shifting away from pleasure and more to pain and the desire for pursuit of the drug now this is a terrible situation and it's a terrible situation that's not just unique to cocaine in fact if we were to look at the averages and again these are averages of the height of the peaks in dopamine that are created by different substances and the rates at which those Peaks take place because remember the time to Peak is just as important as how high that Peak goes we see some pretty interesting numbers so for instance and again these are averages based on neuroimaging combined with um what are called pet scans positron emission tomography combined with blood draws and a number of other data from both animal and human studies you find is that at Baseline just kind of on a background of no drug taking of any kind the neurons in the Venture pigmental nucleus accumbens area are firing at a rate of about three to four per second releasing dopamine so that's your Baseline of dopamine release your your forebrain is always seeing a little bit of dopamine from from that system if you were then to anticipate food and you're relatively hungry that would double okay so this probably happened when you decide to eat lunch today if you were hungry prior to eating lunch it doubles in the anticipation of the food and then depending on how much you enjoyed that food it might triple or quadruple it might be lower than it was during the anticipation as we talked about before so there's an approximate doubling under conditions of Desiring and consuming food let's take nicotine as the next example for people that use nicotine either smoking vaping snuffing or dipping all routes of nicotine Administration that I covered in our episode about nicotine there's about a 150 percent increase in the rate of dopamine neuron firing cocaine is going to increase the rate of dopamine output into the prefrontal cortex by about a thousand percent okay so what you're really talking about here is a tenfold increase in the amount of of dopamine that's released into the prefrontal cortex as measured by the rates of firing of these dopamine neurons methamphetamine is going to be anywhere from a thousand percent anywhere up to ten thousand percent it really varies depending on the potency of the drug and a few other factors and here's where perhaps it gets a little more interesting some of you are probably wondering about caffeine or about sex or about video games now they're the numbers vary tremendously and it's really important to understand that across the board not just for caffeine sex video games but also for nicotine alcohol and other substances and what we call motivated behaviors some of which are part of a healthy life like eating and reproduction you know provided it's you know age-appropriate context appropriate you know species appropriate consensual well then we consider it adaptive if it's not well then considered maladaptive some people will sit down to play a video game they really like video games and as they're sitting down they will experience a five-fold increase in the rate of dopamine output from their nucleus accumbens for other people it's going to be a tenfold increase for other people like me who don't like video games very much I don't have anything against them I don't dislike them but it doesn't do much for me it might not cause any increase whatsoever it might even cause a decrease in dopamine so there's a lot of individual variability for sex it turns out to be a range so the typical range that's cited in the literature is anywhere from a four to five-fold increase in the rate of dopamine neuron firing however there are certain individuals for which that number is doubled caffeine is a little bit of a special circumstance because caffeine has the property of not just causing the release of dopamine but increasing the amount of dopamine receptors over time and there aren't a lot of excellent measurements of the amount of dopamine released as a function of caffeine intake in different populations of humans it's mostly animal studies but what we think based on the Gestalt based on the overall picture of the literature is that it's an approximate doubling of the dopamine signaling that's coming out of the VTA nucleus accumens to prefrontal Cortex when we anticipate and when we drink our coffee again I really want to be clear that for all of these things these are relative levels and they are distribution so if we were to plot them out on paper you would see that these are not bar graphs these are overlapping curves to some extent so some people are going to achieve more dopamine release or less dopamine release from one Behavior or substance however it's very clear that cocaine methamphetamine even heroin for that matter are way out on the right hand side of the curve causing enormous increases in dopamine very quickly and the other things that we described have again a distribution that is more leftward shifted on this imaginary plot that I'm creating it's a lot of individual variability however it's fascinating that dopamine is the single molecule that's causing the craving and pursuit and experience of all of these substances and behaviors and the learning of all of that craving Pursuit and actual experience is what predicts whether or not we will re-engage reuse that substance or not re-engage in a behavior or not and how frequently we will do that so that's addiction but if you understand how the height of those peaks in dopamine and the rate to reach those Peaks and the troughs that result and how long the troughs take to get back to Baseline if you understand or a little or all of that you're really in a terrific position to understand how to Leverage The dopamine system for the pursuit of healthy goals and behaviors I should mention one thing about recovery from addiction which is that the reset of all that dopamine circuitry from unhealthy to healthy often involves depending on the addiction 30 days of complete abstinence that 30 days of complete abstinence inevitably involves a lot of pain and discomfort and craving anxiety insomnia Etc that relates to the big trough in dopamine that inevitably occurs now of course there are some addictions such as severe alcohol addiction and in some cases opiate addiction that immediate and sustained abstinence cannot be used as the tool somebody really needs to work with an addiction specialist and sometimes there needs to be a tapering off of the substance for other addictions it can be quote unquote cold turkey and then of course there are other addictions particularly food and sex but sometimes even things like video games for which the desired outcome is not necessarily to eliminate the behavior completely but to set some constraints around the behavior so that it's not occurring to the exclusion of other pleasureful things in life and adaptive things in life and for that there is the requirement for what are called binding behaviors we'll get back to binding behaviors later but binding behaviors or behaviors in which people bind their behavior around a particular substance use or around a particular behavioral addiction like sex Video Games Etc in space and or time in space meaning they might only engage in those particular behaviors in certain places and certain times when it's context appropriate there are numerous examples of binding behaviors in space and time it all has to do with clamping or directing when the engagement with the dopamine releasing behavior is going to occur so what's happening when people decide to go cold turkey or they use these binding behaviors well what's happening is that people are engaging the specific circuitry within the prefrontal cortex that as I mentioned at the beginning of the episode are important for context setting so in the cases of binding behaviors the prefrontal cortex is essentially getting trained up to understand that okay certain things like food or perhaps sex or perhaps video games they're okay if they are done or consumed in appropriate amounts or in particular context that requires the context setting goal directed behavior that the prefrontal cortex is responsible okay so for the last 10 or 15 minutes we've been talking a lot about addiction and actually this is not an episode about addiction however if you understand a little bit about the dopamine Dynamics in an addiction you can leverage that knowledge towards healthy adaptive goal Pursuit and achieving your goals so let's think about that in the context of what generates dopamine Peaks what generates desire to pursue goals what causes our readout of whether or not we achieved a goal or not in other words what allows us to learn how to pursue goals of different kinds not just get good at achieving one kind of goal but really understand and get really really good at setting goals and pursuing goals of different kinds that are adaptive in different areas of life because we all are going to have to pursue goals in school work relationships Fitness mental health and on and on in order to be our best selves that's clear well all of that is possible using the same basic set of dopamine circuits and the same basic dynamics of dopamine so for instance if we are going to feel motivated at all that is if we are going to wake up in the morning or have any period of time during our day in which we feel like we are capable of pursuing goals we are going to have to have a healthy level of Baseline dopamine in other words we are going to have to have enough dopamine in the wave pool enough water in the wave pool that is before we can generate any waves or peaks in dopamine let alone troughs and the rest so how do we achieve a healthy Baseline level of dopamine well there we can really look to some foundational practices practices that perhaps you've heard about on this podcast before and that to some of you might seem a little mundane although some of them are a bit more sophisticated maybe even esoteric the good news is that we can all control these things and they don't require purchasing anything but they do require some degree of regular upkeep and effort those things include what I call the very Basics now the very Basics put in the context of today's discussion are the things that put water in the wave pool those are going to be getting sufficient amounts of quality sleep each night something that we've done several episodes on and then have online toolkits for us you can see the master your sleep episode the perfect your sleep episode the light and health episode if you want to skip all that and just get right to the tools we have a sleep tool kit or it's actually called the toolkit for sleep that you can access at hubermanlab.com completely zero cost you just go there and download that toolkit getting sufficient sleep each night literally restores your dopamine reserves it allows dopamine to be present and for you to have a level of Baseline dopamine that will allow you to even consider your goals in any kind of meaningful or reasonable way second there are practices that are supported by the scientific literature to increase your Baseline level of dopamine that are independent of sleep but are similar to sleep and I like to refer to these as non-sleep deep rest this is not meditation there's actually very little evidence that meditation of the traditional kind of you know sitting eyes closed third eye sent focusing on your third eye center which is this area behind your forehead there is very little evidence that that increases levels of dopamine there is a place for meditation in the context of today's discussion but I'll repeat meditation itself is a focusing exercise it is not known to increase dopamine however non-sleep deep breaths so-called nsdr very similar although different to what's sometimes called Yoga Nidra which is where you lie there you do a sort of body scan some long exhale breathing and SDR is very similar you can find a link to a zero cost nsdr on YouTube it's a 10 minute long one there are also 20 and 30 minute ones out there also on YouTube but I'll provide a link to the 10 minute one those have been shown to increase the amount of dopamine in your dopamine Reserves by up to 65 percent which is a remarkable number so quality sleep non-sleep deep breast AKA Yoga Nidra very powerful ways to keep your Baseline level of dopamine at a sufficient level in addition to that nutrition no doubt plays a role in your Baseline level of dopamine because tyrosine the amino acid is the rate limiting enzyme For the synthesis of dopamine tyrosine is present in varying levels in different foods you can look those up online you just simply put in a search for tyrosine levels in different foods everything from particular cheeses like parmesan cheese has high levels of tyrosine certain meat certain nuts certain vegetables without getting into details in specifics you can find those there but you need proper nutrition and therefore nutrients in particular tyrosine in order to have sufficient levels of Baseline dopamine the third thing on the list and again these are things that we come back to almost every episode but I don't think they can be repeated enough because these are really things that we need to focus on every 24 hours you might be able to skip a day here or there if you get sick or you're traveling or you have some major life event but really every 24 hours we need to re-up our sleep we need to re-up our nutrients even if you're fasting you're re-upping your nutrients from stored sources within your body the third thing is sunlight morning sunlight in particular I've done extensive episodes about this check out the episode on lighting your health if you want all the details but you want to try and view sunlight as early in the day as possible five to ten minutes on a clear day minimum 10 to 20 minutes on a cloudy day minimum 20 or 30 minutes on a very overcast day minimum without sunglasses don't stare at the sun please don't damage your eyes look off slightly off from the Sun but yes you want to face the Eastward towards the Sun and on those cloudy days that's especially important to do why well viewing morning sunlight increases cortisol early in the day which is excellent because you want cortisol elevated early in the day and you want it lower later in the day and because of the relationship between the cells in your eye that sense sunlight specifically morning sunlight believe it or not that happens and signal to your hypothalamus and the relationship between the hypothalamus and the pituitary and other endocrine organs it sets in motion a dopamine-related Cascade in neuromodulators dopamine and hormones that lead to states of well-being elevated mood alertness Etc throughout the day it also helps your sleep at night but today we're talking about dopamine so yes believe it or not that morning sunlight exposure does increase your levels of dopamine not just cortisol and fourth on the list is going to be movement exercise of varying kinds be resistance training could be cardiovascular training that does increase levels of dopamine here we're not talking about achieving peaks in dopamine right that could be accomplished through setting a personal record a PR or through Sprints or heavy lifts or learning some new Dynamic movement what we're really talking about here is getting into a regular exercise program of if not every day at least five days a week a mixture of cardiovascular and resistance exercise that we also know is known to elevate and maintain an elevated level of Baseline dopamine so it's not just about the Euphoria you feel during or after exercise it's also about the Baseline level of dopamine that's achieved through regular movement and engaging in movement and if you're asking how could that be well you already know the answer the circuits in the brain and body that generate movement not just goal seeking but movement itself as I mentioned earlier that Niagara striatal pathway and yes that circuit is separate from the VTA nucleus accumbens to cortical circuit the mesocortical circuit that we've mainly been focusing on today but they interact and so by engaging in regular movement you ensure that you're maintaining elevated levels of Baseline dopamine which is what you want if you're going to be able to engage in any kind of motivated Pursuit behavior of any kind so those are the fundamentals that will set the level of Baseline dopamine in your system a couple of key points yes there is variation based on both genetics and Circumstance in Baseline levels of dopamine if someone's going through a particular hard time or if somebody inherited a gene in the dopamine synthesis pathway that simply affords them higher levels of Baseline dopamine we likely know these people they seem hyper motivated all the time not just based on prior success but they just seem to have a lot of energy and a lot of go drive you know you talk about activation energy some of you may know what that term means others of you won't having low activation energy is great I mean the amount of energy that it takes to get into action to pursue adaptive and meaningful healthy goals some people just seem to have lower activation energy and higher levels of dopamine are probably associated with that some of us have lower levels of Baseline dopamine regardless everyone needs to engage in the foundational things that I just mentioned a few moments ago every 24 hours or at least strive to there is no escaping that I'd like to just take a brief moment and thank one of our podcast sponsors which is inside tracker inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that blood work is the only way that you can monitor the markers such as hormone markers lipids metabolic factors Etc the impact your immediate and long-term health one major challenge with blood work however is that most of the time it does not come back with any information about what to do in order to move the values for hormones metabolic factors lipids Etc into the ranges that you want with inside tracker changing those values becomes very straightforward because it has a personalized dashboard that you can use to address the nutrition-based behavior-based supplement-based approaches that you can use in order to move those values into the ranges that are optimal for you Your vitality and your longevity inside tracker now includes a measurement of APO lipoprotein B so-called APO B in their ultimate plan apob is a key marker of cardiovascular health and therefore there's extreme value to knowing your apob levels if you'd like to try inside tracker you can go to insidetracker.com huberman to get 20 off any of inside tracker's plans again that's inside tracker.com huberman to get 20 off now there are things that can increase one's Baseline level of dopa being further and some of those get us into the realm of supplements and prescription drugs but for now I just want to mention a few of them that are purely behavioral in nature are zero cost and that have been shown in the research literature to increase Baseline levels of dopamine for long periods of time and this is important because if any of you are out there listening to this thing about Peaks and troughs and bass lines you might be asking wait what's the difference between a Baseline and a peak really because if for instance you get a big peak well that's a peak in the Baseline so how do you distinguish between Peak and Baseline and well there's a trough and let's say that trough lasts an hour is that hour-long trough for your baseline or you know where's your set point how do you establish your set point or more importantly how do you raise your set point ah well if you're not already asking that question I just asked it for you I Define an increase in your Baseline level in dopamine to be anything that increases dopamine for more than one hour you know when we think about cocaine and amphetamine pornography sex caffeine things of that sort regardless of how long one engages in about of those behaviors or substances the increases in dopamine are going to be relatively short-lived on the order of minutes to an hour sometimes longer now I didn't say that's how long you're engaging in the behaviors I said that's how long those increases in dopamine are going to occur even if you were to continually engage in those behaviors and remember with continual engagement in a dopamine spiking Behavior a behavior that increases dopamine Peaks the height of those Peaks remember gets lower and lower and lower especially in a short amount of time and then drops below Baseline there are tools and techniques that you can use to elevate your Baseline level of dopamine for long periods of time and here again this is done in addition to the basic tools that I mentioned a few moments ago the simplest one for which there are excellent data and here I'm referring to data published in the European Journal physiology I'll provide a link to this is that exposure of your body up to the neck to cold water and it doesn't have to be super cold by the way to cold water has been shown to increase Baseline levels of dopamine and the other so-called catecholamines which include norepinephrine and epinephrine but for sake of today's discussion dopamine in particular for not just one but at least two and probably as long as four or five hours there have been some additional scientific studies after the paper I just mentioned and it's really remarkable you can accomplish this a number of different ways you could get into a cold shower in the morning and I do recommend doing this in the morning and in that case it's okay to get the water on your head in fact I recommend it uh you could get into an ice bath you could get into a cold Plunge in these circumstances I'm not suggesting this for sake of increasing metabolism or fat loss and the whole discussion around uh deliberate cold and metabolism and fat loss has become a little bit controversial so we won't go there now mostly because we're focused on the clear ability of deliberate cold exposure to increase dopamine for long periods of time AKA your dopamine Baseline the ways to do this vary depending on the temperature so for instance there are data pointing to the fact that if you want to get a long lasting increase in your Baseline dopamine you could take a very cold shower or cold plunge or ice bath for a very brief period of time anywhere from 30 seconds to two minutes maybe three minutes but probably 30 seconds to two minutes now you might ask what is very cold you have to be careful because I don't want to recommend anything that's going to cause anyone to have a heart attack or go into shock or anything of that sort it's going to vary by person depending on your level of cold tolerance what I recommend is if you are going for the short exposure long dopamine release approach that is 30 seconds to two minutes that you start warmer than you think you need to and then you ease into it over a few days but we're really talking about ranges in temperature from anywhere from about 37 degrees Fahrenheit to about 55 degrees Fahrenheit again be careful approach it with caution and ease into it I do recommend doing this early in the day and I should mention not after strength or hypertrophy training because within the six hours after strength or hypertrophy training this deliberate cold exposure especially immersion up to the neck can suppress the strength and hypertrophy adaptation that the training is designed to accomplish okay so that's one approach the other approach that's supported by the literature to increase Baseline levels of dopamine for very long periods of time in fact this is the original approach is to get into warmer water so not warm but warmer so 60 degree Fahrenheit water up to the neck and to stay there for about 45 to 60 Minutes the reason I don't think most people will do that or that most people would prefer a shorter colder exposure protocol is that most people don't have 45 to 60 minutes each morning to get into water and sit there and in that study they actually had them sitting in lawn chairs basically in the shallow end of a pool up to their neck for a full 60 minutes and then measuring dopamine release and so forth so there are a bunch of different ways to do this I should emphasize I don't think you need to be super precise about the temperature and even the duration what I recommend is find a temperature that's uncomfortably cold to you meaning that you feel agitated you want to get out but that you're confident you can safely stay in and again I can't give a simple prescriptive to everybody but this is known to increase Baseline levels of dopamine significantly in fact double them or more for long periods of time meaning hours up to four maybe even six hours into the day which is one of the reasons I suggest doing this early in the day I happen to get into a cold plunger take a cold shower first thing in the morning I do go outside and get my sunlight first sometimes sometimes I do the cold first it really depends on my circumstances and how I'm feeling that day I don't think it really matters which one you do first but you want to try and get both of those in early in the day because you really want the catecholamines and cortisol elevated early in the day okay so that's deliberate cold exposure we already talked about exercise so if you're doing your exercise early in the day there's no reason why it couldn't be done in concert with this deliberate cold exposure I recommend doing the deliberate cold exposure first for the reasons we talked about a few minutes ago and then of course there are compounds both prescription and over-the-counter compounds that can indeed raise your Baseline levels of dopamine for an hour or more and when I say an hour or more it really depends on individual variation in terms of how quickly you metabolize dopamine and it depends on individual variation in how you manage or tolerate different dosages of drugs and different types of drugs so the typical drugs and here I'm talking about legal prescription drugs for increasing dopamine are things like Ritalin Adderall modafinil and arm modafinil also tap into the system and I did an entire episode about ADHD which is the typical context in which you hear about these prescription drugs but assuming it's prescribed by a doctor for either clinical reasons like ADHD or for other reasons all of those compounds do significantly increase Baseline levels of dopamine for many many hours that's absolutely clear and it's one of the major reasons why those drugs are so effective in increasing motivation and attention then there are compounds that are sold over the counter things like amino acids such as l-tyrosine itself that's a very commonly sold and used amino acid it's present in a lot of so-called pre-workout formulas I as many of you know am a fan of single ingredient supplements for the most part aside from foundational supplements like ag1 which give you many many micronutrients kind of all together because it would be nearly impossible to consume each of those as individual ingredients and get the right amounts Etc but for all other supplements I'm a big believer in parsing what you need and what's most effective for you in single ingredient formulations and the typical ways in which people work to elevate their Baseline levels of dopamine with supplements are using either l-tyrosine which as I mentioned earlier is the rate limiting enzyme for dopamine or by using what's called mucuna purines which is actually very similar to l-dopa which is the treatment for Parkinson's mechuna purines actually comes from the velvety outside coating of a certain bean I know it sounds really esoteric but that's actually where it's found in nature and it's really 99 l-dopa and I confess having tried McCune appearance having examined the scientific literature on the cune appearance there is some evidence that it can increase dopamine especially in that tuberinfrendibular pathway because it can tap into some of the hormone-related functions of the pituitary it does increase alertness and mood it might even increase libido motivation Etc but the effects of mercuna purines tend to be very much of the increasing the peak in dopamine and then very quickly dropping that peak in other words the peak trough phenomenon not for increasing Baseline levels of dopamine now it's likely different for people with Parkinson's who are taking prescription drugs that are similar to mercuna purine so if people have Parkinson's oftentimes they are prescribed things like l-dopa which is in the pathway to dopamine synthesis or they are prescribed things like bromocriptine which will indeed increase dopamine and I do realize that some people use those prescription drugs recreationally which I don't recommend those drugs can be used to increase Baseline levels of dopamine but more typically they cause Peaks and dopamine and troughs and dopamine which is why I do not recommend them they are not going to allow you to accomplish what you want if your goal is more motivation Etc in fact they are likely to do the opposite give you a big peak an alertness and then a crash that can include depressive symptoms and just not feeling very good l-tyrosine however has been examined in the scientific literature and at reasonably low dosages has been shown to increase circulating and available levels of dopamine both in the brain and body and lead to increased cognitive performance and in some cases physical output I'll provide links to a few of these studies but the two that I really parsed most finely for sake of this episode really just focus on taking l-tyrosine under conditions where your Baseline levels of dopamine are reduced due to stress and under conditions where there's no stress and people are trying to increase their Baseline levels of dopamine for sake of improving cognitive function the first paper is entitled effective tyrosine on cognitive function and blood pressure under stress I'll provide a link to this in the show note captions and it's one of many papers really dating back to the early 90s exploring how relatively High frankly relatively High dosages of l-tyrosine Taken under conditions of stress allow people to rescue some of their cognitive function in terms of working memory tasks and other kind of cognitive tasks visual Pursuit tasks and so on the second paper is entitled tyrosine improves working memory in a multitasking environment and the second paper is perhaps more interesting because it involves exploring the use of tyrosine supplementation basically taking tyrosine about an hour before a cognitive task or set of cognitive tasks that involve a lot of multitasking and working memory working memory for those of you that don't know is your ability to maintain small batches of information in your mind for relatively short periods of time so for instance if I tell you my phone number or the phone number where I grew up 493-2931 if you can remember that chances are you'll remember it for 30 seconds 60 seconds but that you won't remember it tomorrow because there's really no reason to a lot of the tasks that we do throughout the day involve working memory and working memory is very subject to interference from other tasks that we happen to be doing like looking at our phone or having a conversation or trying to navigate through a city it involves a lot of attention and this study shows that tyrosine improves working memory especially in the context of multitasking and having a lot of conflicting goals and they did a number of really nice experiments here it's again it's a small study not that many subjects but it's one of several papers in fact this is the paper that kind of set in motion the Domino of other papers exploring the efficacy of l-tyrosine for cognitive performance and they looked at working memory tasks of course but also auditory visual tasks and they involve some interference of visual cues and things of that sort and they saw some really interesting effects basically when we need to attend to multiple things at the same time l-tyrosine can help us do that at least as it relates to memory when I say althyrosine what I really mean is having your Baseline levels of dopamine elevated can really help navigate multitasking environments especially as it relates to working memory and this is true under conditions of stress and under conditions of not stressful okay you might say well isn't multitasking stressful itself yes it can be but when we talk about under conditions of stress we're talking about people who are sleep deprived we're talking about people that are under other kinds of psychological or physical stress l-tyrosine can help in that context as well so as I mentioned before in these studies they use very high dosages of l-tyrosine so high that actually I don't recommend them they did measure stress hormones they did measure blood pressure and things of that sort but I want to caution you I do not recommend I will say it again I do not recommend following the dosages that were used in these two studies because they are exceedingly high they used 100 milligrams per kilogram of body weight of tyrosine one hour prior to these cognitive tasks now I weigh about 220 pounds I'm a little bit lighter than that so that's a hundred kilograms approximately translated from this study that would mean that had I participated in the study and I wasn't in the placebo group but I was in the l-tyrosine group I would have been given 10 000 milligrams of l-tyrosine which is 10 grams of l-tyrosine I do not recommend that in fact there are papers showing that as little as 500 milligrams but perhaps up to one gram that is a thousand milligrams or 1500 milligrams a gram and a half of l-tyrosine Taken 30 to 60 minutes before a cognitive or physical task can increase Baseline levels of dopamine for extended periods of time and thereby improve performance on those mental or physical tasks so if you are somebody who's interested in trying l-tyrosine please know that the increases in Baseline levels of dopamine can be substantial they are long lasting which qualifies them as Baseline increases as opposed to Peaks and I would say you should also start with the lowest possible dose so for most people 250 to 500 milligrams is going to be a reasonable starting dose depending on your body weight smaller people start with 250 larger maybe 500 keep an eye on whether or not you're combining it with caffeine or with any other stimulants and keep in mind that again the bigger the peak in dopamine the bigger the trough in dopamine afterwards so pay attention to whether or not you experience a crash that same day or the next day but chances are if you're using a relatively low level of l-tyrosine so anywhere from 250 maybe 500 milligrams or a thousand milligrams of l-tyrosine prior to cognitive or physical work and taken early in the day by the way because this can act as a bit of a stimulant that you're going to achieve these long lasting increases in Baseline dopamine but please also keep in mind that that I always always suggest that you engage in the proper behaviors and you disengage from the improper behaviors as a first line of offense on any health goal so now you know how to set your Baseline levels of dopamine at the highest possible level you of course want to guard that Baseline level of dopamine very carefully so for instance you want to avoid any kind of behaviors or substances that are going to Peak your Baseline level of dopamine very high or very sharply or if you do engage in those types of behaviors whatever they may be that you are well aware that your Baseline level of dopamine will drop far below what it was after that Peak has fallen you will be essentially in the quote unquote trough if however you find yourself in that trough you now have the knowledge to understand that that trough will resolve if you wait enough time that Baseline level of dopamine that you were at prior to the peak will come back you will feel better however most people don't know that and as a consequence when they feel that low that is they feel kind of a motivated maybe a little bit depressed maybe a lot ammotivated or a lot depressed following some quote unquote Peak experience what they end up doing is thinking about what caused that Peak experience and then go back and try to re-engage in the behavior and try and regenerate that Peak experience but you now know that that is a terrible strategy in fact that strategy will only lead to diminished Peaks from the same experience it will lead to in many cases pursuing more and more intense experiences to try and recapitulate recreate that big peak which won't work or even worse people start stacking and combining different dopamine increasing behaviors in order to try and obtain something like that initial Peak when in fact all they need to do all you need to do is simply wait because the way that the dopamine circuitry is arranged is that it's not just about pleasure as you know it's about motivation desire Pursuit and pleasure and it also has everything to do with pain and discomfort now when people hear the word pain they often think oh pain okay so a physical pain or an intense emotional pain but today we're going to talk about pain a little bit differently we're going to talk about the pain associated with the trough and dopamine that occurs after a big peak in dopamine as a period in which pain and effort go hand in hand and I'll return to this in a moment but I want you to just note that in your mind kind of earmark that in your mind because what we're about to talk about is how to leverage that pain and to use effort as a way to not just get out of the trough more quickly but actually to get back to a higher level of Baseline as you exit that trough meanwhile I really want to harp on this one point that I made a moment ago which is that after some big experience so it could be a vacation or a night out partying or the birth of a new child all of these are well-known phenomena that lead to troughs or deficits in dopamine afterwards which can cause a sort of postpartum depression postpartum depression is a phrase normally used to describe literally postpartum post-birth of a child depression and that has many causes not just related to dopamine baselines although it does involve dopamine baselines but it has hormonal aspects and other aspects as well but postpartum depression is also used to describe any time that our Baseline dopamine has has gone down way way below what it was prior to some recent Peak or exciting exhilarating win or behavior couple of things that one can do in order to get out of that trough more quickly the first one is simply to wait with the understanding that you will get out I know that sounds overly simplistic and maybe a little bit brutal but I think most people don't realize this they don't realize that the dopamine circuitry does take time to replenish and it has everything to do with restoring both the synthesis of dopamine as well as What's called the readily releasable pool of dopamine so dopamine is packaged in these little spherical things that we call vesicles those vesicles are released from the ends of nerves so in this case we're talking about the nerves that originate again and VTA and nucleus accumbens and send their little wires up to the prefrontal cortex and that's where dopamine is released and that readily releasable pool of dopamine takes time to replenish and that can take several days in order to replenish just knowing that can help you through that process and of course then it raises the question is there anything that you can do to accelerate that process and indeed there is and indeed this is what I consider not just something to get you out of a trench of kind of lower mood and motivation but actually what represents the Holy Grail of motivation today I'm going to talk about this pain effort process as a very powerful way to get out of sticking points but more importantly to get into a mode where effort and reward can actually accelerate your progress along any path to any goal and in a way that you can do it repeatedly and this is not simply taking mechanisms from biology and painting names on them rather this is leveraging mechanisms in biology that are well defined in the animal and human in literature that have parallels to the addiction and addiction recovery literature but that have been shown in specific circumstances to really allow people to engage in motivational Pursuits in a variety of context School relationships work etc in an ongoing way and in a way that never depletes their Baseline of dopamine to the point where they have to do a lot of extra work to get it back and in a way that allows them to be really motivated in a variety of contexts in an Adaptive way so what we're really talking about here is regardless of your genetics regardless of who your parents are which obviously you couldn't select being able to leverage your dopamine system in order to be maximally motivated when you want to be and indeed to avoid procrastination I'd like to tell you about a classic experiment that I've described once before on this podcast but frankly this experiment is so crucial I don't think it can be described enough this was an experiment that was done at Stanford many years ago and involved children but it's actually been repeated in adults the experiment involved observing a classroom of young children so these were kids about kindergarten age a little bit older and observing which activities kids like to do in their free time so their structured time where they had to you know these are little kids so they play blocks or they had to um sing or they had to write or or do what they could or I suppose draw they're probably not writing um significant prose at that age but then they had free time where they could do whatever they wanted and what the researchers did was observe the children who selected by their own choice to draw pictures so there were some tables out with crayons and markers and paper Etc and there were some kids that would just naturally go to that activity every day because they liked that activity and they measured how much of the free time these children elected to use their free time drawing doing these different art projects and then what they did was they started introducing rewards to these children they started putting a gold star or in some cases a silver star on their pieces of artwork and telling them what a good job they did and the kids really liked that in fact who wouldn't right they're not only doing an activity that they like but they're also getting a reward for it so you can probably see where this is all going what they were doing was they were increasing the amount of dopamine that these children experience and again in parallel experiments done with adults if you take adults who enjoy a particular activity you let them do activity and then you start rewarding them for that activity especially when you surprise them with a reward for an activity they already like they report that being a much more pleasurable experience than had they just done the activity then what they did with these children and in the experiments with adults done later on was they cease giving them the reward and then they observe what percentage of their free time they spend doing that activity drawing and what they observed was you guessed it a drop in the total amount of time that the children elected to do this activity that initially they were doing quite a lot in other words their total satisfaction or desire or motivation to engage in this activity drop below what it was prior to ever receiving a reward and again this has been repeated in a variety of contexts in different populations different cultures different countries men women boys girls lots of different backgrounds so what this tells us is everything you already know which is that reward prediction error is not just about the desire to do something and you carrying it out and it being pretty good amazing or not good okay I always like to joke that the nervous system sort of codes things into three bins you can think about this in terms of food or any type of experience it can either be yum yes I really like that yuck I really don't like that or meh it's kind of so so what the scenario led to where rewards were received for an activity that people already like to do and then removed was that an activity that at one point was a yum becomes a meh and that all reflects a drop in Baseline dopamine why because the activity that the children or adults liked combined with the gold star or the monetary reward or praise that children and adults seem to like compounded to create a bigger peak in dopamine and therefore a bigger trough in dopamine and if you're already wondering whether or not their desire to engage in that activity eventually came back it did indeed so essentially what I described all matches precisely with dopamine reward prediction error and the fact that peaks in dopamine give rise to subsequent troughs and dopamine that if one Waits long enough allow Baseline levels of dopamine to return to normal and of course the amplitude of that dopamine Peak has been varied by giving more money or less money in different scenarios nearly all the different derivations of the experiments that you could imagine that map onto the Dynamics of dopamine release that we've been talking about during this episode all played out exactly as one would have predicted based on the neural circuitry and the Dynamics of dopamine I recommend that you leverage this knowledge to make sure that any activities that you enjoy to do whether or not you enjoyed a little or a lot but especially if you enjoy it a lot that you guard and Protect by making sure that you don't start layering in or attaching reward or other sources of dopamine releasing behaviors or substances to that specific behavior or if you do that you don't do it terribly often now how often is terribly often we'll get to that in a moment but let me give you an example from my life just as an example but you will likely have and you'll know people that will have different examples I love to exercise I know to some people uh this might seem foreign but I love to exercise I love to do resistance training I love to run I am not one of those people that doesn't like the experience of exercising but likes the feeling afterwards quote unquote I hear that a lot I don't like to exercise but I love the way I feel afterwards I love physical training and I love the way I feel afterwards but I mostly love the feeling during I don't know why I'm wired that way I can't say that I'm somebody who likes to do hard things across the board there are plenty of difficult things in life that I dread or that I'm sort of meh about but for me hard exercise intense exercise of a particular kind resistance training and running in particular both give me a yum yes I love this kind of feeling and yes it persists for me quite a long while afterwards both for sake of the way that it changes my neurochemistry but also my sense of satisfaction but I just simply love it now years ago I discovered that if I drink a cup of black coffee or an Americano or a double espresso or some yerba mate that my workouts can be quite a bit more intense I can run further and then I also discovered that if I were to take a pre-workout energy drink or I took say 300 milligrams of alpha GPC and 500 milligrams of phenylethylamine and perhaps even 500 milligrams of l-tyrosine and perhaps did that alongside the caffeine in the Yerba mate then yes absolutely I really like those workouts I could be like a laser in terms of focus I could exert even more effort put on some music and I could achieve even better performance and then I also discovered that I could export that protocol of caffeine yerba mate and various supplements to my cognitive work so I was when I was studying or writing papers or writing grants or in the laboratory when I was doing experiments with my hands in those days you know cutting brain tissue and staining it and working really long hours and I discovered that all of those things all of those behaviors compounded with my love of exercise and my love of doing science and gave me these big peaks in what to me felt like even important experiences they felt you know unlike anything else they were just so so peak in their nature which was great and it did indeed enhance my performance however while it did not create a dependency for those different substances caffeine supplements Etc what I noticed was that in the days and sometimes weekends afterwards even though for much of my career I confess I've worked weekends as well but I would notice that I'd experience a real trough in energy I just would not feel that good and then if I kept up those behaviors consistently and I was consistently adding in these other let's just call them what they are dopamine releasing or stimulating behaviors and substances that my enthusiasm for physical training or running or for doing experiments actually started to diminish and this was really discouraging to me at the time because I started to think okay maybe I'm burnt out maybe I have adrenal burnout which by the way doesn't exist folks your adrenals don't burn out there is something called adrenal insufficiency syndrome you can over stimulate your system by way of too much adrenaline epinephrine and norepinephrine but that's a separate thing there's no such thing as adrenal burnout per se but I didn't know that so I thought gosh I'm really burnt out when in fact it's now obvious to me what I was doing I was combining too many dopamine releasing or stimulating behaviors in substances for things that I already enjoyed doing as behaviors namely exercise and doing experiments anything related to science actually so what this means is not to avoid taking things or doing things that amplify your amount of dopamine but to be very cautious about how often one does that and how many different dopamine stimulating behaviors or compounds one stacks especially in terms of taking those things or stacking those things in and around behaviors that you already really enjoy doing I was essentially just creating another version of the kids in nursery school or first grade with the gold star experiment I was basically just doing the exact same thing and when I realized that and I changed my relationship to those compounds I didn't eliminate them all together but I started realizing for instance that I didn't need to double up on yerba mate and coffee every workout sometimes I would do one sometimes I would do the other frankly I always do one or the other it's rare that I ever do any kind of physical training without some caffeine first and I do my physical training typically in the early part of the day so that's fine doesn't interfere with my sleep I might do a hike without caffeine but if I'm in a weight trainer I'm going to run I tend to drink coffee beforehand or have yerba mate or if I occasionally meaning about once every third sometimes every other but usually about every third workout I'll take 300 milligrams of alpha GPC maybe occasionally maybe every third or fourth workout and these are resistance workouts mind you not running I'll take 500 milligrams of l-tyrosine or more typically 500 milligrams of phenol ethylamine and very very rarely maybe once every two or three months I might stack all of those things together prior to a workout but of course I'm always mindful to also include workouts or runs or bouts of cognitive work so that could be grant writing prepping for a podcast Etc where I don't do anything prior maybe just my caffeine because I have a baseline level of caffeine that I use each day to function like many people there's a baseline level of caffeine that just allows us to function if we're a Perpetual user of caffeine I talked a lot about this on the episode in caffeine but the key here is be cautious I would say be very cautious about stacking and layering in too many dopamine Peak inducing behaviors all at once on a regular basis the key Point here is if you are somebody that can engage in these intrinsically joyful activities for you these activities that you're really motivated to do whether or not it's skiing or playing music or dancing Etc without the need to layer in additional dopamine releasing mechanisms or compounds or activities well then I highly recommend you do that because then you are essentially making yourself one of those fortunate few that does not require additional stimuli and therefore can hold on to that pleasure can hold on to that intrinsic pleasure and motivation to engage in these behaviors over time which frankly there is no replacement for there is no pill or bottle or potion or motivational speech or podcast or book that can replace intrinsic motivation intrinsic motivation is perhaps the Holy Grail of all human Endeavors and behaviors because it encompasses so much of what brought us to this point in our species Evolution and also what brings each and every one of us closer and closer to our goals and if it's happening with enjoyment without the need to layer in additional tools well then you have really tapped into the source and when I say the source I don't mean it in any kind of mystical way I think it's quite clear by now that when we hear about Chi from Eastern medicine or we talk about motivation drive and pursuit in on Western neurobiological languages that relates to dopamine or we hear about the source maybe in my podcast episode with the one and only Rick Rubin incredibly productive music producer who's as an just an unbelievable track record in terms of creative Endeavors and he talks about the source we're really talking about the same thing which is this set of circuits within us that allow us to identify what we want and then lean into effort and then to do that in a persistent way that allows us to reach our goals and if we can do that with an intrinsic sense of pleasure well that is nothing short of magic but of course it's not magic it's science and of course most people are not concerned about trying to protect the things they already enjoy in order to make sure that they can continue to do those things and enjoy them most people are thinking about how they can engage and pursue things that are less than pleasureful to them or how they can continue to engage in motivated behaviors when the going gets tough or and this is a big one I hear this over and over again as a request to cover on this podcast how people can overcome procrastination what we're going to talk about now is how the Dynamics of dopamine release that you already are aware of plus and additional Dynamic that we haven't quite talked about can allow you to leverage dopamine in a way that really will bring you to the Holy Grail of motivation and drive which is when effort starts to become the reward itself in other words when friction becomes the reward I know that sounds crazy to some of you but when friction becomes the reward you can pass from an idea and a goal no matter how daunting to successful completion of that goal while experiencing what essentially will feel like pleasure the entire time now that doesn't mean it will be Bliss the entire time but what is very possible is to leverage the Dynamics of both dopamine Peaks and dopamine troughs in order to not just maintain your Baseline level of dopamine but to also pull yourself out of any kind of procrastination or other kind of overthinking trenches very quickly and get back into a mode of pursuit so how do we make effort the reward you may have heard about this in the context of so-called growth mindset growth mindset is the incredible Discovery and research papers from my colleague Dr Carol dweck in the psychology department at Stanford and there are others such as David Yeager at the University of Texas Austin who have leveraged the so-called growth mindset as a tool that young people and adults alike can use in order to get better at anything and the basic Contour of growth mindset is to adopt the mindset that if you can't do something or if you can't do it well that you can't do it or can't do it well yet it's that word yet that's really key and there are a number of different tools and techniques that people use to adopt growth mindset but it all starts with that relationship to not being able to do it yet now that all sounds pretty straightforward when you tell yourself but when we are in a performance context when we expect ourselves to be able to motivate or when we expect ourselves to be able to perform and we can't that often sets up a downward spiral of motivation because we are so used to being attached to the relationship between desire motivation and outcomes reward prediction error we want something we want that a in class or we want to learn how to dance or we want to be able to do this uh physical skill of another kind or learn a language or get the mate we desire or make the relationship work or make the business work on and on and then we get the outcome that we don't want and our confidence for lack of a better word drops over time oftentimes that leads to situations where we are not motivated we are a motivated it can even lead to situations where we are downright depressed there's also circumstances where people myself included of course procrastinate we know we should do something but somehow we can't get motivated we know that if we put in the effort we'll get there but we can't do it either because we don't like the activity or we're just not feeling great now we could be quote unquote not feeling great not feeling motivated because our dopamine Baseline is low and so I absolutely encourage everybody to take a look at themselves anytime they're in a motivated State take a look at the landscape of their life not just at that moment but in the preceding days and weeks and ask whether or not you've been tending to those foundational things we talked about earlier whether or not you are engaging any other of the tools that we talked about earlier to see if you can get into a motivated State however if all of those boxes are checked you answer yes I'm doing all those things I'm just not motivator I'm just whatever reason I just procrastinating I don't know I don't want to do it or I'm not feeling motivated well then there's a very potent set of tools that you can leverage to overcome states of lack of motivation overcome procrastination and indeed can help you deal with things like overthinking as it relates to procrastination and lack of motivation as well so the way this works is the following if you recall a peak in dopamine is followed by a trough in dopamine that trough in dopamine is experienced as pain or wanting or craving that pain that I'm referring to is actually a craving or a wanting and it's a craving you're wanting for a specific state that you would like to achieve that is different than the one that you're in you want to get out of that trough and as you recall from earlier in the episode that trough is the stimulus for the ongoing release of dopamine that provides the propeller the motivation to go forward and seek some goal okay so when we are not motivated when we are in a so-called a-motivated state or when we are procrastinating or when we just sort of can't seem to get in gear the key to getting out of that pain trough is one of two things I already told you earlier you can just wait you can wait till your motivation comes back and a lot of people do wait in fact they procrastinate they start doing other things that are less painful than the state that they happen to be in when they are you know trying to get into gear to go work out because I realize not everyone wants to do that or to study or to have a hard conversations whatever it is and what do they do they start engaging in activities that we and indeed they would not consider pleasureful activities they start for instance cleaning the house so seemingly out of nowhere they start engaging in these activities that normally are not intrinsically pleasureful for them they're not highly motivated to do them as a replacement for doing the very thing that they quote unquote need to do or ought to do and that they're procrastinating to do what they're essentially doing here is a mild type of addiction replacement in other words rather than be in the painful State and wait for it to pass they're doing things that give them some sense of accomplishment ostensibly to give them the sense that they're completing things and perhaps and I don't know because I'm not um in the psychology of knowing what other people are thinking perhaps in order to generate the momentum in order to get engaged enough or motivated enough to study or work out or whatever activity it is that they're trying to avoid through procrastination now what's interesting about this Dynamic is first of all it's extremely common and second of all a lot of people will use this as a tactic so that they get very close to the deadline to complete something and then they go into a sort of pseudo panic and then use anxiety as a way to leverage their mental and physical resources to complete that thing how do I know the Contour of this so well how do I understand the inner dynamics of it well part of that relates to my work as a neurobiologist and reading the papers that I'll mention to you in a moment but it also relates to the fact that I'm somebody who Waits quite a while right up until the sort of last minute possible to complete something for activities that I don't want to do something I've been working on my whole life in any case I'm very familiar with the procrastination process so how can we overcome procrastination well it turns out that there are findings from within the addiction literature that turn out to be very powerful towards leveraging our way out of procrastination and it has to do with this you already know because I've told you probably a dozen times now that the depth of the trough after a dopamine Peak is proportional to how high that Peak was and how steep it was how quickly that Peak occurred it turns out that not only is the depth of the trough proportional to that but the rate at which you get out of that trough is proportional to how steep that trough is let me explain this for you in as clear terms as I possibly can imagine you're in an a-motivated State you're just not feeling motivated you're procrastinating you may think okay the thing to do here is something I'll clean the house I'll take care of some bills I'll do something or I'll just wait those approaches as we talked about before generally don't work or at least don't work quickly or they lead you right up to the deadline and that's the deadline that forces you to get something done or you just don't get it done and you don't succeed in your goal that happens a lot as well however if you were to take that state of being unmotivated or procrastinating and actually do something that's harder than being in that a-motivated state in other words doing something that's more effortful even painful you can rebound yourself out of that dopamine trough much more quickly so what do I mean you want to put yourself in a state that's worse than or harder than the state that you're in or do something quote unquote more painful and here I want to be very clear I'll say this three times but I'm going to say it for the first time now when I say more painful I do not mean doing any kind of tissue damaging or psychologically damaging Behavior or anything of that sort that's going to render you injured or not well even in the short term that's not what I'm referring to okay let's just get that one out of the way what I'm referring to is the fact that for instance if you're feeling a motivated but you find yourself cleaning the house as a way to procrastinate you can say well cleaning the house is harder than sitting down and doing nothing but actually in that moment or in those moments that's not the case or else you wouldn't be doing it the reality is that the dopamine system works according to what feels hard or easy in the Moment In other words if you're feeling a motivated you need to do something and put yourself into a state that's harder than the state you're in so for instance if you're sitting around feeling a motivated or you find yourself tending to tasks that are irrelevant to the goal that you really should be focused on you need to put your body and mind into a state of discomfort quickly and the way to do that is to either engage in some tangential activity meaning an activity not related to your goal that puts your body into a very different state so here again I'll default to the obvious one which is something like cold shower or cold immersion which not only increases dopamine long term or over several hours rather but for most people is experienced as pain that pain causes a rebound out of that dopamine trough faster than it would occur if you had just stayed in that a motivated State and waited for it to go away or done something like cleaning up that for whatever reason felt like it required less friction when I say friction I mean limbic friction your limbic system is always in this dialogue with your forebrain and limbic friction goes two ways limbic friction can be you're tired and you don't want to do something and so you have to quote unquote motivate to do it energize yourself to do it or limbic friction can be that you're nervous and scared and anxious to do something and you have to calm yourself in order to lean forward into action in order to do that thing despite the anxiety I realize this can be a little bit confusing as a concept so I want to go into a bit more detail let's imagine that you or somebody else does not like to exercise you don't want exercise and you're trying to get your minimum of five days per week exercise and you're just not motivated to do it there are a couple different techniques to doing this assuming you've taken care of all the Baseline stuff all the foundational stuff we talked about earlier and you're just not getting in gear and you find yourself you know checking your phone or maybe you're tending into some tasks obviously those things are quote unquote easier for you meaning they cause less limbic friction than engaging in exercise the typical advice would be just exercise for one minute okay just get one minute of exercise or five minutes and then use the successful completion of that one or five minutes as a milestone that allows you to then move to the next Milestone and indeed that approach can work and it's exactly what I'm describing here when I say that you're in a state of lack of motivation or procrastination or both and you need to put yourself into a more painful not less painful state so what do you do you push up against that friction and you exercise for a short while and then that pops you out of that trough that's possible but for a lot of people even that won't be possible because they just can't get motivated or they do that one minute or five minutes and they're just like okay I'm still in the trough I'm not actually feeling that great in those circumstances it makes sense to do something that's tangential to the whole path that you're trying to pursue this goal that you're trying to pursue that is Believe It or Not much worse than just being a motivated and when I say worse I don't mean picking some task that normally you don't like to do but now you're willing to do I mean literally thinking about what would be worse than being in this state again without causing yourself tissue or psychological damage what would be worse well cold water would be worse for many people very cold water so the key is to figure out something that for lack of a better way to put it really sucks really sucks and yet is safe and by doing that you steepen the trough you steepen the slope of the trough which we know brings you back to your Baseline level of dopamine more quickly now for some people that will be deliberate cold exposure through cold shower ice bath and I have to tell you that if you're cringing as I say this well then there you go you now have a tool that you know you cringe even when you just think about and therefore represents a great tool for you so if I'm procrastinating to do something I really need to do should I just simply wait for that procrastination to evaporate no will it eventually evaporate maybe will a deadline eventually surface that will trigger me into an anxious or activated state that will allow me to complete what needs to be done maybe hopefully but better would be to get out of that a motivated state that state of procrastination quickly and to do so you need to leverage something that's painful so for instance I heard a beautiful lecture recently done by Dr Anna Lemke at Stanford School of Medicine discussing dopamine and some of the things in her book and some newer findings as well and somebody in the audience asked her the question does meditation increase dopamine now earlier we talked about how non-sleep deep rest In Yoga Nidra has been shown in the scientific literature to increase dopamine but I also mentioned earlier that classic forms of meditation whether eyes open or eyes closed so-called open monitoring or closed monitoring meditation sitting there lying there and focusing does not increase dopamine levels per se however for most people especially people who find it hard to meditate or who don't do that practice very often meditation is effortful getting into meditation and staying in meditation is effortful so if you find yourself in a state of procrastination oftentimes a brief five to ten minute meditation where you absolutely do not allow yourself to do anything besides close your eyes focus on your breath and when your mind drifts get back to your breath is not only extremely difficult and extremely frustrating unless you're a well-practiced meditator but it's often difficult and frustrating not just to do but to get into that practice and not just to get into that practice but to maintain that practice for that mere five to ten minutes because it's just not a natural state for us to be in we have to force ourselves so it is effortful in fact it qualifies as a basically available almost anywhere anytime type of effortful activity that if you dislike it perhaps even as much as some people dislike deliberate cold exposure well then perfect you now have an additional tool in your kit that you can use anytime you are feeling a motivated and procrastinating now there are numerous examples I could give and hopefully there are numerous examples that you're thinking about the key is to have a short list of about five different effortful AKA painful activities that you can employ anytime you're feeling a motivated or in a state of procrastination keeping in mind that the goal is not what you accomplish inside of that activity although it is important that you actually engage in that activity I actually have to make myself meditate in that five to ten minute little bout of effortful or painful activity but it's not about achieving an outcome it's about forcing your body and mind into a deeper state of pain and discomfort in other words taking yourself from that trough that you're already in and steepening and deepening that trough because in steepening and deepening that trough we know that the return from that trough to normal and even elevated levels of Baseline dopamine is going to be faster and more robust and in doing that you will quick quickly find yourself back into a motivated State because not only does it teach you that doing hard things is possible that's sort of more of a subjective cognitive learning but it actually Taps into the very neurochemical system that allows you to then feel motivated and capable to pursue the larger goal which is the thing you're really concerned about after all so as is often the case perhaps always the case on this podcast we covered a lot of material we cover dopamine and what it is we talked about the circuitry and the different kinds of circuitry focusing mainly on this mesocortical pathway that is so vitally important to motivation for any goals talked about the relationship between Peaks and troughs and bass lines and the foundational tools that allow us to set and maintain a healthy Baseline level of dopamine as well as ways to protect that Baseline level of dopamine and we talked about how to get ourselves out of states of procrastination and a Motivation by not just waiting out those troughs in dopamine but actually making those troughs and dopamine steeper by engaging in things that are effortful and things that we really don't want to do in those moments provided that those things are safe we can get out of those dopamine troughs more quickly and back to our dopamine baseline or even above Baseline and we talked about what I really view as the Holy Grail of motivation which is to be able to learn to attach reward to the effort process itself and to do so by not just understanding but also learning to subjectively recognize and somatically experience release of these different stressful chemicals within our body I realized this was a lot of information and yet throughout I've tried to highlight tools that you can use that range from behavioral to nutritional supplementation tools cognitive tools and keep in mind that all of these different segments of the podcast is always are time stamps so if you feel the need to go back and listen to any of these in order to get clearer understanding we've made that easy to do so so simply look for the time stamps in the show note captions if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zero cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on Apple and Spotify and on both apple and Spotify you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or suggestions about topics you'd like me to cover or guess you'd like me to interview on The huberman Lab podcast please put those in the comments section on YouTube I do read all the comments in addition please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast during today's podcast and on many previous episodes of The uberman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep hormone support focus and many other aspects of mental health physical health and performance the huberman Lab podcast is happy to announce that we partnered with momentous supplements if you'd like to learn more about the supplements mentioned on today's and other episodes of The huberman Lab podcast go to live momentous spelled ous so livemomentis.com huberman if you haven't already signed up for the huberman Lab podcast neural network newsletter it's a monthly newsletter that provides summaries of podcast episodes and Tool kits toolkits are summaries and links to specific protocols that you can use that have been discussed on various podcast episodes so we have a toolkit for sleep for neuroplasticity for deliberate cold exposure and much much more to sign up for the newsletter which by the way is completely zero cost go to hubermanlab.com go to the menu scroll down to newsletter and provide your email we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's Deep dive discussion into dopamine and its practical applications and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 216 ---
Video ID: cp9GXl9Qk_s
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cp9GXl9Qk_s
Title: AMA #5: Intrusive Thoughts, CGMs, Behavioral Change, Naps & NSDR
Published: 2023-03-24 12:00:22 UTC
Description:
Welcome to a preview of the fifth Ask Me Anything (AMA) episode, part of the Huberman Lab Premium subscription.

The Huberman Lab Premium subscription was launched for two main reasons. First, it was launched in order to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel — which will continue to come out every Monday at zero-cost. Second, it was launched as a means to raise funds for important scientific research. A significant portion of proceeds from the Huberman Lab Premium subscription will fund human research (not animal models) selected by Dr. Huberman, with a dollar-for-dollar match from the Tiny Foundation.

Subscribe to Huberman Lab Premium at https://hubermanlab.com/premium

#HubermanLab #Science #AMA

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction
00:01:53 Strategies for Abstaining From Addictive Thoughts and Narratives 
00:21:07 Huberman Lab Premium

In the full AMA episode, we discuss:
- Continuous Glucose Monitors (CGMs) 
- How to Build Good Habits Alongside a Partner Who Challenges Them? 
- Short Naps vs. Non-Sleep Deep Rest (NSDR) for Replenishing Energy and Dopamine 

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 217 ---
Video ID: ufsIA5NARIo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ufsIA5NARIo
Title: Dr. Peter Attia: Improve Vitality, Emotional & Physical Health & Lifespan | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-03-20 12:00:47 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Peter Attia, M.D. He completed his medical and advanced training at Stanford University School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine and the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Dr. Attia is host of the health and medicine podcast, The Drive, and the author of a new book, “Outlive: The Science & Art of Longevity,” which examines disease prevention and healthy aging, including emotional health. He explains the leading causes of death worldwide and how to measure one’s risk of death and mitigate each risk factor. Dr. Attia shares how, in addition to blood-based markers of lipids and hormones, there are behavioral measures and interventions, and key aspects of emotional health (i.e., relationships, emotional stability, purpose, etc.) that fundamentally impact our physical health and longevity, and how to assess and adjust our emotional health. This episode is rich with actionable information related to disease screening and biomarker testing, nutritional, exercise, behavior and prescription-based tools that area useful to all people regardless of age, male or female, and that can significantly improve vitality, health and lifespan.

#HubermanLab #Science #Science 

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman  
HVMN: https://hvmn.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Peter Attia
Website: https://peterattiamd.com 
The Peter Attia Drive Podcast: https://peterattiamd.com/podcast
Newsletter: https://peterattiamd.com/newsletter
Twitter: https://twitter.com/PeterAttiaMD 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/peterattiamd
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/c/PeterAttiaMD 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/peterattiamd 

Articles
A Wandering Mind Is an Unhappy Mind: https://bit.ly/40ccfw8

Books
Outlive: The Science & Art of Longevity book: https://peterattiamd.com/outlive
The Road to Character: https://amzn.to/42nMx9H

Other Resources
Withings Blood Pressure Cuff: https://amzn.to/47TJ6tQ
Omron Blood Pressure Cuff: https://amzn.to/41kLirQ
Prenuvo Whole-Body MRI: https://www.prenuvo.com 
Biograph: https://www.biograph.com 
The Fentanyl Crisis and Why Everyone Should Be Paying Attention (The Drive podcast episode): https://peterattiamd.com/anthonyhipolito

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Peter Attia
00:03:22 Sponsors: Eight Sleep, LMNT, HVMN, Momentous
00:07:34 Lifespan vs. Healthspan
00:10:54 “4 Horseman of Death”, Diseases of Atherosclerosis
00:14:44 Tool: Hypertension & Stroke, Blood Pressure Testing 
00:23:14 Preventing Atherosclerosis, Smoking & Vaping, Pollution
00:32:24 Sponsor: AG-1 (Athletic Greens)
00:33:29 Cholesterol, ApoB
00:42:21 Cholesterol Levels, LDL & ApoB Testing
00:49:29 ApoB Levels & Atherosclerosis, Causality
01:01:06 ApoB Reduction, Insulin Resistance, Statins, Ezetimibe, PCSK9 Inhibitors
01:12:30 Monitoring ApoB
01:17:12 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:18:30 Reducing Blood Pressure, Exercise & Sleep
01:20:50 High Blood Pressure & Kidneys
01:23:11 Alcohol, Sleep & Disease Risk
01:31:21 Cancer & Cancer Risks: Genetics, Smoking & Obesity
01:39:47 Cancer Screening & Survival
01:44:17 Radiation Risks, CT & PET Scans
01:48:48 Environmental Carcinogens
01:52:11 Genetic & Whole-Body MRI Screening, Colonoscopy
01:58:47 Neurodegenerative Diseases, Alzheimer’s Disease, ApoE
02:08:08 Alzheimer’s Disease & Amyloid
02:13:58 Interventions for Brain Health, Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI)
02:21:26 Accidental Death, “Deaths of Despair”, Fentanyl Crisis
02:31:20 Fall Risk & Stability, 4 Pillars of Strength Training
02:41:05 Emotional Health
02:53:45 Mortality & Preserving Relationship Quality
03:02:20 Relationships vs. Outcomes, Deconstructing Emotions
03:09:34 Treatment Centers, Emotional Processing & Recovery
03:16:34 Tool: Inner Monologue & Anger, Redirecting Self-Talk
03:27:37 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today my guest is Dr Peter AA his second time on the podcast Dr Peter Atia is a medical doctor who did his training at Stanford School of Medicine John's Hopkins school of medicine and the National Institutes of Health he is a world expert in all things related to health span vitality and longevity in this episode we focused on many topics focusing mainly however on health span and Longevity and mental health health span and longevity of course relate to how long one lives and Dr AA goes systematically through the seven major causes of death worldwide beginning with cardiovascular disease and cerebral vascular disease also cancer also accident related deaths dementia deaths of Despair and in every case explains the three or four major levers that one can employ in order to offset that is to prevent those major causes of death what follows is an incredibly informative and actionable set of tools for anyone male female young or old he explains the behavioral nutritional supplementation based and prescription drug- based approaches that one can use in order to extend health span and Longevity Dr a explains the key tests and markers that we should all pay attention to if our goal is to extend our healthspan and how to do so while maximizing our Vitality this is something that not a lot of people think about when they think about health span and Longevity but as Dr AA illustrates for us emotional health has everything to do with our physical health and vice versa and he shares quite openly about his own experiences in pursuing ways to improve emotional health and thereby healthspan lifespan and vitality Dr AA is quite open about his own experiences exploring different practices to improve emotional health as ways not just to improve health span longevity and vitality but of course also to derive the most meaning and satisfaction from Life throughout today's discussion we also discussed Dr aa's newly released book which is entitled outlive the science and art of longevity this is a phenomenal book I've read it cover to cover now three times I have extensive notes written throughout and the Book of course focuses on longevity and health span and also has an extensive section on emotional health it gets quite detailed into Dr aa's personal experiences with emotional health and tools to improve emotional health that are very actionable for anybody to use I think the best way for me to summarize my feelings about the book would simply be to read the back jacket quote which I provided so I read quote finally there is a modern thorough clear and actionable manual for how to maximize our immediate and long-term Health firmly grounded in data and real life conditions this is the most accurate and Comprehensive Health guide published to date outlive is not just informative it is important and indeed outlive is an important book as is the discussion that Dr AA so graciously provided Us in today's episode outlive is released on March 28th 2023 and is available for pre-order prior to that date you can find a link to where it's sold in the show note captions before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity as I've talked about before on the hubman Lab podcast there is a critical relationship between sleep and body temperature that is in order to fall asleep and stay deeply asleep your body temperature needs to drop by about 1 to 3° and in order to wake up in the morning and feel alert your body temperature needs to increase by about 1 to 3° the problem with most people's sleeping environment is that even if you make the room cool the actual environment that you sleep on that is your mattress and underneath your covers is hard to regulate in terms of temperature with eight sleep regulating the temperature of that sleeping environment becomes incredibly easy in fact you can change the temperature of that environment across the night making it a little bit cool at the beginning of the night even cooler still a few hours into your sleep which really helps getting into very deep sleep and then warming it as you approach morning so that you wake up feeling most alert I've been sleeping on an eight sleep mattress cover for over a year now and it has completely transformed my sleep if you'd like to try eights sleep you can go to 8sleep.com huberman to save up to $150 off their pod three cover eight sleep currently ships in the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again that's 8sleep.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't that means plenty of salt magnesium and potassium and no sugar the electrolytes salt magnesium and potassium are critical for the function of all cells in particular neurons or nerve cells and of course proper hydration is critical for mental functioning and physical performance to ensure that I stay hydrated I consume one packet of element in approximately 20 to 30 ounces of water every morning when I first wake up and I will also consume one element p pet in about the same amount of water when I exercise or when I'm doing any kind of mental work you know preparing for a podcast writing grants working on papers and so forth I find that allows me to maintain my focus and physical performance at levels that I just simply can't otherwise if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element that's LM nt.com huberman to claim a free element sample pack with your purchase again that's drink element LM nt.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by HV MN Ketone IQ hvmn Ketone IQ is a supplement that increases blood ketones I want to be clear that I am not following a ketogenic diet most people fall into this category they are not following a ketogenic diet they are omnivores and they do eat carbohydrates so their standard fuel source for the brain and body is not ketones however I found that by taking Ketone IQ which we know increases blood ketones I can achieve much better focus for longer periods of time for any kind of cognitive work and much greater energy levels for exercise especially if I'm going into that exercise fasted and find myself a little bit hungry when I start that exercise and this is no surprise we know that ketones are the brain's and body's preferred fuel source even if you're not following a ketogenic diet so in other words I and many other people are now starting to leverage endogenous ketones as a fuel source for the brain and body and yet we are not following a ketogenic diet and of course if you are fallowing a ketogenic diet Ketone IQ will further allow you to increase your blood ketones as a source of brain and body fuel if you'd like to try Ketone IQ you can go to hmn.com huberman to save 20% off your order again that's hmn.com huberman the huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with momentous supplements to find the supplements we discuss on the huberman Lab podcast you can go to Liv momentus spelled ous liv.com huberman and I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding again that's liv.com SL huberman and now for my discussion with Dr Peter AA Dr AA Peter welcome back thanks man good to be back and sounding better this time looking forward to talking about a number of important topics with you that you cover in your book maybe we could start off by trying to set the frame for what people should be thinking about in terms of Vitality and especially longevity so I mean I I think you um have to be mindful of how you define these terms and uh I'm not going to suggest that the way I Define them is the only way or necessarily the best way but I think from a clinical perspective it's the way that makes the most sense to me having thought about this for the better part of a decade so it involves some bifurcation between lifespan and healthspan uh lifespan is very easy for people to understand it is binary you are alive or you are not alive and uh clearly part of longevity is about how long you live uh now I think for a lot of people that tends to be where the discussion ends that tends to be the focus of it right it's sort of like you know longevity somehow implies living for you know 100 years 120 years some something like to that extent we talk a lot about maximum lifespan um even in laboratory experiments with mice that's sort of one of the metrics that's that's discussed is what what what's maximal lifespan of the animals um but there's an equally if not slightly I think potentially more important part of longevity which is Health span and health span is squishier and I think it requires some definition now the the medical definition of Health span is the period of time uh by which you are free from disability and disease uh I find that to be a not particularly helpful definition because by that definition you and I have the same Health span today that we did 30 years ago but I know you pretty well you know me pretty well 30 years ago we were Twice The Men We are now based on what we believe our health span is right in terms of our cognitive function our physical performance and things like that so you know I've clearly experienced the deterioration of my physical function as I'm sure you have going back to when you were a teenager late teenager early 20s and I think that needs to be cap Ed somehow in health span so the way I think of Health span really is along these three dimensions physical cognitive and emotional again not necessarily suggesting that that's the only way to do it but I do think that clinically it makes the most sense and so therefore anything that really becomes a question of longevity has to address all of these issues lifespan physical health beyond that of just straight up disability and disease cognitive Health independent of and separate from pathology such as dementia and emotional health which of course is by far the most complicated of all of these because we have no biomarkers for it we have no you know it's not like you can get a scan on somebody and determine the state of this um but nevertheless it's it's important right and it dramatically factors into quality of life so with all of that in mind what are the major exit points for people along the lifespan route let's just start with the the binary one dead or alive right I think most everyone who's healthy would like to be alive rather than dead so what are the typical ways that people exit from alive to dead and uh how can people stay on the uh free way of life so to speak so this is again a great analysis we internally uh in our practice call this the death bar analysis and it's a surprisingly trivial analysis that I'm just surprised the death bars aren't plastered front and center on every doctor's office um so if you simply just look at Actuarial data which are readily available through the CDC and do a little bit of data you know manipulation and Analysis you can pretty quickly realize what the horsemen of death are because there's largely speaking kind of Four Horsemen of death um the first and most consequential in terms of the numbers is the diseases of atherosclerosis so that's um cardiovascular disease being the Lion's Share of that but also cerebrovascular disease so anything that has to do with atherosclerosis Rises to the top now that's that's true in the United States but it's even more true outside of the United States it's even more true globally so in other words when you look at the relative difference between the number one cause of death in the US and number two which is cancer um The Gap is actually smaller in the US than globally globally it's enormous we're talking about 18 to 19 million people a year that are dying of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in the world whereas number two is cancer at about 11 million how does the number change when you include um cerebral vascular disease yeah it adds it adds a bit to it um cerebrovascular disease has there's largely speaking you can die sort of through embolic events which are the majority of them can you explain for people what embolic events are yeah so taking a step back what like what what does the brain need more than anything it needs blood flow anything that interrupts blood flow to the brain that results in esea is uh devastating and it's devastating in a more read you know readily apparent fashion than virtually any other organ um so one way that that can happen is if a clot or disruption of blood flow occurs through obstruction of blood flow so so that can occur through a clot so for example if a person has atrial fibrillation and a blood clot gets festering in the right atrium and they happen to have a hole in between the you know atria of their hearts called it Pon frame a valley and a clot goes from right to left it can make its way up into the uh arterial circulation and and and happen that way where you include blood flow the much more common way it occurs is the same way it occurs in the heart which is you have plaque build up and that plaque becomes unstable that plaque ruptures and the rupture of that plaque results in an immediate attempt by the body to fix problem but in doing so it walls off the artery meaning the blood flow distal to that point so that you know now blood is acutely being robbed of that however there are other ways that people can um have this problem and so you have the whole hemorrhagic side of this so you can have blood vessels that you know small blood vessels in the brain that will rupture as a result of high blood pressure for example so hypertension factors both into both sides of this equation um both in the heart and in the brain uh the majority of these are embolic however so don't quote me on this exactly but call it four or five to one Strokes result from an embolic phenomenon as opposed to um a hemorrhagic phenomenon a bleeding phenomenon I don't want to take us too far off on a tangent but as long as we're here talking about bleeds versus clots what are some of the major risks for bleeds I mean I know some people out there have genetic predispositions for being bleeders as they're sometimes called or clotter so things like uh Factor five lien mutations uh which can be exacerbated in women for instance by taking certain oral contraceptives I mean and there's huge list if people are interested in them they can look up you know what are the factors uh controlling uh bleeding and predisposed people to be in clotter but for the typical person out there who feels healthy um but might do well to know whether or not they are predisposed to be a bleeder or a clotter um what what sorts of things rise to the top of that list and that people might want to check into well I mean there might be sort of two different things going on in that question but I think if your question is when we look at the subset of people who are at highest risk for hemorrhagic Strokes the far more Germaine question is not underlying coagulopathy the far more Germaine question really comes down to blood pressure blood pressure would be the first second and third driver of that so hypertension is hands down the leading driver of hemorrhagic stroke phenomenon okay so I'll just briefly interrupt and ask um since sometimes your recommendations deviate from the the standards that one would find online or in the typical doctor's office at what point do you get concerned well I'm I actually find myself uh quite in line with the most recent available data on blood pressure and this has been um obviously this a topic that's of high concern to any Doctor Who's taking care of patients who even pays a fraction of attention to the available literature which is is that basically with each subsequent blood pressure trial the data are becoming clearer and clearer that the more aggressively you manage blood pressure to be within the 120 over 80 range the better so you know there's a recent study that even looked at going from what used to be considered acceptable which was 130 to 135 over 80 to 85 we used to basically say that's kind of the first level of hypertension and we would say well you know do you really need to be better than that and the answer turns out to be yes you do if you want to reduce heart attacks and strokes be it's better to be 120 over 80 than 135 over 85 now this is a whole other rabbit hole that we don't need to go down but it's a total Obsession of mine which is how do you measure a person's blood pressure I think this is potentially I'd have to give it thought but honestly I could say top three under diagnosed fixable problems in the United States today and probably globally in other words there are two many people walking around with high blood pressure who don't know it um and I think part of the problem is it's something that is mostly done in the doctor's office and the readings that you get in the doctor's office can be often misleading you you've heard of this phenomenon of white coat hypertension so you go to the doctor your blood pressure is virtually never measured correctly in the doctor's office that cuff they put on and that squeeze bulb that's if you look at the rigor with which you need to measure a person's blood pressure the right way to do it is the person has to be sitting like this for 5 minutes doing nothing okay folks so when you go to the doctors now you don't let them take your blood blood pressure sitting for five minutes and that doesn't include in the waiting room because if you walk get up and walk over right okay so make them stand there right so you you want to be sitting there like this um a manual cuff is better than an automated cuff but not enough people use manual blood pressure so a manual blood pressure means they put a cuff on you and and they actually put a stethoscope on the brachial artery and they're you know using the human ear to listen which believe it or not you would think a machine is better but it's not the machine can be misled by different sounds now I don't want to suggest that automated cuffs are useless they're not but when an automated cuff gives you an answer that is you know potentially suspect always back it up with a manual I'm pretty Relentless about checking my blood pressure and um so I'll do side to side manual versus automated every day and there's easily a 10 to 15 Point difference between them maybe this is a silly question but can people check their own blood pressure uh meaning manually yeah just could could I get get a cough in a bulb and and learn how to do it yeah I think so I mean I can do it but honestly I usually have my wife do it she's a nurse um but it's not rocket science check blood pressure I guarantee you there's a great video on YouTube that explains the physiology of it and if you're willing to splurge on a good enough stethoscope and cuff like the cuff I have is really easy to use like it's once you put it on you know it's in a single thing I'm squeezing the bulb and looking at the pressure gauge while I've got the you know um stethoscope on my artery I mean given the importance of blood pressure and this arteriosclerosis being at the top of the list of uh risks for um dying um it seems to me it might be worth the expense what what's a typical range of cost for for the quality I I I don't it's not it's not inordinate like I feel like my blood pressure cuff is 40 bucks um and the steth so is a couple hundred bucks if you're getting a good one and um you know good automated cuff there's I I I have no affiliation with any of these companies I use a I use two automated cuffs one's called wiing and the other one's made by a company called Omron om r n um and they're both decent but again they tend to run high and I have yet to find a credible explanation from cardiologists as to why everybody acknowledges that the manual one when done correctly is the answer but I've heard wonky answers about why automated ones are sometimes Incorrect and again it's just made me realize we're not checking blood pressure often enough on people we're overly relying on blood pressures in the doctor's office which are not being done correctly so we basically have our patients do this relentlessly so how often uh let's say someone buys this because I think for $240 I mean I realize that's prohibitive for some people but given the cost of some of the other things that are discussed on this and many other podcast first of all I would just have people start with an automated cuff to begin with start with um we have people do it for weeks you know we we our patients a little spreadsheet that automatically Cates averages and stuff like that tells them what to record and where and we just say look for two weeks we want to see two recordings a day and you know do an morning and an afternoon slpm recording twice a day for two weeks and um let us see those numbers and we'll scrutinize them further and if those numbers come in fine let's revisit in a year will a day ever come when a a watch or a wristband can do this really well so um I hope so and I'm investigating it I I'm actually G to be trying one out in a couple of weeks with a company that I tried two years ago two years ago when I tried it I was not impressed so I kind of punted on it um the company which I guess I'll not share the name of the company just yet but they they claim that it's significantly better so I'm going to put it to the test again and it's basically a continuous monitor so it it's a wrist device that about every 15 minutes throughout the course of the day will check your blood pressure um to me this would be I honestly probably more important you know you know how much emphasis I place on CGM as a great thing to be able to test glucose monitor right I I would argue this would be more important when the day comes that we can continuously assess people's blood pressure um it would be an integral part of of a person's you know Health checkup once a year is do two weeks of continuous blood pressure monitoring right now to do that which I've done as well is so cumbersome that it borders on absurd you actually have to wear a blood pressure cuff that is attached to a clumsy device that goes through the whole insufflation exercise every 15 minutes including while you're sleeping you know it provides some insight but it's so disruptive that it's not what we really want what we the dream would be like a patch that you could put I don't know over your chest that can somehow impute changes in blood flow or something like that and regulate but um we'll see you know op between Optical sensors and things like that I hope that we're getting closer to having something so I don't want to stroke I don't want to bleed in the brain um I don't want to clot um as long as we're at this number one on the list AR sclerosis being the number one killer what are the major ways to to prevent it yeah so there's three big ones that stand out you know top and center and then there's kind of a fourth one that I think is the the foundational piece so the three big ones we've talked about one blood pressure so if your blood pressure is 120 over 80 or better that's important the second is not smoking so it turns out that smoking and blood pressure are both devastating for arteries uh but for different reasons right so smoking is devastating from a chemical perspective so it's completely irritating to the endothelium so the endothelium as you know is the Single Cell lining that is the innermost part of the arterial and arterial wall so this is a pretty special organ um again it's it's it's a bit naive but understandable that people just think of arteries as tubes um they're much more complicated than that they have many layers to them but this particular layer is unusually important it has an outsized importance because it is the one that's in contact with the luminal side right where the blood is flowing in the tube and anything that injures that has significant consequences so smoking is irritating to that in a chemical way and blood pressure is irritating to that in a mechanical way so th those two things basically you just want to that's the lwh hanging fruit in my world right you just don't want to have those things causing irritation the endothelium because that renders you now susceptible to the third factor which is apob bearing lipoproteins I want to talk about apob um in depth but as long as don't smoke is the second recommendation on the list uh can we better Define um smoking uh and what's being smoked so assume nicotine for um what about cannabis and what about vaping of nicotine and cannabis because vaping has become so much more common yeah it's a great question and it's sadly something we don't have a great answer for so I can certainly tell you that there's no reason to believe that smoking cannabis is somehow better than smoking cigarettes but the dose seems to be significantly lower in other words you know let's consider a person who smokes a pack a day for 20 years we call that a 20 pack year smoker someone who smokes two pack pack a day for 15 years is a 30 pack year smoker that's a person who's dramatically increased their risk of U many cancers including lung cancer and also their risk of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease again I'm not a I'm not a THC guy so I don't I can't necessarily speak for the habits of people that are smoking marijuana I can't imagine they're smoking that much probably not yeah so so while on a on a joint to cigarette basis they're probably equivalent in in terms of harm it I don't know let's say a person smokes a joint a day that would be like smoking a cigarette a day you know that's a 20th of a pack again I don't want to say that there's no downside to that but it it's it's probably significantly less so I don't I don't think the risk fully tracks I think the same is probably true for vaping and I I want to be clear like I don't think vaping is a good idea my my you know the last time I looked at the data on this it was surprisingly sparse but to me the only Advantage I could see to vaping was if it was the only way a person would stop smoking so there was you know I sort of looked at it as it was the definitely the lesser of two evils but the by far the better scenario was not to do any of these things if if nicotine is what you're after there are better ways to get nicotine for example through lozes and gum and things like that so that you shouldn't be turning to those things to to do it but but if it was like if gum is here and cigarettes are here you know vaping was probably here but boy I don't know for those listening uh uh Peter spaced his hands far apart for um gum and smoking and put vaping about a third of the way uh from gum uh toward uh smoking in other words vaping isn't good for you but it's not as bad as smoking that would be my that would be my I mean do you have a you've probably looked into this as well we did an episode on nicotine I did an episode on cannabis and um you know that the discussion around cannabis gets a little contentious for reasons that aren't um important it's kind of funny people the moment someone starts to confront cannabis as a potential Health harm people say it's not as nearly as bad as alcohol which is a crazy argument right getting hit by a boss isn't nearly as bad as getting hit by a motorcycle in most cases but sometimes you know so that's just kind of silly um and clearly cannabis has medical applications yeah clear clearly um and then it becomes an issue of the ratio of THC to CBD pure CBD forms actually been quite effective for the treatment of certain forms of epilepsy so called Charlotte's Web that's actually what it's called um very high THD containing cannabis clearly predisposes especially young males to later on set psychosis those data are starting to become clear clear enough to me anyway that people ought to be aware of them at least and maybe make decisions on the basis of those when it comes to the smoking versus vaping it's just very very very apparent that the chemical constituents of The Vape and what people are inhaling are terrible for people and are loaded with carcinogens and a bunch of other stuff many of which cross the bloodb brain barrier so that's what worries me the most you know obviously I'm not a clinician but anytime I hear about small molecules you know these small inorganic molecules getting across the blood being bar and then being maintained in neurons for many many years I worry because the experiment is ongoing mostly in young people so anyway without going too far down that track I I think if people can avoid smoking and vaping they should and as you mentioned there are other delivery devices for nicotine and cannabis tinctures and patches and uh gums and things that um Edibles that um if people choose to use those substances that can I I think sometimes people would benefit to to imagine what the surface area of the lung is right if you took the Alvar air sacs of the lungs and spread them out you would easily cover a tennis court remarkable so so just think about anytime you inhale something you are exposing your body is so Adept at absorbing it I mean we have this unbelievable system for gas exchange that was designed for gas exchange and anytime you're putting something else in that WG you're doing a really good job of getting it into your body so be mindful of what that is um and and that look that applies to to pollution too I mean the the PM 2.5 data is pretty good I I think once you so particulates that are less than 2.5 microns are are getting straight into the body um which is like a great argument for avoiding air pollution right I mean I I I always find it funny not to get off on this tangent but to me the most compelling arguments around cleaner energy have nothing to do with greenhouse gases they have to do with air pollution I promise you more people are dying from the part ulate matters in air that result from burning coal than are ever going to die from the CO2 emissions that result from that it's not it's and and and I would argue that's going to be two orders of magnitude it's not even in the same zip code makes sense during the fires which seem to follow me uh because when I was in Northern California there were a bunch of fires and we were constantly looking me wake up in the morning everything was covered with Ash uh my dog was having trouble breathing I was having trouble breathing everyone was suffering uh but but there are websites that one can go you can just look at air pollution and and we tend to only do this during fires then I'm you know when I'm in Southern California there tend to be fires here so um you know it's correlation not causation but um for sure I didn't set those fires folks but it's clear that it disrupts your breathing for a very long period of time but it's the long taale of that that we're really talking about here the very small particulate that we know firefighters for instance and certain um industrial workers can end up with that stuff embedded in their brain tissue for extremely long periods it's just not good um you make a really interesting point about um the the uh the call for cleaner energy um can we run that one up to to uh Washington or settle some of the debates about climate change just by getting straight to heal bypass all all the garbage that's um that's being spewed back and forth and just and basically get to the issue at hand right yeah just just just make it better for people to not die from the direct consequence I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors athletic greens athletic greens now called ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs I've been taking athletic greens since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast the reason I started taking athletic greens and the reason I still take athletic greens once or usually twice a day is that it gets me the probiotics that I need for gut health our gut is very important it's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain the immune system and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health and those probiotics and athletic greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health in addition athletic greens contains a number of adaptogens vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met and it tastes great if you'd like to try athletic greens you can go to athletic greens.com huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road in the car on the plane Etc and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's athletic greens.com huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 so trying to avoid oer such a difficult word to say especially for a neuroscientist arterial sclerosis did I get it right well it's AO which is easier because yeah atherosclerosis oh there I've been making life more complicated for myself typical of Me Okay um so blood pressure keeping it 128 120 over 80 or better don't smoke let's just throw in don't Vape sure I'm going to just plant my flag on just don't B there are other ways to get those things in your system if you really want to get nicotine or cannabis into your system APO what's the story with apob okay so to explain this you have to tolerate a little bit of chemistry um so everybody's heard of cholesterol and uh I I I certainly devote quite a bit of time in the book to explaining this because it is so important um and it's definitely one of those areas where I initially received a lot of push back from the editor and there was a thought that hey this is a bit more technical than it needs to be but I I think that sometimes you do need to resort to longer dissertations to dispel mythology so cholesterol is a lipid it is a molecule that the body synthesiz izes it is a molecule that is essential for life so if you cannot synthesize cholesterol you can't live you you'll die in utero so there are rare genetic conditions that prevent the successful synthesis of cholesterol uh you know embryos that have those mutations do not survive okay so why do we need this stuff so we need this stuff primarily for two reasons first it makes up a very important structural comp component of cell membranes so as you know a cell is a sphere we look at them and think they're circles but they're spheres and they're fluid right they they they aren't just like little perfect you know big bowling balls or you know balloons they actually morph and shape and move in these paths and this is what it's what allows cells to be next to each other and all sorts of things they also have channels across all of them and those channels are held in place by among other things cholesterol and phospholipids the second thing that makes cholesterol so important it is the precursor to some of the most important hormones in our body so our sex hormones testosterone estrogen progesterone in addition to glucocorticoids if you look at them it's really funny you know people if you're looking at if you Google like give me the structure of these things you're kind of like wow they're all basically the same they all look really similar and they're all pretty much just templates of cholesterol so understandably when it's something that's that important the body would leave nothing chance we make all of our own cholesterol the cholesterol that you eat in food largely irrelevant it's aerified cholesterol so it means it has an Esther side chain it's too bulky to absorb in the gut so most cholesterol that you eat in food just goes out your GI trct okay so we have this super important molecule that every cell in the body makes but there's a bit of a problem there's actually two problems the first problem is not every cell can make as much as it needs all the time so you have this demand problem so for example if you're sick you're going to need to make far more glucocorticoids your body's response is going to be to ramp up cortisol production to mobilize Fuel and do a whole bunch of other things and certain cells like the adrenal glands are going to be called on to rise to a higher level of performance and they're not going to be able to make enough cortisol so they're going to have to borrow or take cholesterol from other cells in the body in fact one of the things we used to notice in the ICU I never knew why it was happening I now know is the few times I would accidentally order the wrong set of Labs on a patient in the ICU and also order like a lipid test or something you would always notice their cholesterol levels were dropping you know serum cholesterol levels and I now realize why because they were basically just funneling cholesterol to the adrenals to make more of the cortisol that they needed to combat whatever they were in the ICU for which is usually the most severe form of you know stress the body is under so you have to be able to transport this stuff and then the second problem is as you know cholesterol being a lipid is not water soluble so the the most dominant Highway in the body is the circulatory system we we can use the lymphatic system and things like that but for the most part we use our circulatory system as the highway to move stuff around and the highway is made up of water plasma which is what is the liquid component of your blood is water and therefore things that are water soluble move easily so glucose uh sodium electrolytes all of those things are dissolvable in water and therefore they don't need a carrier you just dissolve them in the water and they can go so that's why your liver can make glucose that your brain can easily get and there doesn't need to be a carrier or an intermediary or anything like that but unfortunately with cholesterol being a lipid we can't do that just as water and oil don't mix cholesterol and plasma don't mix so the body had to come up with a trick and the trick was designing a vehicle that was water soluble on the outside and fat soluble on the inside that you could bury the cholesterol inside along with triglycerides and on the outside it was covered in protein which is water soluble and that's the that's the thing that moves around and that thing is called A lipoprotein and as its name suggest it's part lip Li part protein lipid on the inside protein on the outside and those lipoproteins um come largely in two different families uh so one family comes from a lineage called apob so the apob family which is short for APO lipoprotein B1 100 is a family that is derived from the liver and each of those lipoproteins has one and only one APO lipoprotein b00 on it we shorten it and just call it APO B because we don't really worry about APO lipoprotein b48 which is attached to kyom microns that are responsible for fat absorption in the gut they're very shortlived They Don't Really factor into atherosclerosis so we're going to just for the purists out there there's an apob 48 we're not going to talk about it so when I say apob what I'm talking about is a protein that wraps around a subset of these lipoproteins there's another family of lipoproteins called apoa or APO lipoprotein a this is a much more complicated family and I'm not going to talk about it here because we're we would take an hour to just explain how the APO lipo protein a family works but I'll I'll I'll I give the punchline is there are many APO lipoprotein A's there's variable numbers of aoas on those proteins and they are all part of a family called high density lipoproteins to the apob guys they are of the lowdensity lipoprotein lineage so you've heard the term LDL and HDL what is it referring to it's basically referring to the relative concentrations of protein and lipids in the lipoproteins and not surprisingly based on their names the hdls are higher density more protein less lipid the ldls low density lipoproteins and vldls very low density lipoproteins and idls Inter intermediate density lipoproteins are all lower density which means more lipid to protein there're different sizes there's a whole bunch of other things going on most important fact in all of this is that the apobs are atherogenic so what we're about to talk about next is perpetuated by lipoproteins that have an apob on them so everything in the story right now is just about how do you get cholesterol around the body and these um proteins that have lipid in the middle um so let's just take apob for example um many many billions of them floating around in our body even in the healthiest of people y um and they're being shuttled to tissues that need them um like the adrenals muscle heart Etc what sets the demand for these things so for instance could somebody have Rel relatively High um LDL maybe even higher than um sort of highend of chart or even um above high-end apob but there's some sort of demand metabolic demand or or there they're weight training a lot or they're running marathons and so they need a lot of LDL the reason I asked this um is because it's so easy for the uninformed person which I include myself in that group to just hear oh LDL bad cholesterol bad apob bad when in fact um you very graciously spelled out the fact that they these things actually perform a functional role in the healthy body so before we get into why they are or can be bad why would you want a lowdensity Lial protein what is that doing for somebody and is there um any circumstance where the way people are exercising or thinking or not sleeping or or sleeping too much it's um that a higher level actually reflects a healthy metabolic need we don't have any evidence of that to date um all of the functions that I described can be function can be done by the HDL so the high density lipoproteins the APO as can do all of it so APO and low density lipoproteins are just um they're just the necessary uh we don't no we don't understand why we have them Andrew this is the part that's really interesting to me um most species do not even have apob and as a result of that most species are chemically incapable of atherosclerosis so if someone could zero out their apob and their LDL we assume they would function just fine we know they would because we have certain people who walk around with genetic mutations that render them that way wow furthermore we also know that there's a bit of a myth out there that cholesterol the cholesterol you measure in your blood is essential for brain health for example that's an understandable thing right you you can speak to this very eloquently the role of cholesterol in the brain yeah I wrote down when I um was a postto at Stanford um as I always point out I was born at Stanford trained at Stanford work I'll probably die at Stanford hopefully a long time from now you'll tell me how long we're going to do the Charli we're going to do the Charlie Munger thing and make sure that you never go back to Stanford so that that like you can't die there there exactly we cured already um the when I was a postc I worked with a guy named Ben Baris who I I know um you know probably um as a different person then for reasons that people can look up Ben's name um anyway incredible scientist and but there was someone in his lab that discovered that cholesterol is a critical component of the synaptogenesis process the for the formation of connections between neurons and the developing brain and then that went went on to lead to the discovery of things like um thrombospondin being important for synaptic Genesis Etc but cholesterol sit Central in the brain development mechanisms like you want cholesterol around for brain development in fact I think very lowfat diets and very low cholesterol diets during early development can really impair brain development as I understand yeah it's not it's not entirely clear why but here's what we know when you're born your serum cholesterol levels are very low so children infants and children have very low levels of cholesterol they would have uh and I should explain one thing that's important they're not melinated yet right I mean they're they're sorry to interrupt but milin of course the the sheathing around uh neuron neuronal axons which accelerates the propagation of nerve signals and which is deficient in things like multiple sclerosis is essentially fat made up of phospholipid um and requires cholesterol for synthesis but but young children are not very well m i mean the spinal cord is M you know spinal tracks are so this is what's interesting right we would all agree that cholesterol is more important to infants and children than to anybody else right it would be the most important substrate for CNS development and yet infants and children have virtually unmeasurable levels of cholesterol it really starts to take off in your teenage years right so cholesterol basically serum cholesterol levels rise basically monotonically throughout life um women get a big bump at menopause so it really goes up for them um but what's interesting is how is it how do we reconcile the fact that infants and children have really low levels of serum cholesterol yet clearly undergo CNS maturation without any problems and it basically comes down to the following what you measure in the serum is but a fraction of the total body pool of cholesterol so we get a little bit of the light under the you know the uh what's the the you know the the Street Lamp under the the drunk under drunk the Street Lamp problem just because we're looking there we tend to think that that's what we're seeing but um if you took the entire circulatory pool of cholesterol it's about 10% of your total body cholesterol it's a tiny fraction of it so it's what we measure because that's all we have access to but it really represents virtually none of it um I do want want to say something because you mentioned LDL I want to tie this back to the reader right or The Listener rather um apob refers to the lipoprotein the singular lipoprotein wrapped around an LDL particle so if you happen to be lucky enough that your doctor measures an apob level it's a blood test it says apob X number of milligrams per deciliter that's measuring the concentration of that protein it is a direct measurement of the concentration of LDL and vldl particles when you have a blood test that says LDL it usually doesn't say LDL it usually says ldlc or LDL cholesterol because LDL is not a laboratory measurement LDL cholesterol is a laboratory measurement and it's just taking the total number of LDL particles breaking them apart and measuring how much cholesterol is in them so ldlc measures the total concentration of cholesterol in the ldls apob measures the number of them and they're different but one of them is far superior at predicting risk in its apob the number of particles is much more predictive of risk than the amount of cholesterol contained within them fascinating first time I've understood H LDL and these lipoproteins in a way that makes sense so thank you I'm sure others feel the same way what apob level is your red flag cut off right um I actually had my apob measured recently and I'm definitely above the high end we'll be discussing this over dinner on Saturday man and with um and just to tie this back um I hope that's a steak dinner and that should be fine given the fact that dietary cholesterol has no direct link to apob and L that's true but dietary saturated fat does ah okay so which is not to say we're not going to have a steak will but not necessarily one of the fattier cuts um although probably will be uh for me um so what's what's the high-end that you uh high-end flag at what point you start saying ah we need to do something and then we'll talk about what people can do yeah so this is a complicated question because it depends on so many factors the first Factor it depends on is what is your objective and I do pose this question directly to a patient right so I say look we've got this disease it's the number one cause of death now you can die with it or you can die from it that those are your choices statistically speaking more people will die from it than anything else but if you live long enough we will all die with it to some extent so if you're me and I come from a family history as you know I write about this in the book where basically every man in my family except one has died of atherosclerosis and they have all done so very prematurely uh my dad lost Brothers in their 40s and 50s um by some miracle my dad is still alive at 86 but you know I think that's in large part because he at least had the good sense to listen to doctors and take medication to lower his cholesterol and blood pressure um if your objective is to not die from heart disease and only to die with it then you want apob as low as possible now how low you go depends on when you start because one way to think about this is it's an area under the curve problem the longer you wait to start doing something about this the more aggressively you need to do something about it um I think a better way to think about this though is to go back to what we talked about with smoking so would you agree that smoking is causally related to lung cancer yes so just to be clear Andrew you do not think that it's just an association that smokers get more lung cancer no I do not you in other words you believe that smoking causes lung cancer then yes okay I mean there are a number of mechanistic steps in between I mean if somebody was really wanting get uh to you know drill into the logic they could say okay it's not actually the smoking it's a you know some uh uh disruption of the endothelial cell lining that you know smoking triggers that that triggers that I assume so and I agree with you by the way I think the data are very clear I'm very relieved to hear yeah so but but I'm going someplace very important here because if there's one topic that doesn't get enough attention in medicine it's causality and causality is an obsession of mine like most of the day on some level I sit around thinking about causality and I think the hardest part about studying medicine with respect to human beings is how difficult it is to infer causality for most things that we do so if you believe that smoking is causally related to lung cancer then smoking cessation reduces the probability of lung cancer that is that is a logical equivalency there can be no debate about that what if I said to you Andrew this is going to be our new philosophy around smoking cessation you're I'm going to anoint you the Zar of smoking cessation so um if people pick up smoking no problem we're going to let them smoke but we're going to assess their risk for lung cancer using a model that predicts when they t 10e risk of lung cancer gets above a certain level we're going to recommend that they stop smoking so we're going to look at their age their sex their family history some biomarkers that might help us we're going to even do scans of their lungs and once we think they cross a threshold where their risk of lung cancer is high enough let's just say it's 25% boom you make them stop you tell them it's time to stop is that a logical approach to treating smoking and lung cancer or would be better to say given that we know cigarettes are causally related to this how about you never start smoking and the minute you do we pull the cigarette out of your mouth and explain to you that you're doing something that is causally related of course it would be the latter not the former it would be idiotic to suggest that we endorse smoking until you cross a certain threshold well this now becomes the Germaine question there is no ambiguity that a OB is causally related to atherosclerosis you know how how can I tell you that I can tell you that looking at all of the clinical trial literature all of the epidemic epidemiologic literature and perhaps even most importantly the mandelian randomizations all of these things tell us because by the way melan randomizations meaning genetic mutants humans out there that make very little apob or excessive exactly so we have a whole gradient so you can say if you make very little you aren't gonna die as uh quickly in your life as if you make too much that's right so mallion randomization is such an elegant tool where you basically let genes do the randomization and as you said there is a gradation of LDL concentration or apob concentration that occurs from insanely low to insanely high and this is a wildly polygenic polymorphic set of conditions and we can look at the outcomes of those people based on the random sorting of those genes and there's no ambiguity LDL is causally related LDL cholesterol or apob causally related to atherosclerosis well if that's true and I haven't seen a credible argument that it's not there are people who argue that it's not by the way but they just don't have credibility in their arguments then you have to say that what we're doing in medicine today is very backwards because what we're doing in medicine today is the following we're saying I'm I'm coming at this in a long way but your question is so important that I want to answer it this way we're answering your question today as follows we're saying Andrew let's do a 10-year risk calculation of your risk of Mace mace stands for major adverse cardiac event it is the metric we use in medicine so major adverse cardiac event is a heart attack stroke you know or death basically resulting from these things so and we have calculators that are pretty good at predicting your 10year event risk they'll look at your cholesterol levels your blood pressure they'll ask if you smoke they'll ask some family history questions and they'll spit out a number now we should do yours after the fact um and I don't know if we did it for a person who's is you know you're in your mid-40s like it would probably spit out less than 5% risk for a major adverse cardiac event in the next 10 years in fact the models don't even work if age is below 40 so the first time I went to do one of these tests when I was in my mid-30s I couldn't do it like the the the algorithm breaks that's sort of like uh you know just doesn't work so the the implication there is if your uh if your mace risk is less than 5% the thinking is you do not need to treat LDL or apob I argue that that makes absolutely no sense it's just as idiotic as the analogy I used around smoking if a risk is causal and it is modifiable it should be modified regardless of the risk Tale in duration so then the question becomes to what level and again the earlier you start the less aggressive you need to be the less damage that's there already so for example we do CT angiograms on our patients if the CT angiogram shows no evidence of calcification no evidence of soft plaque that means grossly their coronary arteries are still normal histologically they're probably not because nobody probably makes it to our age with histologically perfect coronary arteries you know we might be satisfied with a person's apob being at the fifth percentile of the population which would be about 60 milligrams per deciliter but if we have any other factors meaning we're starting later in life you know or a person already has gross evidence of disease calcification soft plaque family history is significant any other risk factors are present I mean we'll we'll treat apob to 30 to 40 milligrams per deciliter which is you know probably the first percentile and if somebody's sitting up in the say low 130s um what where does that what kind of flag does that raise for you and I realize it's highly contextual age Etc no no it's a huge red flag again um just because something is causal doesn't mean it's you're guaranteed to get it there are smokers who don't get lung cancer so you know there's going to be somebody listening to this who says my my grandmother's 95 years old she's as her cholesterol is Skyhigh and she's alive and well and I will say absolutely there are a lot of people walking around that way just as there are a lot of smokers walking around who don't get lung cancer um you you can't you can't impute these things on an individual ual basis you basically have to ask the question um how do I make the best judgment about an individual from heterogeneous population data and based on what are causal and non-causal inferences around risk so you know to me if a person has very high apob and they do not want to be treated for it then the best we would do is say let's at least establish that there are no other risk factors present and let's at least do the most investigation we can around the existing damage and if that person has a perfect CT angiogram I'm going to push less hard than if they have a devastating angiogram and by the way devastating in my book is just any amount of calcification or soft plaque anything that shows up grossly that you can see on a CT scan means that you've got a decade plus of really bad histology building up to it this uh issue of causality I think now becomes very clear as to why that is so crucial and um really appreciate the way you spelled that out so let's say somebody's apob is you know 80 100 let's say 130 um for example what sorts of things can they do to reduce that number is this always going to be prescription medication and if so what are the more common forms of prescription medication that work best what are their side effect Prof profiles and so on so yeah usually once you want to start getting down into the 30 to 60 range you're going to require pharmacotherapy um but you know usually we want to see how far we can get with nutrition so fixing insulin resistance in an insulin resistant person will will bring this down right so one of the Hallmarks of insulin resistance is elevated triglycerides they haven't we haven't talked about triglycerides but they they warrant some attention because I mentioned it earlier but one of the other things that the lipoproteins carry is triglycerides so they're they're carrying fat and cholesterol and if you recall APO represents the number of particles so the purpose of them is to be carrying around mostly cholesterol but if you have a high amount of triglyceride you're basically using up cargo space on the ships and so you need more ships so if a person has elevated triglycerides and I consider anything over 100 to be elevated even though most laboratory tests would consider normal to be up to 150 milligrams per deciliter um we would want to fix their insulin resistance bring the trigs way down uh I I would want to see trigs no more than two times the HDL cholesterol so if your HDL cholesterol is you know 60 milligrams per de I consider 120 to be through the roof high and ideally we want trigs at or below HDL cholesterols being triglyceride right so and uh mean lowering dietary fat no actually it's most easily accomplished through carbohydrate restriction yeah carbohydrate triglycerides in some ways are kind of an integral of carbohydrate consumption um any energy restriction will get it for you um but it's most sensitive to um to restriction of of um even even under UK caloric conditions carbohydrate restriction will lower triglycerides so again energy restriction would be kind of first order of business um but within that carbohydrate restriction will probably get you there quicker so you know you want to take the the lwh hanging fruit off the table and where does exercise come um play a role minimal role for improving insulin sensitivity no no no no I'm sorry for improving uh lipids in general yeah but it can improve in uh absolutely especially combinations of resistance training and cardiovascular exercise correct yeah so once it comes down to pharmacotherapy um you basically have several classes of drugs so the most obvious and the one that most people are aware of are called statins so statins work um both directly and indirectly on the problem so directly they work by targeting an enzyme um very high in the synthetic pathway of cholesterol production enzyme is called HMG COA reductase and I think it's the second committed step I might I could be wrong on that it's I don't think it's the first committed step but but you that that enzyme gets targeted kind of ubiquitously throughout the body and in response to that the liver senses a reduction in the body's pool of cholesterol and the liver really tries to regulate this so the liver in response to that increases its expression of LDL receptors so the liver itself has LDL receptors on its surface and as the body's pool of cholesterol goes down the liver senses this reduction and says I want to bring more chol ol in more LDL receptors go up and more apob particles are coming out of circulation so that's really the dominant way that they work and in fact that's kind of the dominant way that all of these drugs work so another class of drug is called aetam it works by blocking we could get as technical as you want on this it's called the Neiman pix C1 like one transporter in the entros site um I like to explain this I borrow this explanation from Tom dpring but the entos site is a is obvious see the luminal gut side cell that is responsible for absorption of cholesterol remember I said earlier most the cholesterol you eat you don't absorb the reason you can't absorb it is an esterified cholesterol molecule cannot come in the Neiman pixie1 like one transporter it's too it's physically too large but the cholesterol that you synthesize which once it makes its way back to the liver gets secreted in bile down the intestine that is unesterified and readily fits into that transporter so I kind of describe that guy as the ticket taker at the bar he lets everybody in as long as they fit through the door there's a checkpoint inside the bar that basically says do we have too much cholesterol if so spit it out and there's another door that acts more like The Bouncer and he's called the ATP binding cassette G5 G8 and he spits excess cholesterol out and if that system is working fine everything is great but in a lot of people that ATP binding cassette doesn't work very well and it can't properly regulate the total body pool of cholesterol so there's a drug called aetam that simply blocks the ticket taker are there side effects to statins and a zami aetam has virtually no side effects it's a you can think of it as a drug that's acting outside the body right it's sort of acting on a you know a Turn Style door in your gut um I have seen one patient get uh sort of loose stools from it that became enough of an issue that we discontinued it um I would say that when zami is combined with a Statin which is very commonly done um it's not unheard of I don't I can't give you a number but it could be as high as 10% that you see an elevation in transaminases which are enzymes that are made by the liver in response to some irritation so you know this is where I think it's unclear what the clinical significance of that is we tend to abort the strategy in the presence of elevated transaminases um even though the literature says you don't need to our view is we have other options why would we tolerate any inflammation if you don't need to statins uh do have side effects so 5% of people genuinely and legitimately legitimately get a muscle soreness uh that can be debilitating it could feel like kind of the worst workout you've ever had that you know like the day after you've like imagine you hadn't lifted weights in 6 months and then you you know came over and I made you do the most brutal workout of your life you know how you would feel that happens every time I come over to well I work out often um but every time I come over to your house you put me through the most brutal workout I've ever been through I think you and cam Haynes are the two people who've managed to put me through workouts that kept me sore for at least uh two weeks after each visit so so that soreness that imagine you would have that persisting that 5% of people get that response from a stattin and obviously that's just non you know it's a non it's a non it's a nono um there's a narrower subset of people that um do do do get brain fog and do experience brain frog from statins and and we don't really understand the why there we have some theories as to why you know maybe they're maybe they're getting too much of a reduction in central cholesterol synthesis um again it's a subjective finding but given that we have so many tools in the toolkit like we don't have to tolerate side effects with these drugs anymore there was a day when you know you had somebody who just had a heart attack and they're basically looking down the barrel of being on a stattin for the rest of their life and there were like two of them and they you know had tons of side effects and it it didn't matter today while there were probably nine statins out there there were really only four that we even use and at least two of them have such a low side effect profile they're not as potent but they have a I mean potent a bit of the potent the wrong word they don't have the same effect um but they're very potent because you're at least one of them you're taking at such a low dose um that we've got lots of Statin options the third side effect of statins which again not common but can't be ignored is insulin resistance so it really and this is one of the I think one of the benefits of at least having periotic CGM tracking is we'll see this you know we had a patient who happened to be wearing CGM in general and then we started him on you know 10 milligrams of rzua Statin which is probably the Workhorse Statin right now it's a that's generic NM for store um and he pings us like a couple weeks later and he's like man my glucose is like 10 points up consistently from where it has normally been kind of hummed and haod we troubleshooted a few things after two months we're like let's just stop the Crestor and uh see if that fixes it and it immediately fixed it so there was you know we reintroduced the Crestor and it happened again so there was no doubt in my mind that you know or low doubt in my mind that Crestor was responsible for that um and again you could say well maybe that's not that clinically significant but I would argue why bother I have other choices so those are your two big ones um the next one that is really the big one are pcsk9 Inhibitors so you know um gosh we're coming up about 20 years ago maybe a woman named Helen Hobbs uh made a discovery of a group of people that had a disease called familial hypercholesterolemia so FH or familial hypercholesterolemia is a very genetic heterogeneous condition going back to that mallan randomization study these are the people on the far end that show us how high lipid levels cause atherosclerosis so these people have very high cholesterol levels typically north of 300 milligrams per deciliter their LDL cholesterol alone is by definition at least 190 milligrams per deciliter uh very high incidence of atherosclerosis in these people along with other sort of injuries like they accum they have so much cholesterol they accumulate it in their tendons in their eyes I mean it's it's it's really devastating condition if not managed correctly and she discovered this mutation in uh a gene for pcsk9 that codes for a protein that degrades LDL receptors so these people had hyperfunctioning pcsk9 genes so their genes were just chopping down all the LDL receptors in the liver so these people weren't clearing LDL about 5 years later another subset of the population were discovered that we the exact OPP opposite these people had hypofunctioning pcsk9 they had virtually unmeasurable these people had LDL cholesterol levels of 10 to 20 milligrams per deciliter and not surprisingly they had no heart disease so that led to the development of a couple of amazing drugs that are now used so I take one of these drugs I've been taking one of these drugs for I don't I probably started in 2015 so it's an injectable drug I take it every two weeks and it's a called a pcsk9 inhibitor so the drug blocks the protein and therefore gives me more LDL receptors Yanks more apob out of circulation interesting when we were talking about side effects I um I was thinking are there any short-term benefits so I guess we call this positive side effects but let's think of it more directly in line with the underlying biology let's say my apob is um High mid-range to to high you know let's say 100 um you know 80 to 100 um and I improve my insulin resistance through nutrition but we decide you know it doesn't go down so much so we're going to continue to to try and knock this number down and and I take uh any number of different drugs um to reduce it do I immediately start to feel better nope so there's no feel okay you feel nothing and I think that's an important um important point because of the causality issue that we were talking about earlier because a lot of people are walking around out there feeling fine their apob might be a bit high they either know it or don't know it but they think well I'm feeling fine and you gave a very rational argument earlier as to why because of the causality involved it makes far more sense to intervene yeah we don't want to rely on feeling when it comes to atherosclerosis just to put some perspective on this when I was in medical school we had a I I think I even write about this in the book we had a pathology lecture where the professor stands up there and he says um what is the most common presentation of a heart attack and you know us Keener first year Med students hands shoot straight up chest pain no that's not the most common uh oh uh uh shoulder pain AR radiating down the left arm no nausea shortness of breath no no no we rattled this off for a few minutes and he goes death the single most common presentation for a myocardial infarction is death more PE now I would say today that was 25 years ago today it's probably not the most common because um Advanced cardiac life support is so much better but it's still strikingly common so well you could say that um the the best predictor of a heart attack is still a heart attack um I not saying that the best underlying predictor but um and actually this hits home when I was uh postto I was living in San Francisco and I'll never forget this taking my coffee and uh out on my porch in the morning this is right near the UCSF Parnassus campus and this guy's walking down the street he's probably about my age and I said hello and he said hello he walked a few more steps and boom he just hit the concrete and died right in front of me it took a minute or two to know that he was truly dead I'll never forget it because that's a for a non surgeon you know it's it's an event right and they and I followed up on this and because it's family you know the the whole thing um because they wanted a report and no cocaine in his system no prior history of any kind of health issues and but he was just strolling along and just boom as if he'd been hit by a bus it's crazy so it's I mean again this is just one of those things where we're g we're gonna spend a lot of time talking about things that feel good and feel bad when you change them right like if you take a person who's not sleeping well but who thinks they're sleeping well and you ask them for a leap of faith which is hey give me a month to help you sleep really well yeah you're going to feel better you might not know it now because you don't know how bad you're sleeping now you've become acclimated to this U but this is not one of those domains you know exercise nutrition sleep all those things when you do those things better you feel better but I you know I don't want to overpromise on this you're you're not going to feel better in the moment when you fix your lipids but you'll feel better when you don't have a heart attack so by all this logic everybody should get their apob measured how early in life should people do that starting in their 20s uh in their 30s certainly if you have a family history that is of any concern like in ret like if I could live my life over again knowing if I knew everything you know then that I know today yeah I would have had mine measured in my 20s you know I didn't I didn't get my apob measured for the first time probably till I was in my 40s because you know that's well yeah maybe late 30s early 40s right um I had my first calcium scan when I was 35 and I had to beg borrow steel to get it done because everyone was like why does a 35-year-old want to do this but I something I just felt something was wrong given my family history um and I'm glad I did I'm glad I did that because I learned something that that completely changed the direction of my life okay I know my apob numbers and it I might be that guy who's up in the you know above a hundred so I'm going to get this treated uh that's a promise to myself I'd like to just take a brief moment and thank one of our podcast sponsors which is insid tracker insid tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that blood work is the only way that you can monitor the markers such as hormone markers lipids metabolic factors Etc that impact your immediate and long-term Health one major challenge with blood work however is that most of the time it does not come back with any information about what to do in order to move the values for hormones metabolic factors lipids Etc into the ranges that you want with insid tracker changing those values becomes very straightforward because it has a personalized dashboard that you can use to address the nutrition-based behavior-based supplement based approaches that you can use in order to move those values into the ranges that are optimal for you Your vitality and your longevity inside tracker now includes a measurement of APO lipoprotein B so-call apob in their ultimate plan apob is a key marker of cardiovascular health and therefore there's extreme value to knowing your apob levels if you'd like to try insid tracker you can go to insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off any of insid tracker plans again that's insidetracker docomond to get 20% off we covered um the three major risk factors which were um blood pressure um keeping that in check don't smoke um and apob and we've now talked about the things to adjust apob levels we did not really talk about things to adjust blood pressure I'm assuming exercise sits as one of the for exercise nutrition yeah weight weight management is a huge one here so you know you take a person who's blood and and this is one of those things where we don't immediately jump on the pharmacotherapy train with blood pressure um because here there are side effects sometimes um and you do have to worry about overshooting you don't really have to worry about overshooting a person's lipids we do back off if we overshoot but it doesn't cause a symptom there's not a there's not a short-term immediate risk from doing that if you overshoot somebody's blood pressure medication you trade one problem for another problem they become laded when they get up to pee at night they fall and bang their head that's a devastating consequence totally unacceptable so our goal is to see how much we can lower blood pressure without medication before we turn to medication and let's be clear the meds today are so much better than they used to be again there was a day when the side effects of these medicines were miserable that's that's simply not the case today I mean ACE inhibitors Angiotensin receptor blockers I mean these things are very well tolerated especially the arbs um so again almost anybody can on these things but if we could get a person to lose 10 pounds and exercise every day we see great effects with zone two stuff right so kind of the low intensity cardio what's and your recommendation there I know you talk about this in the book but we I've thrown out numbers about 15 to 180 minutes per week you go a bit higher yeah we go 180 to 250 240 yeah I'd like to see three to four hours a week of zone two um so that's an important piece and sleep is an important piece um so get get the sleep right get the exercise right if you if you're if you're overnourished let's correct that problem and if all of that doesn't work and by the way that works a lot of the time works most of the time if that doesn't work then we've got pharmacotherapy there is still a true phenomenon of essential hypertension which is in individuals for whom all the fixable stuff has been fixed and they still have high blood pressure uh we still have to medicate those Folks by the way there's something that I want to mention here that doesn't get much attention but it's so important which is the effec of high blood pressure on the kidney and also the brain itself we've talked about the brain we've talked about the heart but the kidney doesn't get enough attention the the kidney is a remarkable organ and I think if you're really in this game of trying to live longer right if you if you think hey you know maybe we'll live 80 85 years but if we kind of start doing all of these other things and and really optimizing our behaviors that could be 95 well you have to start thinking about the capacity the kidney and once the glomular filtration rate Falls below a certain level uh you have to be very careful with how you live your life and unfortunately this is one of those things that I is is another sort of mistake that's made in kind of modern medicine which is we don't pay enough attention to how to measure kidney function correctly we rely very heavily on something called um creatinin as opposed to looking at another biomarker called catin C Which is far more accurate and also tolerate too low of a kidney function for a person's age so we look at you know we might look at someone who's 50 who's kidney function is at 65% and say you're totally fine because it's true that at 65% there is no problem but you're not thinking well if this person has to live another 40 years and this continues to go down they're going to potentially be staring down the barrel of needing dialysis The Last 5 Years of their life again you don't want you want to die with with compromised kidney function but never from compromised kidney function in fact the hazard ratio of all cause mortality associated with compromised kidney function is even greater than that of heart disease once once you cross that threshold I mean lights out once you are needing dialysis I mean your risk of death is higher than that of someone with high blood pressure smoking even someone who has cancer you have a higher risk of death having endstage renal disease than you do having cancer so um the kidney is so sensitive to blood pressure this is a tiny organ that on every pump of your heart is getting 20 to 25% of your blood wow so just imagine how sensitive and susceptible it is to elevated blood pressure we've covered um quite a few corners of avoiding the major killer artherosclerosis um let's talk about cancer nobody wants cancer everybody seems to know somebody who has had or has died of cancer and probably no surprise given that it's number two on the list what are the numbers and what can people do to offset cancer um and of course can't there are huge number of different types of cancer um and inside of this conversation I just want to um earmark that might be good to have a conversation about alcohol which we didn't talk about in the the last um last discussion but if alcohol is involved or is a risk factor rather for cardiovascular disease or cerebrovascular disease now would probably be the time to to mention it yeah um this has been looked at in a number of ways um and you know so if you if you look at sort of Topline epidemiology and you you've heard of these things called the French paradox which is oh come on like they eat all of this fatty stuff and drink all this wine and they have a slightly lower risk of cardiovascular disease you just have to kind of throw that stuff out the window because there's so many confounders there that it's kind of useless epidemiology if you really look at the data clearly and there was actually a really elegant analysis that included some genetic studies that came out in jamama about a year ago it's actually pretty clear that there is no dose of ethanol that is healthy okay so there's no J curve so it used to there used to be kind of this literature that said there's a J curve associated with ethanol so meaning um at at total abstinence there's a slightly higher risk of death than if you're drinking one drink a day and then if you go beyond one drink a day the W the rate of death starts to climb the problem with that analysis so there just been a lot of consternation around that but the problem with those analyses are multiple but the most important of these are that the abstainers have a reason for abstaining typically and those reasons can can't be extracted statistically from these analyses so I'll leave it at that without I mean I've written many blog posts about this if people are really interested um they can they can go and talk about that I also do talk about this a little bit in the book by the way um but the the short answer is there is no dose of ethanol that is healthy I would argue that it's not a straight line of risk but it probably goes I think from zero to one there's probably no measurable harm for most people one per day or one per week probably one per day up to one per day it's probably very difficult to discern the harm but I'm going to put a caveat on that that I'll come back to and then I think the risk starts to climb pretty steeply after that and I think it climbs nonlinearly after that that that is my reading of the literature okay so then how do you decide if you're going to have up to one drink a day and by the way that's not the same as seven a week because that doesn't mean seven in a day right which we know is is really detrimental right for especially for the brain right but also the Cascades that result from uh disrupted sleep not just for that one night but multiple nights yeah yeah the the literature I've seen on alcohol you know that the most now again this is an emerging literature because um what you're describing is exactly right but people are now some more conservative folks are starting to place it at two drinks per week total Beyond which you start running into issues especially for women in terms of breast cancer risk which is something maybe we can we can Circle back I mean look my view is if you can not drink at all you're better off not drinking at all and people always say to me well Peter what's your view on this and my view is I do drink um I'll go weeks at a time without having a drink I haven't had a drink you know I've had one drink since I saw you last a couple weeks ago because I've been sick so I'm thinking well gosh like the deck is stacked against me right now why would I do anything to stack it more um but my philosophy which is half tongue and cheek but is is true is like I just don't drink bad alcohol you know I I sort of my wife saw me do this the other day we opened up a bottle of wine and it was a very expensive bottle of wine and I took a sip and I was like yeah I just dumped my glass I was like I don't know just doesn't taste right to me uh and it tasted fine to her so I don't think it was that the wine had spoiled it was just I didn't like the taste of it enough to justify drinking it I was like I don't feel like drinking it yeah I've fortunate I there were times in life you know certainly college and portions of graduate school when I drank but I've never really enjoyed the the um taste or experience of alcohol so I all the alcohol in the pl could disappear I wouldn't even notice but I'll have one every once in a while I'm sort of of that of that mindset but um great to hear that zero is better than any um because I think everyone agrees on that um so it doesn't appear that alcohol can be directly linked to cardiovascular disease and cerebral vascular disease although there are these indirect effects through insulin altering insulin sensitivity S I think I think the the impact of sleep on cardiovascular stov vascular disease is profound and I do think that the impact of ethanol on sleep is underappreciated yeah and and here I I think we should um do a little uh nod to Matt Walker the great Matt Walker because you know 10 years ago if um we someone had a conversation about sleep and how critical it is and how not getting enough quality sleep is dangerous people would have just kind of shake their heads and say what's the evidence for that I think Matt really deserves um most of the credit for alerting people to these issues around not getting enough sleep it's just remarkable what's happened in the last decade thanks to Matt and and while we're on that topic we you know we have the other next Horseman of death the neurodegenerative diseases I think those were also heavily impacted especially on the dementia side uh by ethanol so again I want to be careful when I say this stuff right I don't believe in fear mongery okay I I you know I just said a moment ago I'll say it again I I drink alcohol and I'm going to continue to drink alcohol but I think that one has to make the trade-offs which is like if I really do love the taste of certain Spanish wines I really do love the taste of certain Tequilas certain mcals and I really do love the the taste of certain weird esoteric Belgian beers and it really does give me pleasure to consume those things in the same way it gives me pleasure to consum certain foods that are quite vapid right you know there's no upside in consuming a brownie that my kid just made except for the fact that my kid just made it and it's fun to eat the brownie with them right so you know we come back to this thing about like longevity is also about health span and part of Health span is quality of life and you know I write about this in the book that I I think there was a day when my approach to this was purely an engine ing approach which was we going to optimize every molecule of my being for this and if you if if you go so far down that rabbit hole that the quality of your life deteriorates what's the point so that's why I think for somebody like you who says like you could take all the alcohol off the face of the earth I wouldn't even notice then that's a great reason not to bother drinking I wouldn't put myself at the opposite end of that Spectrum but I'm probably further to the Spectrum you know where yeah if you told me I could never drink alcohol again I would be fine with it but I'd be giving something up that I enjoy um but at the same time I know if I have two drinks with dinner my sleep sucks and therefore that's that's just a threshold I rarely rarely cross I certainly have my vice as alcohol just doesn't happen to be one of them what about cancer again nobody wants cancer uh we've all known people have died of cancer um or have had cancer what can be done to reduce one's risk of cancer well you asked earlier about the numbers so let's throw some numbers out there right so globally we're talking about 11 12 million deaths per year about half the number of uh ascvd still a staggering number um at the individual level put it this way somewhere between 1 and three and one and four chance anyone listening to this or watching is going to get cancer in their lifetime but what's the probability they will die from that that about a one in six chance of dying okay so is it true that every male gets prostate cancer most in other words on their death bed every man will die with prostate cancer and some will die from it got you you and I have prostate cancer right now thank you for informing me yes uh hopefully we will not die of it we should not die of it prostate cancer colon cancer are Cancers that no one should ever die from because they are so easy to screen for they are so easy to treat when they are in their infancy um that it's totally unacceptable that people are dying from this there are other cancers for which I can't really say that breast cancer much more complicated pancreatic cancer much more complicated gasto multiform much more complicated so there you know as you said a second ago cancer is not a disease it is a category of diseases each it's not just that each organ is different and breast differs from pancreatic it's that within breast cancer erpr positive her two new positive is a totally different disease from the triple negative breast cancers those with braam mutations or non- braam mutations well even putting that aside just looking at the the hormone profile of the individual breast cancers they're totally different diseases so it's not just that breast cancer is different from prostate cancer it's that all breast cancers are quite different maybe I should frame the question a little differently than given the vast number of different types of cancers and categories Within your question is still a fair one I just wanted to throw that caveat out there so now to your question okay so what do we know it turns out that we can very comfortably speak to um several things one is the role that genes play so um maybe I'll just spend one second on a gene 101 thing for for the for the viewer we want to differentiate between what are called germline mutations and sematic mutations so um your germ line and my germ line are set when we were born our germ line mutations uh any mutations we have in germline genes are inherited from our parents it they're non-negotiable non-negotiable you got those things so question one is how much of cancer results from those types of genetic mutations and the answer is very little less than 5% so very now you mentioned one a moment ago braa okay so so mutations in braa are germline mutations a woman will get a braa mutation from one of her parents and we will often have a sense of that just from the family history you know when mom and sister and aunt and grandmother had breast cancer you've got a breast cancer Gene now it might be braa it might be another Gene that's not braa but there's no ambiguity and we test for these genes mostly just for insurance purposes frankly but there's no ambiguity that that was a germline transmission of a gene that is driving cancer but 95 plus percent of cancers are not arising from germline mutations they are arising from sematic mutations or acquired mutations so the question then becomes what is driving sematic mutation and the two clearest indications of drivers of sematic mutation are smoking and obesity smoking we've talked about let's put that aside for a moment I'm so surprised about obesity I don't know why I'm surprised but I've um never heard this I'm probably just naive to the literature yeah so obesity is now the second most prevalent environmental driver of cancer now I will argue and I think I argue this in the book hopefully pretty convincingly I don't think it's obesity per se I think obesity is just a masquerading proxy what is obesity obesity simply is defined by body mass index well first of all uh I don't think I'm obese but I'm I'm way overweight on BMI you probably are too so you know let's just acknowledge I'm clinically diagnosable as obese are you oh no well not well clinically BMI over 30 I don't think you're probably there no but if I if if I measure my weight by height um you know my BMI is probably 27 or 28 okay it's been a little while since I've checked I I can I only know body fat percentages and things like that so so so basically like BMI is a far from perfect proxy but at the population level it's what we use um I wish we would get off it by the way I think it's really crap because it doesn't take into account lean versus I think we could get I think we could get better data if we looked at waste to height ratio that's a way better metric so this is just a quick test for everybody it's I don't I I'm going to argue your BMI is less relevant to me than your eye color but if your waist circumference is more than 50% of your height you should be concerned okay well then I'm okay yeah you're fine by that metric right but that's important so if you're six feet tall your waist better be under 36 in and if it's over I would argue that's the definition of obesity not your BMI being over 30 so um back back to this issue because we're using such a crude measurement it basically is catching a whole bunch of stuff but the question is what's driving it and I think if you really look at the physiology of cancer I don't think it's obesity I think it's two things that come with obesity insulin resistance which is you know 2/3 to 3/4 of obese individuals are insulin resistant and inflammation and I think those two things with the inflammation and the immune dysfunction with the insulin resistance and the hyper basically tonic growth stimulus that's coming that's what's driving cancer so again is it because a person is storing extra fat you know and their love handles that that's driving their risk of cancer no that that's those are just two things that are coming along for the ride so beyond those two things and along with C we also certain environmental toxins we absolutely know are doing this right so we understand that people who you know have exposure to asbestos have a much higher risk of certain types of lung Cancers and things like that but for the most part um those are our big risks beyond that we talk about alcohol in certain cases absolutely um alcohol is a carcinogen um it's the dose part still isn't clear to me I don't know is one drink a day moving the needle much on cancer risk per se it's not clear and it might depend on those uh genetic predispositions yes so so yeah if Step One is don't get cancer you have no control over your genes you have control over smoking you have control over insulin sensitivity I wish I could sit here and tell you that there is a proven anti-cancer diet or that if you do x amount of exercise per weak you're going to not get cancer we just don't have a fraction of the control over cancer that we have with cardiovascular disease we we don't understand the disease well enough so we don't understand kind of the initiation process and the propagation process um and we you know we we have to rely much more on screening are there good whole body screens for cancer uh in other words can I walk into a tube and um or a cylinder rather and get screened for the presence of tumors any and everywhere in the body outside the brain because the brain's a little harder to to get to right believe it or not the brain is actually pretty easy to screen for Zo is so fatty and floating in water well and also the head when you put the head into an MRI scanner there's no movement uh it's the least motion artifact is in the brain so when you use something called diffusion weighted Imaging with background subtraction in an MRI a technology that was actually pioneered in the brain for stroke identification um it's also really good at looking for tumors as well um so let me make the argument for why screening matters because this is again kind of an area where I go far down a rabbit hole in a way that I think traditional medicine would argue against so my argument for screening is an argument at the individual level and it goes as follows to my knowledge there is not a single example of a cancer that is more effectively treated when the burden of cancer cells in the body is higher than when it is lower uh so the two examples I think I talk about in the book are colon cancer and breast cancer so when you take an individual with stage four colon cancer that means that the cancer has left the colon and is now outside of the colon so it's usually in the liver at a minimum potentially in the lungs or in the brain that person's fiveyear survival is very low their 10e survival is zero we will treat them with a very aggressive regimen of multiple drugs and again you'll get a 5e survival of you know maybe 10 to 20% and by 10 years nobody's alive if you take a person with stage three colon cancer so the colon cancer is big and it's even in the lymph nodes around the colon but at least grossly you can't see colon cancer cell you can't see those cells in the liver microscopically of course we know they're there because if you don't treat those patients they still die of colon cancer but you whack them with the same chemo regimen that you were going to give the metastatic patients 80% of those people are alive in five years so night and day difference in survival what's the difference in the person with metastatic cancer you're treating a person with hundreds of billions of cells in the Adent setting which is what we We call we call it adant when you treat people who have only microscopic disease you're you're treating billions of cells the same is true with breast cancer so we have the clinical trial data to put them side by side so rule number one is don't get cancer rule number two is catch cancer as early as possible if you're going to get it which brings us to your question of how do you screen for it um we basically screen the first line of screening is is Imaging is is is is is a sort of visualization so you have cancers that occur outside the body that you can look at directly so skin cancer you can look directly at the skin uh esophageal gastric colon cancer are those are outside the body right mouth to anus embryologically is outside the body so you can put a scope in and you can look directly at the cancer but for all other cancers that are inside the body you have to rely on some sort of Imaging modality um although now we're starting to look at things things called liquid biopsies so blood tests that are looking for self-free DNA and the self-free DNA gives us a sense of based on the epigenetic signature of what you're looking at hey is there a cancer in the body and if so what tissue is it potentially coming from based on these epigenetic signatures so the problem with relying on any one modality is a is a problem of sensitivity specificity optimization now with MRI scanners which are in some ways the best way to do this because they don't have radiation so you don't want to be incurring damage as you do this the irony of doing a whole body CT scan to screen for cancer is your you know whole body CT scan would be close to you know 30 to 50 Ms of radiation it's staggering some of radiation so does that mean that people should uh sorry to pull you off this but um I was going to ask about this anyway avoiding going through the whole body scanner at the airport um noise Solo solo yeah you know going through a whole body scanner at the airport or even getting a dexa scan I mean these are trivial amounts of radiation what about flying you know uh hear that Pilots get more uh get more pilot if you're a pilot who's flying over the North Pole back and forth and back and forth you're probably getting you know 5 to 10 m seevers a year the NRC suggests that nobody body should get more than 50 Ms a year so uh you and I both travel a fair amount uh but typical travel for the busy person let's say um two roundtrip flights of uh more than two hours per month and an international trip every three months um probably still less than a mly seert a year yeah uh living at sea level one m seert a year living at a mile elevation if you lived in Denver you're at 2 Ms a year Bas I have to ask standing in front of the microwave I'm just we've got friends they they they ask and with or without testies on the counter that's an inside joke that uh unfortunately and fortunately deserves no description um and Peter's not referring to me um but people worry about other sources of radiation so doesn't sound like the microwave is a concern um what are the other major sources of radiation um I mean outside of sort of nuclear stuff where things go sadly live near a plant or there's been a there's uh it's mostly it's mostly at the hands of medical professionals right it's the CT scanner and the pet scanner are hands down the biggest source of radiation what about the x-rays of the dentist when they go when they Scurry behind the wall put under the blanket they're they're very low uh relatively speaking uh fluoroscopy is very high um they tend to try to cover up all of you that so for example if if they were doing a fluoroscopic study of your kidney because you had a stone or if you were getting an injection into you know if they were doing doing a a fluoroscopic guided injection of one of your discs in your neck that would be a locally pretty high dose but they're going to cover the hell out of you elsewhere um and again if if you if you get one of these things it's not the end of the world but boy I wouldn't want to be getting one a month and and back to the point about screening you know a a chest abdomen pelvis CT scan is probably I mean look there's probably a scanner out there now that's moving fast enough that it's much lower but I'll give you an example okay remember how I talked about we do CT angiograms on all of our patients for coronary artery disease um an off-the-shelf scanner for this is 20 Ms of radiation okay so calibrate calibrate me because that's 40% of your annual allotment oh wow so the medical uh practitioners really are the uh the major culprits here that's right so what what we say is and I think most doctors are now realizing this is no no it behooves you to pay a little bit more to go to a really good place that can do that scan for 2 m cevers meaning they have a much faster CT scanner much better software and they're better Engineers so they have better engineering that they can do on the scanner to get that done so so I if for someone listening to this here's my take do not get a CT scan or any Imaging study without asking how much radiation am I seeing and if a person can't tell you how many MTS of radiation you're being exposed to then just say I'm I'm going to wait a minute until somebody can tell me that I I realize and keep in mind 50 if you you know if 50 is the most you should ever be exposed to in a year there better be a damn good reason why I'm going to get 25 in a day now there are some people who have to do this if you're a cancer patient and they're scanning you as a part of your treatment I mean you know you have to pick and choose between those two those two opportunities so I don't want to I don't also don't want to create some fearmongering where oh my God if you hit 50 in a year your hose no it's just I wouldn't want to hit 50 a year every year for my whole life and I certainly wouldn't want to be hitting hundreds a year for any period of time I think we're just trying to raise awareness and and also calibrate people to you know what the sources are and and so they make can make good choices not um to place them into a chronic state of fear or even an acute state of fear so for that reason we prefer MRI scanners because there's no radiation I realize this might sound like a specialized circumstance but I'll just start off um with my own which is you know when I was a graduate student I um worked with fixative so paraph Maldive parap Malahide excuse me um gluto alide we know that these are mutagens they mutate cells not good you do some molecular biology in the lab you use DNA intercalating die those little bands and gels the reason they label is because they get between the DNA not good if for to get into your own uh DNA um and that's a very specialized circumstance I also injected Tri radioactive Proline into animals and things of that sort again very specialized and yet most people I think uh will be exposed to pesticides um they'll put um stuff on their lawn or they'll have um paint thinners and things of that sort is there any sense of what the average if one can average risk um is incurred in terms of carcinogens just through this interaction with um you know weed killers uh paint thinner um detergents around the house that you know we now know there's some major lawsuits that have been uh successful against the the manufacturers of these things um and what is the real cancer risk created by having those kinds of solvents and um pesticides and things around I I don't I don't think I know truthfully I I think it's very complicated to calculate such things when the when their ubiquity is so high um so so one one argument is look it's kind of baked into the Baseline prevalence of cancer today because these things are so ubiquitous asbestos in California for whatever reason it seems that there's an his bestos warning on pretty much every building if you look carefully enough except maybe the ones built in the last five years right I don't think I've ever worked in a building where the elevator was updated in terms of the inspection it was always like 10 years back you always see it while you're in the elevator no one seems to worry about those or where there was not an asbestos warning or a lead warning it seems like it it's just kind of everywhere and and they're noting it in these little Flags I I don't walk around worried about I don't lose sleep over it but it it sounds like a real risk or else they wouldn't bother right clearly they're just trying to cover their it might be more cya than than anything at this point I mean I I I don't know how much of a risk asbest poses when it's not being agitated in other words I don't know that the asbest in the ceiling you know four layers up is really a problem but if they had to come in here and rip this you know ceiling apart I don't know that i' want to be in here either right it was like post 911 a lot of the workers selling that the World Trade Center um pits because that's what was left um sadly were uh developed cancers right probably from exposure to those kinds of things well I mean I would argue it's also the fuels just the unbelievable amount of pollution microlution that was in the air following those things I mean that's devastating stuff so yeah those are those are fortunately the outlier events that are that are dramatic but again my my focus is basically look I could hermetically seal myself somewhere in the world maybe and maybe that would reduce my Risk by 1% or but I'm G to focus my energy on what I control because that's really hard for me to control I like focusing my things on I like focusing my energy on things I can control what I can control is the uh timing and frequency of my screening that's I can't control my genes anymore um they are what they are I got whatever predisposing cancer genes I'm going to get uh I might be lucky in this regard and that I seem to get all these horrible heart disease genes and maybe not as much but you could also argue I got there are cancer bad genes in me that we don't really know about because everybody was dying of heart disease so young um but boy am I going to control the screening thing what what source of genetic screening do you recommend to your patients because there are a lot of them there's 23 of me there's whole genome sequencing place you know available now in variety of formats we're this is actually one of the questions our research is working on as we speak so um we're we're trying to decide so we do genetic screening for certain things like apoe is a gene we want to know in everybody um for its role in neurod degenerative disease correct uh specifically in Alzheimer's disease uh we are selectively using cancer screening in some patients but in our practice it's less important because we're generally so aggressive anyway that it turns out to to be a little bit moot we don't learn a lot in the genetic screening that's changing our screening practices because we're so thorough in our family history and we're so aggressive in everybody regardless of family history but I think there's a place for these things for example if you're looking for reimbursement on certain tests uh you know I'll give an example right so colon cancer um historically was not covered by colonoscopy screening for colon cancer was not covered until you were 50 that's been bumped to 45 we still think everybody should be screened no later than 40 no I haven't had one so I suppose I should yeah I mean look I'm 50 and I've had three already so again why because colon cancer is not just the third leading cause of cancer death it's 100% preventable why because every colon cancer comes from a pop and every pop can be seen on a colonoscopy so there's simply no reason to not know that and that has to be way against the cost of the colonoscopy both the financial cost and the risks which are very low but not zero um you know there's a a risk that comes from electrolyte abnormalities and hypotension from the bow prep there's a risk from the sedation and there's obviously a risk of you know bleeding or perforation that comes from the colonoscopy itself again in in a in a generally healthy person those risks are so low that they're almost difficult to quantify as evidenced by a recent New England Journal of Medicine paper that was a very anti- colonoscopy paper which I won't get into because it's it's it's um probably a little bit of a tangent but what's interesting is despite being a very anti- colonoscopy paper this paper does a better job demonstrating the safety of colonoscopy than anything else um it just um was a oddly designed experiment so the biggest challenge with aggressive screening posture is the specificity problem which is is when you stack more and more modalities around these things you're going to start finding things that aren't cancer so MRI has a very high sensitivity in English that just means if a cancer is present an MRI is very likely to see it um but it has a very low specificity which means in English it will see a bunch of things and think they are cancer when they are not and it's most troubled by glandular tissue so glandular tissue is the Achilles heel of MRI and therefore when you use as we do Whole Body MRI for cancer screening we tell our patients going in there like a 25% chance we're going to find something that is not cancer but will require us to do further investigation if you're not cool with that which is totally fine we probably shouldn't do this and again most people are okay with that but it helps to set that expectation going in that you're going to probably be chasing your tail looking at some stupid thyroid nodule that is absolutely nothing I mean I can't tell you how many useless thyroid nodules we've had to get ultrasounds on that prove to be absolutely nothing and you but you have to follow them for a couple of years to make sure they're nothing what is the typical cost of a whole body MRI and so for people who are not your patients how would they go about getting those because I think most people's general practitioner is not going to script that out for them correct um I don't know the short answer because I don't know how many different places are doing it I can tell you that we use a couple of different facilities and I should disclose that I'm a founder of of one of them um but we use a scanner that probably um we send our patients to any anywhere they want to go but within a certain company that we like um that's not a company I have an affiliation with and I believe they're charging about $2500 can you since you don't have an affiliation can you mention that because for instance uh you are not my physician sadly for me um and luckily for you um but I'd love to get a whole body MRI um so what where can I what is this company so the the company that that makes the MRI that that we're using right now is called pruvo um it's a I I interviewed the chief technology officer and the head radiologist uh of that company on one of my podcasts um it's a super interesting Technology based out of Vancouver and for a long time that was the only scanner in the world so I had my first scan back in 2015 I went up to Vancouver to get it done uh probably had my first two up there they've now opened locations all over the country so they've got they've got one in the Bay Area they've probably got one here in La um I know they have one in Dallas they so they've got them all over the place great um and then the company that I'm affiliated with with is a different typee of company that does all sorts of Diagnostics but among them is we have a pruvo scanner in that company that company's called biograph and that's in the Bay Area biograph biograph yeah spelled as one word respect yep that's very helpful in terms of understanding the general risk and um ways to offset cancer to the extent that one can um and certainly what the what the consideration should be number three on the list of ways to die we should just title this ways to die or we should title this how not to die um too early neurodegenerative disease this is an area I'm I'm somewhat familiar with uh not because of my own experience thankfully but uh because of my relationship to the Neuroscience community and last time I checked I was told that everyone experiences some age related cognitive decline so we all get less uh uh proficient at Focus memory um complex context dependent task switching all that stuff as we get older but it's the slope of that line that really can be controlled to some extent and that Alzheimer's dementia represents just a steep acceleration downward uh acceleration of of all of that um that was what I was told I'm guessing that that even though I reside in the not kind of but I'm reside in that community that some of that is being revised especially with respect to the underlying causes of Alzheimer's because there's a lot of controversy even Scandal around this whole AP apob um ameloid plaque tangle stuff which is the stuff of textbooks for medical students and Neuroscience students what is the story with neurod degenerative disease Alzheimer's in particular how can we offset it and perhaps as importantly how can we all slow our own cognitive decline irrespective of whether or not we get what is called Alzheimer's dementia so Alzheimer's disease is both the most prevalent form of dementia and the most prevalent neurodegenerative disease so it occupies that unique spot uh we're talking about roughly six million people in the United States have Alzheimer's disease that's one in uh well let's see I mean Haven checked about two% of the total population okay but that doesn't include those with mild cognitive impairment or pre-dementia or other forms of dementia and of course the right metric is not what percent of the population which of course includes children things like that it's you know so that's a function of age yeah is age the major risk factor for getting Alzheimer's L we say with glaucoma a disease how much more familiar with because my worked on it for many years the biggest risk factor for getting glaucoma is AG yeah the greatest risk factor for cardiovascular disease is age the greatest risk back for cancer is age um we tend to not spend a lot of time talking about that because it's not a modifiable risk so you know we we tend to focus on modifiable risk factors um so what else can we tell you just to give you kind of lay of the land so the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disease would probably be Louis body dementia followed by Parkinson's disease although the rate of growth of Parkinson's disease is the highest so I think we probably be most you know we those three diseases we want to really be paying a lot of attention to as you know there are a lot of other neurod degenerative diseases every one of these things is devastating like multiple sclerosis multiple sclerosis uh ALS huntingt disease these are awful awful diseases um there are also kinds of Dementia vascular dementia is not Alzheimer's dementia but it is it produces comparable symptoms each of these things by the way are slightly different Louis body is a dementia it's a dementing disease but it also has a movement component so it sort of sits on a spectrum that's sort of you know I mean Loosely halfway between Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease um we talked obviously about age being the number one risk factor kind of not that interesting because can't do anything about it so they real goal is as we age what are we doing to reduce risk um well let's start with an important Gene the gene that everybody's heard of certainly uh came up a lot on the Limitless special where Chris Hemsworth was um you know made the decision to reveal something that none of us expected when we started that whole series which was that he ended up being homozygous for the apoe for isopor so um maybe folks understand we have two copies of every Gene so for Gene X you have copy that you got from your mom and copy that you got from your dad and the apoe gene is kind of a unique Gene and that it really it has three different isoforms that are all considered normal none of them are mutations so you have the E2 isopor the E3 isopor and the E4 isopor the E for isopor is the OG isopor that's the one that we have historically had as as far back as we can go we actually think the E4 isopor offered a lot of advantages back in the day it's a bit of a pro-inflammatory um isopor and it certainly offered protection against infections especially parastic infections in the CNS which would have been a really important thing to select for 200,000 years ago how do parasites get into the CNS you got a blood brain barrier you a thick skull I mean not I'm not calling I'm not telling you you have a thick skull but but I mean it just seems like parasites and other tissues would be an issue because what we're talking about here is brain disease yeah yeah anyway I take but it also could have protected them it probably offered some protection outside of the brain as well um anyway the um the E3 isopor I think showed up God I think 50,000 years ago and the E2 isopor showed up very recently about 10,000 years ago now today we realize that there's a clear stratification of risk when it comes to Alzheimer's disease that tracks with those isoforms so because you have two copies you basically have six combinations of how you can combine those genes you could be 22 23 2 4 33 34 44 um the prevalence of them is basically as follows 33 is now the most common three is the most common so double three is 50 5 is% of the population the next most common is the 34 which is about 25% of the population and then after that most things are kind of a rounding error so uh two threes and two fours uh would be the next most common four fours are very rare and 2 tws are the rarest of them all two tws are less than 1% 4 fours are about 1 to 2% um very important Point here is that the e E4 genes are not deterministic so they're highly associated with the risk but they're not deterministic there are at least three deterministic genes in Alzheimer's disease uh one is called psn1 another one is called pn2 and another one is called AP those genes collectively make up about 1% of cases of people with Alzheimer's disease so they're fortunately very rare genes but sadly they are deterministic meaning if you have those geneses you do get Alzheimer's disease and what's perhaps most devastating about those genes is how early the onset is of the disease these are people that are usually getting Alzheimer's disease in their 50s um so we do have a patient in our practice actually she's spoken about this very openly um whose whose mom had one of these genes um and she you know got Alzheimer's disease in her early 50s was I I think she might have made it into her 60s before or she died but you know absolutely devastating consequences here why do people with Alzheimer's die because I know about the hippocampal degeneration hippocampus of course being an area of the brain important for learning and memory uh but is there brain stem degeneration do they lose breathing centers or cardiovascular us usually what happens is it's sort of failure to thrive aspiration things like that yeah so it's usually they just stop eating um or they can't control secretions they aspirate they get a pneumonia or they really lose the ability to even sense like pain in their body and therefore like they'll get an ulcer and they don't realize it and it'll become cellulitic and they'll develop a horrible infection in response to it I see so it's a body vulnerability the reason I asked is every once in a while a news report will come out a based on a legitimate um case study where um they'll do a scan on some person and discover that they're missing literally half their cerebral cortex like huge chunks of brain and they're functioning relatively normally and so here we're about a nerd degenerative disease of relatively it's widespread but there are a few hot spots of course in the brain that degenerate more profoundly than others and and the people dying so that makes sense it it extends to lack of peripheral awareness or control and then some some acute injury or infection got it um you mentioned earlier some of the controversy right so what what what are we talking about here well it it it's and I I do write about this at length in the chapter on Alzheimer's disease because I think this is a very important point right which is the index case for Alzheimer's disease there's always an index case right you know there's the quote unquote patient zero um the index case was a woman who you know a hundred years later we realized had an AP mutation I was these are AP or psn1 but she had one of these deterministic genes that led to a very early onset of disease which by the way without which we may not have come up with the diagnosis because had she just got Alzheimer's disease in her 70s it would have just been referred to as cility which is you know was not interesting enough to pay attention to um but I think it probably set the field on the path towards an overemphasis on amalo beta um and it's not really clear how important amalo is which is not to say it's not important it is important and there's no ambiguity that ID is responsible for the um the changes that we see in the brain but it's not crystal clear because there are lots of autopsies that are done on people that are completely healthy and have died with no cognitive impairment and they're chalk full of amalo so what we don't fully understand is exactly what does removing amalo do um the other thing complicates the story is there has been no shortage of drugs that Target amalo that have seemed unsuccessful and uh just to clarify when you say ameloid you mean people have died with their brains examined an autopsy and see that there are tons of so-called amid plaques correct um different than uh arterial plaques of course but within the brain so that the two Hallmarks of Alzheimer's um uh histopathologically would be plaques and Tangles um and even that now is of course coming under under question um but for that's what we teach every Neuroscience yeah graduate student it's what we teach every undergraduate it's also what we teach every medical student um and not just at Stanford but everywhere uh so I have heard that the the link between AP and whether or not one develops genes for related to AP and whether or not it's cleaved at one site or another is just what you were describing and and risk for Alzheimer's so it's basically a CLE it's a cleavage question right so AP people with the AP mutation I think have one extra cleavage site um the they result in one extra cleavage of amalo and then it misfolds and the misfolding is is what the plaque is that's being created that also then predisposes them to the neurofibrillary tangles and um again but all this is under question now right I mean this is what I was told and and when I look it sounds like there were some early there were some papers early in the chain of Discovery um and the research in Alzheimer's that um were either wrong WR because they were falsified intentionally fif there was an intentionally falsified paper on one particular amalo uh variant and that clearly set the field back a decade because a lot of people went down that rabbit hole based on deliberately falsified data um what happened to that guy I'm gonna assume I don't know why I assume it was a guy but what happened to that guy yeah it's a good question um I think I wrote One Piece about it when it happened I actually reached out to the person who broke the story because I wanted to have them on my podcast and I forget why he didn't do it I forget why he he wouldn't commit to it or something like that I thought it was a little odd because I thought this would be a great way to talk about this um I do not know what came of that scandal in other words I I haven't paid attention to it for probably nine months so I don't know you know obviously the paper's probably been recalled but I don't know what disciplinary action was taken um the field is I don't know I don't want to speak like I'm in the field because I'm not so I don't I I want to be careful what I say but I I think the field is probably in in a bit of a crisis because there's there have been so many bets placed on anti- ameloid therapies and ameloid biomarkers and ameloid everything and we just haven't seen efficacy right so contrast that with cardiovascular disease where you know you have this apob biomarker you you understand the pathophysiology of how it works you have drugs that Target it so you have a biomarker so you give somebody a drug that lowers apob you can measure apob that's a really important and obvious thing to be able to do and then you have clinical outcomes which is oh when you take a bunch of people in primary prevention it takes this long before you see an effect in secondary prevention it only takes this long to see an effect right different risk stratifications all these different things we don't have any of that for Alzheimer's disease so we do use there are now serum amid biomarkers that we use and we do track these in our highest risk patients but only because we believe and I don't know if we're right by the way that lower is better and therefore if we make these changes to you and your serum ameloid levels come down that that tells us something about what's happening in your brain that's favorable but I mean I would hate to represent that we are practic ing nearly the level of precision medicine there that we are in cardiovascular medicine when it comes to Alzheimer's disease maybe take a step back when it comes to brain health I think there are a handful of things that seem unequivocally true and there's a lot of stuff that is signal to noise ratio that's really low so the unequivocally true things for brain health are sleep matters another unequivocally true thing for brain health is that lower LDL cholesterol and apob is better than higher another thing that is unequivocally true is not having type 2 diabetes matters so having really being yeah being insulin sensitive insulin sensitive matters sleeping adequately matters having lower lipids matters those three things are clear and the fourth one that is unequivocally clear is exercise matters more specific form of exercise uh very I mean so I I tried to answer this question on a recent AMA that I did because the answer is more is always better but if you if I I tried to have one of our analysts look at it through the lens of if you could only exercise three hours a week what would be the highest use case and our interpretation of the literature was if you could only spend 3 hours a week exercising you'd be best off doing one hour of low intensity cardio one hour of strength and one hour of interval training so if someone said like I only want the minimum effective dose you're going to get a pretty good bang for your buck doing that but I would argue if your brain really matters to you do more one hour of interval training is no joke no because you're going to spread that out over probably at least two workouts yeah um but Andrew those four things are basically the only thing where there's there's no ambiguity about the benefit what about head hits like don't get don't hit your head uh seems almost assuredly true in a susceptible individual for sure um so I put that yeah maybe we could include that as well well I just men you know one of the things I've been learning recently is I know you boxed um uh for a number of years when you were younger I I boxed a little bit hit my head a number of times skateboarding but you know we think about sport injuries as the major cause of head injuries but then I've got colleagues car accidents bike bike accidents I've got so many colleagues and children of colleagues growing up in around campus that were hit by cars on Woodside Road or you know I mean there small object surrounded by you know three what a car weigh 3,000 pounds or something like that um you know it it's unbelievable the number of head injuries and then construction sites because those ridiculous little hard hats which um don't protect against anything except um I don't know maybe uh uh windblown hair that they they basically predispose the whole situation predisposed people to head injuries very common on construction sites and then um say nothing of military Etc so I think that um I was told that the the best thing to do if you get a head injury um is to not get another one in other words if you can stop doing the activity that leads to more head injury yeah the other thing that I think is emerging and I hope it is studied rigorously is the use of hyperbaric oxygen immediately following uh a TBI a traumatic Maran injury I reached out to um Dom Deus youo a little while ago to kind of because he knows a lot about this lit um to say hey is there anything out there that's really kind of TurnKey convincing and he said not yet um they're still doing it right so I I would do this like if I if I was in a car accident tomorrow and sustained a concussion and by the way I'm not a proponent of hyperbaric oxygen so I you know we have an internal white paper that we wrote inside quite recently where where I examined when I say I examined you know the analyst team examined and I pushed back and reviewed um and I I came away very kind of bearish on hyperbaric oxygen I don't think I don't think it's harmful but I think all of the claims are nonsense you know tiir extension is totally irrelevant if you actually look at the studies they're the worst done studies I've ever seen in my life I'm sure you've seen some of these where it's like you put these people in a hyperbaric chamber and then watch them do cognitive tasks after and they're so much better well the fine is they don't even have Placebo groups here like can you imagine doing a study without a placebo group or your placebo group doesn't go into a sham chamber yeah I mean one of the big problems of the proliferation of all these pay-to-play journals meaning journals that will basically publish a paper with minimal or poor peer review um because they charge in order to publish um and then offer free access you know free access sounds great but when it's pay to-play typee journals there's been a huge proliferation of papers most of which you find on Twitter um in which the study design is is beyond that like like a ninth grader who woke up late for school and was parying all weekend could design a better study than most of these studies and there's some excellent studies out there as well of course presumably and eventually on hyperbaric chamber too so I'm not picking on hyper baric chamber per se but the the proliferation of of truly terrible science that's published in peer-reviewed journals is is just overwhelming yeah it's insane and all of that is to say I think there are places where hyperbaric oxygen makes sense clearly in wound healing it does it's it's a miracle treatment for wound healing and I would absolutely use hyperbaric oxygen if I suffered a concussion um but you know beyond that I think it's pretty pretty tough to make the case where do people go for that I mean there clinics yeah there clinics you basically go to protocols have to be very precise I mean you're this isn't something to Cowboy at home you know no I no no you have to go into a real chamber um I think the TBI protocol that's most commonly used is God I want to say it's pretty intense it's like five 60 Minute sessions a week at two atmospheres oh boy like it's not it's no joke um so from a cost and time perspective it's enormous and and the time and cost are reasons why I think when I see people doing hyperbaric oxygen just because they think it's going to help them live longer I'm like dude you know what you could do with 5 hours week plus the commuting time that you put into that like it's put that into exercise and I promise you you'll get a bigger benefit than you're getting out of hyperbaric oxygen um but there's a lot of other stuff that I just think is maybe helpful there's tons of supplements that I think about when it comes to brain health you know what about thumin what about magnesium with L3 and8 the transporter um what about methylated vitamins that lower homocysteine what about EPA and DHA and we've gone through all of the literature on that stuff and many of these things we still are recommending through a kind of basically like the potential benefits outweigh the potential costs but the evidence is really unimpressive for most of those other interventions so when you think about the big four or big five if you include not getting head injury everything else is probably a rounding error compared to those big ones maybe just for sake of of um thorness we could just list off those four again exercise exercise sleep insulin sensitivity um and lipid management well along the lines of head injuries we should probably move to the next category of um uh how not to die is to avoid accidental death uh how common is accidental death and what are these accidental deaths because we are separating this out from Automotive death so is this people um falling while hiking self self's gone bad um you know what are we talking about here I'm not chuckling because I like it's just I mean it seems like there's a near infinite uh ways ways to um to die accidentally uh and one use I think there's two ways to kind of look at this um I and and so here I kind of merge two categories um so I would call it that're they're that overlap in the way that they're characterized by the CDC but I would sort of we'll we'll we'll we'll talk about them separately and bring them together so if you talk about true accidental deaths Automotive uh and falls and overdoses are the are the three that's basically what it comes down to so you know in our death bar analysis we kind of list all this stuff out in fact I think that's actually one of the figures in the book is I have the accidental death uh figure that we've put together where we've adjusted by population and you'll see a couple of things if you look at it in absolute terms it's basically a pretty con so regardless of what decade of life you're in once you're above you know 20 accidental deaths are pretty sizable number of of deaths now car accidents seem to be pretty constant throughout life little more common if you're under 60 than over 60 but they never go away I was told that um in teenage and boys and and uh boys in their in their early 20s alcohol induced F uh Automotive fatalities place them at at this an astronomic risk is that just not true it's not true anymore compared to overdoses is that because young people now um aren't getting their driver's licenses I've also heard that yeah well I think it's also because we're seeing such an uptick in the deaths that come from fentanyl got it so fentanyl related deaths have basically squashed all other deaths below 65 on The Accidental front really oh it it's not even close because of the number of different substances that fentol is being woven winding its way into everything right so all counterfeit drugs all illicit drugs and look most of the time you're not getting a lethal dose so it's you know it's it's but but you're getting lethal doses so often now that um well you know I did a little analysis actually the other day when I looked at how are deaths of Despair increasing over the last 5 years so what did I Define as a death of Despair suicide alcohol relateded death or overdose accidental overdose so that we differentiate that from suicide where suicide is obviously deliberate and accidental is not so if you just looked at those three things so accidental overdoses suicides and alcohol use or alcohol rated death um not including driving by the way this is like therosis of the liver that comes from that number is going up at almost 20% per year since 2019 so the I couldn't get 2022 numbers yet so at the time of the time I did this analysis which was last week um the 2021 numbers was about 210,000 Americans goodness up [Music] from 80,000 in 2020 up from like 150,000 2019 so is this um and that is driven almost almost entirely by fentel use so I'm trying to um get a sense of how this would happen while back there was an article in the New York Times that some photographs of people that um uh died of fentanyl overdose they and said they they went out to buy cocaine and died and I thought to myself this is a really kind of odd socio uh biological phenomenon right because I mean here there're they're not demonizing these cocaine user I mean they went out to buy cocaine right this is not a um I know cocaine has one narrow clinical use as a prescription drug but in general when people buy cocaine they're they're quote unquote partying with it or using it to work longer hours or something like that um so the whole nature of the article was a bit strange to me but it clearly pointed the fact that people are using cocaine okay that's no surprise but people are going out and buying cocaine they're presumably buying Valium they're presumably buying this is where it's really killing kids but this is online this is in person I mean the reason I'm so so ba by this is let let me uh contextualize what I what I've said so far about this question I was surprised that the times would write a paper about the tragedy of cocaine users dying of Fentanyl and I think they did it to highlight this fentanyl problem um because people have been using cocaine for a long time and typically those are not the members of the population that we really focus on since the mid 80s the so-called cocaine and crack epidemic so basically tells me that people like you said illicit drugs so cocaine but also you know what other sorts of drugs are where the majority of people are dying from fentanyl poisoning and I had a guy on my podcast recently named Anthony hippolito and if anybody's interested in this topic they really need to go listen to that so I watch the the YouTube version of this and your podcast are are excellent so people if you're interested in this and I think everyone should be interested in this if you have a child or know somebody who has a child you just got to get this podcast into their hands because it's the most important Public Service Announcement I'll probably ever do in terms of saving more lives potentially um where the majority of this is making its way into the into The Accidental poisonings is through illicit counterfeit pills so it's when kids are out there buying you know oxy they want oxy well they can't they can't get real oxy right because they're not going to go to a doctor and get real oxy so they're going to buy it through you know Snapchat right they're going to buy it through some drug dealer that finding on social media um they're buying sleeping pills they're buying all sorts of counterfeit stuff like Aderall any of these things are being laced with fentanyl adal absolutely wow I I assume the fent and again the reasons are it's insanely cheap to use synthetic Fentanyl and secondly and again but the effects of fentanyl are nothing like the effects of arerol so cocaine um doesn't make sense for that reason cocaine doesn't make sense either yep and yet it's still showing up in cocaine again I I don't think that's the dominant place it's showing up I would I would guess that the dominant place it's showing up is in counterfeit opioids so any opioid barbituate any sedative depress but let me tell you what I'm telling my daughter right because this is to me it's a Frontline problem I have a 14-year-old daughter I'm like listen I don't care which friend of yours it is I don't care how much she's amazing if she tells you to try this sleeping pill because she took it the night before and it was really helpful or this will help you study better or this will help you do anything I'm like just come to us we got a better pill for you right like in other words I you can't trust anything because you don't know where she got it she has the best of intentions I'm sure when she's given it to you and by the way she probably took it the night before and was just fine but the people who are making these pills are not exactly up to GMP standards so there you know you just have no idea which pill is getting what dose of fentanyl one thing that Anthony hippolito told me that I simply couldn't believe I had to ask them six times was that some of these pills have like 1 mgram of fentanyl in them now I made the point on the podcast that a 100 milligrams of fentanyl for most people is a hit like they've like I've had fentanyl before I've been in the hospital and you know I've had fentanyl 100 milligrams is like wow that is such a trip why are people dying from one milligram intake respiratory inhibition you can't breathe that shuts the brain stem off well I don't think we can highlight this enough um you know adults are dying kids are dying I met someone just earlier this week who told me her 35-year-old son died of a accidental fental overdose and um and he wasn't at least by her description a drug addict or anything of that sort I think yeah this is this is we're talking about a different game now right so it's like these are kids that have anxiety these are kids that are you know are are are are sort of addressing another issue with these with these pills and that's why I think this this whole concept of deaths of Despair is is is is a really important one but back to your question what do what do accidental deaths primarily amount to for for the Aging population again it is so clear that it is fall related this is where um once you hit 60 65 the the risk of a fall that results either immediately in death you know you hit your head and die going back to like cerebral hemorrhage or it is the straw that basically leads you down the path to death within the next 12 months is astonishingly high it's so high that it's sort of hard to wrap your head around but if you're over 65 and you fall and break your femur or hip so you either crack the femoral neck or the femur itself your 12month mortality the probability you will be dead in 12 months after that break if you're 65 or older depending on the study is about 15 to 30% wow wow so in terms of offsetting the probability of Falls um You' talked a little bit about this um before but I uh you and I have talked a little bit about this before but maybe we could go a little bit deeper um people's ability to jump and land seems to be highly correlated with one's ability to not fall or at least fall and control the fall in a way that leads to no or less severe injury yes so Andy Galpin talked about this on your podcast he talked about it on my podcast what is the Hallmark of aging on the muscle it is atrophy of the type two muscle fiber that's the Hallmark fast twitch fast twitch muscle fiber so if you want to understand what looks different in 50-year-old Peter versus 18-year-old Peter it's not my type one fibers it's my type two fibers it's my fast twitch fibers it's my explosive fibers I mean when I was 18 years old I could vertical jump over 30 in to today I'm lucky if I can vertical jump 24 in and you know and when I'm 60 boy it's like my goal is to be able to vertical jump 60 uh 20 inches when I'm 60 and I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it I've seen some videos of some uh 80-year-old sprinters that are pretty impressive and certainly 80-year-old gymnasts yeah that are impressive I've not seen very many videos of 80-year-olds um dunking basketballs for instance yeah who are not more who are not uh taller than six feet um so so when we lose you know our so so again if you just think about size strength speed we lose speed first we lose speed then strength and the last thing you lose is size so again size is agnostic to fiber right you you could have big type one fibers and still have lots of size they're not going to be that strong and they're certainly not going to be fast so what I I mean like we could go through we could spend hours on this particular topic but I think the most important thing that people need to understand is you cannot age well if you are not doing the type of training that is there to strengthen and delay or minimize the hypertrophy of your type two fibers so everything matters right you have to be doing your Zone 2 you have to be doing you know all of these other things but some component of your training needs to be stressing the type two fibers you have to be doing strength training that t those fibers you have to be doing reactivity training you have to be doing explosive training and ideally some training that involves jumping and Landing well jumping is a very big part of it and Landing is a very big part of another one of what I kind of think of as my four pillars of strength training so one of the pillars of strength training is Ecentric strength which is breaks so um you know you're going to hurt yourself 10 times more likely I'm making that number up by the way I don't know if it's 10 times but experientially it seems to be you are 10 times more likely to hurt yourself stepping off something than stepping onto something right stepping down versus stepping up um because when you step up onto something you are concentrically controlling a muscle when you step down you have to apply the brakes and that's where most people falter much harder to walk downhill than uphill uphill is taxing your cardiovascular system but if you slow down enough you're fine but a lot of people don't have the ability to slow themselves down when they're walking downhill and so when an older person steps off a curb and can't fully stop themselves and that results in a fall so you know I like doing things like a broad jump broad jump is a fun little test set I like to do every once in a while I always want to make sure I can broad jump six feet that's kind of my arbitrary number that I've chosen and the reason is on the takeoff that's a very explosive movement but the landing is just as important if I can't stick that Landing it means I don't have the braks so those are kind of some of the tests I want to be able to to do to make sure that I'm I'm utilizing that system because I do think you know look I've watched I've watched my mom my mom fell gosh probably been about four months ago just fell in a typical way that people fall um by the way it could have happened to anybody it's not like you know my mom walks around and moves around just fine but in this particular day she just tripped on a on a uneven Stone and fell and landed and broke her hand and she really lucky she didn't break her hip and I told her that because my mom was you know probably in her mid-70s and I said look you know if that was your femur I I'd give you a 30% chance of dying in the next year I mean it's just an un those are such difficult to recover from injuries because first of all you're dealing with the immobility of you know the hospitalization and immobility that follows that and the amount of muscle loss that occurs uh could easily be you know four or five pounds of lean tissue lost that for most people that age becomes almost impossible to get back that says nothing about sort of the acute causes of death like a fat embolism that results from a broken femur a blood clot from laying in bed those things are also catastrophic but what happens is a lot of these patients just never get back to the same level of mobility and you know now I think in many ways we're kind of pivoting from what kills you to what ruins your quality of life and we spent so much time talking about what kills you but I think you might as well be dead in some ways if you can't do the things you want to do and if playing with your grandkids or gardening or playing golf or going for a walk with your spouse or think of any of the things that we all do today and take for granted if you can't do those things I don't know you sort of lose the the reason to to be around and often times um the inability to do those things is associated with pain MH that you know which is uh psychologically and obviously physiologically so so distressing um you mentioned the four pillars of Health maybe just list those off for people the well the four pillars of of um longevity through physical uh oh yeah yeah sort sort of the exercise pieces of them yes yeah so strength stability aerobic efficiency and um aerobic Peak output guess aerobic Peak would be Zone that's in my analogy that's the your your zone two is the is how wide the base of your pyramid is and your V2 Max is how tall the peak of the pyramid is so the best Pyramid has a wide base and a high peak so you could have a reasonably wide base and a shallow Peak if you just did zone two training you're you know you're going to get a reasonable Peak but it's not going to be that high you have to do some of that specific training if you just focus on high intensity you might drive up that V2 Max but you're actually going to have a Rel wide narrow aerobic base so think about just maximizing the area of that triangle widest tallest stability and strength stability of course encompasses everything we're talking about in terms of reactivity um you know I I I dedicate a chapter in the book to this concept because it is so foreign to most people um and and for understandable reasons it's just it's not sexy it's not it's the hardest one to train it's the hardest one to understand but it's so so important because it's the thing that I think differentiates people who age well and and people who don't age well and I should um perhaps throw in there please correct me if I'm wrong but also most of the machines that are in typical commercial gyms that allow people who are not um very experience to start doing some resistance training don't really tap into the stability Factor terribly much so while there's value to leg extensions and leg curls and you know chest presses and shoulder presses done with machines certainly uh for a number of reasons and can often be safer than freeways especially for people who are approaching at a later time or are new to the whole thing they don't really lend themselves to um real life stability walking down as you mentioned walking downstairs uh with in the absence of a handrail or um or movements in um uh kind of uh odd planes you know having to step aside to avoid a bicycle right um at an angle as opposed to just moving you know linearly um yeah and by the way a lot of things that don't machines still don't give you that right like I mean doing a deadlift you have to be stable to lift a heavy weight like you would a deadlift without hurting yourself that requires an unbelievable capacity to harness intraabdominal pressure and to be connected you know espec if you're giving a lift 500 pounds off the ground you're stable but that still doesn't prepare you for what you just described so stability is multifaceted and it involves doing a lot of things you know today for example I finished my today was a a cardio Zone 2 day so I did my cardio Zone 2 and I you know had it extra 10 minutes before I needed to kind of get moving and so all I did was step ups for 10 minutes I just did single leg very slow step up and insanely slow step Downs off a box in a gym so 2 second up 4 second Down 2 second up 4 second down with you know and I would do them with ipsilateral loads controlateral loads all sorts of different things and you know basically that's just a stability game for me it's like I'm building that concentric strength in um in a movement where it's easy to cheat um but can I do it without cheating it's terrific and it's terrific that you covered all of that in the book in addition to these other topics so several times during our conversation today you alluded to quality of life and one of my favorite segments in your book indeed the segment in your book that I believe could be it's own entire book of tremendous value is the section on emotional health if you could just share with us a bit of what inspired you to include that section was this uh for instance um based on communication with your patience to what extent it was based on your own life experience and then um maybe we can drill a little bit deeper into what's contained in those chapters and what really constitutes emotional health well I mean I think that that chapter of the book which is a pretty long chapter It's the final chapter as well um is certainly different from all of the others in that there is no uh there's no confusion about expertise right I think in the other chapters I at least try to come across as having some knowledge on the subject matter and uh I'm writing them most often as you know quote unquote the doctor right whereas I think that last chapter is is much more about an experiential side of uh my knowledge acquisition and and therefore really it comes across more as a patient um and I think you're right I think that that's a chapter that initially was resisted by all other parties involved in the book so my co-author um my editor everybody else sort of felt like this is interesting but it's a it's a separate topic if you want to write about this you should write another book about it but it doesn't really belong in this book um I disagreed for two reasons and ultimately I guess my opinion prevailed uh the first is I didn't want to write another book so it just that you know not including this in this book to then write about in another book was not something I was interested in doing but I think more importantly I do think that this book is about much more than how long you live and while we have talked about and will talk about uh in the book that is you know how cognitive and physical health are just as gerine to quality of life as they are to length of life this other piece of emotional health you know it's potentially the most important of them all it's also the hardest to Define but without it none of this other stuff matters right so there's you know infinite lifespan if if if if you're miserable means nothing might even be worse it's that would be a curse right you could argue how could you punish somebody the most allow them to live forever and be miserable is there a um there's a Greek god tonus yeah tonus yeah he was granted immortality uh it's a bit different he was granted immortality but without a health span basically so he aged forever Dreadful yeah and this would be Dreadful too right and and I feel like why did I need to write about this well I think that you know this is probably my greatest struggle I think um you know way at the outside of the podcast you asked me kind of like what are the obstacles to longevity and that got us down a path of some very um black and white things but when I look at a patient I create a dashboard and the dashboard is what are all the things that are a threat to every component of your longevity both lifespan and health span we talked about a bunch of those things so how what is what is your risk for atherosclerosis and what are we doing about it what is your risk for cancer what are we doing about it what is your risk for neurod degeneration what are we doing about it what is your risk for accidental death what are we doing about it what is your risk for physical decline what are we doing about it and one of those things is what is your risk of emotional health or poor emotional health and what are we doing about it um so when I do that exercise for me which I've I do right I mean I I can I have that spreadsheet laid out for me and I know where my factors line up and interestingly despite my family history being horrible for atherosclerosis it's like sixth on my list because I mean basically I intervened early I have a clear understanding of the pathophysiology and I'm doing everything to the maximum so I'm actually very confident I will die with and not from atherosclerosis but the top thing on my list is actually emotional health that's the one that is the hardest for me to manage and it's e it's the easiest to get out of balance and it creates the most pain in my life so that's that's a long answer to why I felt this needed to be in here well in the book you go into um very honest detail about some of your Journeys through and challenges with uh emotional health and paths to overcoming those maybe we'll get into those a bit but before we do uh how should we Define emotional health um this to me seems like one of the most difficult areas to calibrate oneself um like even just measuring emotion is tricky uh language is the dissection tool for um psychologist psychiatrist and indeed for all of us you know how are you doing today great or I'm miserable or I'm depressed I mean it means such different things to different people obviously suicide being the far end of of um we presume misery there are instances of manic suicide but you know um depressive misery but uh setting that aside I mean how should we evaluate think about and communicate emotional health to ourselves and to to the relevant people that could potentially help us yeah well you're right it's it's it's it's it's it's very difficult right and and so much of what goes into this book is about things that are much easier to quantify uh it's very you know I could sit here and talk for days about all the ways we quantify from the histologic to the gross of each of these diseases you know genetically all of these other things um with emotional health it's it's far more vague and I don't even attempt to come up with a definition right I can tell you things that make up components of it so connectivity with others just seems to be an inescapable part of this so the ability to maintain healthy relationships and attachments to other people having and by the way these are in no particular order having a sense of purpose uh being able to regulate your emotions experiencing fulfillment experiencing satisfaction um all of the things matter and I think that for many of us if we're taking an honest appraisal of ourselves we'll notice that we have deficits in these areas um being present by the way that's something that may have been less of an issue hundred years ago than it is today so I think you know for certainly for me being present is very difficult it's not my default state I don't know that it's the default state for most people truthfully um but I'm very often predisposed with thoughts about the future occasionally thoughts about the past but it's much more often kind of thoughts about the future and planning and thinking about what I need to do and what do I want to do next and never really being satisfied with anything that's happening the moment um so I have to work hard to kind of overcome those things and I'm sure you can appreciate this but when you are present you generally are in a much better frame of mind yeah there's an interesting study I think it was initially published by Dan Gilbert's lab one of these long-term hap happiness studies uh that was published in Science magazine um uh that pinged people for their level of Happiness unhappiness presence or lack of presence multiple times throughout the day this was in the early years of smartphone so this is around 2010 2011 so the technology wasn't as good as is now but it was good enough to do this in a very large number of people I forget how many but certainly more than 10,000 and pro that number is I'm stating it intentionally low and what they found was regardless of whether or not people were doing something they enjoyed or not boring to them or not the degree of presence to what they were doing was a stronger predictor of their happiness in that moment and overall than was anything else um and also a pretty fairly rare feature for most people so seems like it's something that we do need to work at perhaps nowadays as you point out more than um we perhaps had to in our ancestral past I'm a little bit surprised that um uh you say that you find it hard to be present because you strike me as somebody that um is not just willing but has a a strong um almost reflex toward you know Drilling in you know observing the the Contour of something and then really drilling into it and and really getting to the the guts of of most everything that that interests you so you strike me as somebody who's very present and I guess maybe this gets back to this but they're not exclusive right I mean I think so for example I'll notice that sometimes if I'm playing with my kids especially my boys because they're younger right and and playing with them is really being in their world like if I'm with my daughter we can be doing things that are kind of mutually like you know we'll do things together that I would probably do by myself or she would do by herself but with my boys it's generally doing something I wouldn't otherwise be doing and I'm if I'm paying attention to it I'm constantly amazed at how after five minutes of searching through a bin for just the right Lego piece that we want to do to build this one little thing like my mind will start thinking about something else like oh my God like I got to go I didn't email that dude back and I got to do this and I got to do this and I got to do this and I gotta do this and I just get into I got to do I got to do I got to do and it's like dude you've only been here for five minutes why don't you just find the Lego piece that you need to finish building that thing over there that is this beautiful moment that you're not going to have many of right there's a very finite number of these moments you're going to have um so you want to save for every one of them so again I don't think I'm alone in that I think a lot of parents for example can relate to that and that that's that that's literally just one of many different things and by the way wouldn't have said that that was my greatest challenge either but it's something that requires I think deliberate attention what you're alluding to is a a challenge with um holding a single um time perception or perception of time uh one of the most remarkable things to me about the the human brain is our ability to be present or think about the past or the future or the present in the future and we can occupy different time BS and in a recent um unrecorded conversation of our hours uh you showed me something that uh I've seen before but for some reason this time it had a profound impact on me which is that you have a chart of the number of weeks that you're going to live and you mark them off one week at a time we were talking about this in the context of uh major life decisions um and it illustrates the fact that we need a a chart such a chart that we can't really move through our day being present to the the beauty of working on Lego with our kid while also paying attention to the fact that wow this is week number whatever you know 600 in the or you know X number of weeks of one's life so that that um ability to uh contract and dilate our time perception is is marvelous but it's also um a double-edged sword because it's it's what takes us out of what's meaningful in the Moment One sort of has to wonder then whether or not our our um challenges in being present um you know I guess the the psychoanalyst maybe we need to or psychiatrist maybe we need to ask our Paul Ki uh um who you know and I know um and respect greatly um whether or not this is some um you know subconscious uh refusal of of our own mortality or something right that if we were to really contemplate our mortality on a regular basis not just when we're marking off the weeks of the poster we wouldn't be able to be present because it's kind of overwhelming right I don't know I mean doesn't I I feel like the literature says that people who spend more time contemplating their own mortality are actually more at peace uh kind of a little bit of the exposure therapy idea um and so so I'm not sure it's an unhealthy thing to be aware of your mortality I suspect it's it's it's helpful in as much as you accept it right and you and you feel like you have some agency over parts of it right like I I don't think I have nearly enough agency over the length of my life I think I've got five to 10 years of wiggle room that I can extract if I do if I do all of the things that I've written about in that book I I I bet I can stretch my life out 10 to 15 years at the maximum call it 10 over what would have happened if I didn't do those things maybe it's more but but you know that it depends on what we're comparing it to right from being reasonable to maybe being a little bit you know hyperfunctioning maybe it's 10 years but where I know I have a much greater agency is on is on quality and for me now a big part of that is in terms of quality of relationships I think that's a big thing and I I think for most people that's that's that's what I hope this chapter does is it it is it sort of allows more people to kind of take an appraisal of that and ask that question which is before too late am I living my life more for my resume virtues or for my eulogy virtues to borrow from uh David Brooks's work the road to character which I I I talk about as being kind of one of the many aha moments that I had during this journey yeah and there again thank you you recommended the road to character to me I do an annual solo uh Wilderness trip and I listen to it during the drive to that trip and on that trip and it's a um it's a I would just say it's it's a truly important book for everyone to listen to it's really quite um quite impressive what are the things that you do on a regular B let's say on a daily basis to try and enforce um forgive the word but enforce emotional well-being and health in terms of relationships because as you pointed out it's not reflexive for for everybody and that doesn't make them bad people it I think it does have to do with this um challenge in balancing expectations of work and other things and and for some people a more inherent selfishness and for some people um they aren't selfish enough right I know plenty of people that are running around trying to serve everybody and then their health is crashing or their mental health is crashing so it can cut any which way or always ways what what sorts of practices do you incorporate or just even thoughts within your own mind do you use charts and lists I mean you're very regimented about your workouts um building grip strength uh Ecentric um zone two e Centric training Zone 2 Etc why wouldn't we also um script out the things to pay attention to each morning and day as a list of to-dos well it it I have done those things right so so certainly you know and I write about in the book I've gone away a couple of times right so I I in 2017 I spent two weeks at a facility in Kentucky in 2020 I spent three weeks at a facility in Arizona um and on the back end of that facility 3 years ago when I got out I mean I had uh I had a very clear list of daily things I needed to do and so so at that point for about six months following getting out of that stint of rehab I mean I was I mean God the list of behaviors I was doing every single day I mean twice a day standing in front of the mirror reading my list of affirmations writing in my journal every single day I had therapy every single day I mean all of that stuff was highly regimented you know today I would say there's no one single behavior that is quote unquote mandated as part of my recovery but perhaps the most important thing that does come up every day is um being mindful of and acting on as quickly as possible every time I uh do something damaging to a relationship so um I would say that like if you compare Formula 1 one of my my favorite sport by far if you compare Formula 1 40 years ago to Formula 1 today the difference is not in the number of accidents that takes place the difference is in the fatality of those accidents there are just as many if not more accidents in Formula 1 today the difference is nobody dies in those accidents the cars are so much safer they're engineered first for safety second for performance it used to be the reverse and that's why there was a day when every second or third weekend a driver was killed it's catastrophic to imagine what took place between the mid-60s and about the mid 80s in Formula 1 and similarly I would say that the frequency with which I have an interaction with a person who matters to me that is not the best interaction it could be is only slightly less than what it was five years ago the difference is the severity of that is much lower and more importantly and most importantly the length of time between when I screw up and when I make amends is infinitely shorter right it went from being I would never make amends to if I'm a dick to my wife I usually am trying to rectify it within a few minutes or at most a couple of hours and that and so it's it's really you know one thing I learned throughout this journey was if if you hold yourself up to this goal of I have to be perfect I have to be the perfect dad I have to be the perfect husband I have to be the perfect friend you're going to set yourself up for failure because you know you're just not going to be perfect but if instead you can say what I'm going to be perfect about is repairing damage when I cause it that's what matters you know the other day um I yelled at my son for something it was a while ago actually before I lost my voice so you know I don't know he was just doing something and he was wrong you know like it was like he he did something I told him 150 times not to do and I yelled at him and punished him like you know but I was way too harsh like cuz basically I basically the first 27 times he did it I didn't respond and then when I finally did it's like I blew a gasket right but what I realized is yeah I you could say well maybe it hurts a child to do that but I think it hurts them way less if you can immediately go and repair and say hey buddy daddy was a little harsh in that I'm sorry I didn't mean to yell at you like that but what you did is wrong and you're not going to get to go out and play right now as a result of it but I love you very much and I want us to do better I want it I want you to do better in not doing this thing and I want to do better and not yelling at you when you do this thing so it's not this not rocket science right but I just think I used to live my life in a way where all I did was break and never fix it so you're living in a house where everything is broken whereas now I still break things but now I clean up the mess and oh like all of a sudden the house is better what is your process for when there's a need for repair but um you feel that it wasn't you it was somebody else's um error or potential error so you um very humbly uh Express how you go about repairing um your your errors um but what about situations where um a loved one a cooworker you feel screwed up or wronged you right as many people do we all do from time to time feel this way um do you approach them uh and try and repair the the situation um because there's a little bit less or far less control when um you know then the situation you described and by the way the situation you described I think is a perfect one because um I think uh we all screw up and so the answer to this second question is sort of the answer to the first which is if everyone did what you were doing the world will be truly a far better place but not everyone's doing what you're doing so if some if you feel wronged um assuming that wrong was it you know wasn't sociopathically motivated what is your process for going about repairing a relationship fracture like that again this assumes that this is a relationship that matters right so in every interaction you're you're only really able to optimize around one thing and you have to decide is this one thing that I'm optimizing around the relationship or is it the outcome there are other things to optimize around but you understand that those are different right and maybe you could elaborate on that a little bit I think I get it but I but flush out a bit if I'm at the uh if I'm at the market and I'm trying if I'm at if I'm trying to buy a new car and I'm sitting there talking to the car salesman uh that's a relationship that's an interaction now I want to buy this car for as little as possible and he wants to sell the car for as much as possible well in that interaction my relationship with him means nothing let's assume I don't know this guy and he's not like my best friend I'm optimizing everything around the outcome so everything I do in negotiating and in interacting with him personally is based on getting the best outcome for me it's very selfish right nothing wrong with that by the way he's doing the same exactly but now for example pretend that you are the car salesman and you're one of my closest friends and it's your dealership like it's your money like it's you know you can't sell this thing to me at a loss I don't want you to do that because I I want you to be able to make money and similarly like you care about me and you don't want me to overpay for this so now we're negotiating and we're both trying to optimize for an outcome but the our relationship also matters it's a very different negotiation at that point and so I think I always try to ask myself this question when I'm having some interpersonal conflict which is what am I optimizing for so you know if if I'm having a quarrel with my wife I have to remind myself that the outcome is the objective or outcome is not necessarily the top priority you know being right all the time which is my default State it's just to be a bull in a china shop it's to be authoritarian instead of authoritative and that's that doesn't work if the relationship matters so to answer your question the first thing I'm going to ask myself if I'm trying if I feel slighted is what is the nature of the relationship is it even worth trying to do something about this and presumably you're asking the question because the lens is yes this is someone who you you care about more than in just a transactional way you know usually what I've realized is I can't try to approach the situation without fully understanding myself and that takes a while so generally and this is where you know I still one to two times a week I'm still working with a therapist I have to kind of try to figure it out on my own and then usually bounce it off a therapist and say well I think this is why I'm upset about this I I think that when this person did this or said this I felt this first of all am I am I correct in what I felt because remember sometimes you might at least for me this was the case I would just feel anger in response to every interaction but what I didn't realize was that anger was really just another emotion that was superimposed on top of hurt or superimposed on top of fear or superimposed on top of shame or superimposed on top of something else but I didn't know how to articulate any of those other emotions so the only thing I could really articulate was anger so if anger is the only thing I know and anger is the only response I see it's not very helpful it's not very insightful so that's that's a big part of it is being able to deconstruct what I'm feeling oh what I really feel is loss or what I really feel is abandonment right now and that sometimes takes a while to figure out at least for me like I I'm still you know I'm only a few years into this journey and maybe other people figured these things out when were in their 20s and so they're veterans they can do this more more naturally but that's step one I if I don't really understand what's going on I can't even begin to try to approach this person to say this is how I feel um this is you know how do you feel and and and what are we optimizing for in this interaction well I certainly know you are not alone in this this sense that it's a process and it takes a lot of time and um and on a case-by Case basis can take a lot of time to figure out you know exactly what one is feeling I think it really um goes back to the the coess of language as a way to sort one's feelings it was actually your other because we mentioned Paul Conti who was one of your um Stanford Medical School um uh classmates but another previous guest on this podcast who was also one of your medical school classmates um do Dr Carl daero right psychiatrist and bioengineer of of phenomenal um stature and doing amazing things in the world who said you know most of the time we have no idea how other people feel even though we think we do and most of the time we don't even know how we feel I mean our ability to really know what we're really feeling is terrible um and yet we recognize the the broad the broad bins I'm pissed off I'm super happy I'm relaxed I'm tired I mean just think about how coarse that uh that language is for that for all the nuance and all the underlying things conscious and subconscious that could be driving an emotional state it's really it's really quite unbelievable yeah beyond the veilance that was you know positive versus negative that was about the extent of my emotional language until you know somewhat recently well it strikes me you've come a very long way maybe you could share with us a little bit about what you learned on these um what you called Retreats or um I mean in in the book chapter you describe um deliberately going off to uh a treatment center U multiple treatment centers over time to really drill into this process of understanding oneself better and how one's current state of emotional processing and emotional stability are influencing relationships and the key importance of that what was there any kind of overriding um theme for you for instance could you trace back to specific events or themes of childhood that made a lot of it make sense um or is is it um far more uh nuanced than that well you know the first thing I would say is I wish I could tell you that this was a very um deliberate and wonderful choice that I just decided I'm going to go on a little you know self-healing Journey but unfortunately that was not the case uh in both cases in 2017 and in 2020 um I ver I I I was as close to having no choice in the matter as one can have so uh both of these experiences represented um total Rock Bottom moments in my life uh so the these would have been the two lowest points in my life uh for different reasons but but they were nevertheless the two absolute low points in my life and I would say you know in the first instance I I guess I could have chosen not to go but um I would have lost everything that mattered in my life at that point um and had you know our good friend Paul kti basically telling me um that I needed to do this that I really needed to do this and in the second situation though completely different circumstances you might think how can one person in just a span of three years find themselves in in a situation where they almost without having any choice in the matter have to go away uh to a place where you're you're basically locked up without a phone for you know three weeks and you're doing 12 to 13 hours of therapy a day um so nothing about this was was something I wanted to do nothing about this was pleasant um I would describe these as the most difficult things I've ever done in my life Bar None and I've done some difficult things in my life but they've always been physically difficult I love doing physically difficult things uh but this was emotionally the equivalent of for me um you know climbing K2 and swimming the English Channel in the same month you know something that just I could you couldn't fathom um so so with that said yes I learned a lot and I learned that people like me can be overly analytical and that that hyper analytical nature can lead you astray when you think that your intellect is giving you a fact-based explanation for a set of circumstances and you rationalize them away well this happened to me when I was a kid but you know like I get it and it's not really a problem and as a result of that you know it's uh it's these are actually some positive things that came out of that experience and and and I think the real aha moment in my Journey which occurred um on a on a day that I remember very well was the day I finally dropped that I dropped that um that rationalization and I allowed myself to experience what a child would experience in that moment and then understood what the implications are for a child going through these things and I think that was that was really the first time in my life I ever accepted emotionally something that I had intellectually always said yeah it doesn't really matter I mean it's just you know that's just life and those things happen and lots of worse things happen to lots of people and and that's okay um and I think it it's not that once I emotionally accepted this I became a victim it wasn't at all it just finally allowed me to realize oh I can let that go now like I I don't have to I I don't have to I don't have to be a slave to the adaptations that came from that I can I can I can surrender that's um beautiful and um and inspiring to me I think that um yeah there's this uh incredible ability that the human brain has to script a story and to compare to other people's circumstances and as you said you know rationalize what are essentially emotional traumas of or physical traumas um from the perspective of the adult but um if I know one thing for sure and make it very clear I'm not a clinician but is that the brain doesn't um discard of any circuitry we repurpose the same circuitry we used as children as as adults and so the ability to go back to that and to and to par but as you as you point out not from a um from an intellectual stand standpoint but from an emotional standpoint seems to be the the really hard work do you do that on a regular basis no not not at all um it's been done a handful of times um it's been exhausting it's it's very difficult it's it's it's I don't know if this is the right word I would almost describe it as emotionally violent um and it's it's it's not something I need to revisit often truthfully I I think that um yeah it's um it's it's been done a finite number of times and I think I've captured so much so much value from it that that there are lots of other things I continue to do I mean I you know I I use a system called dcal behavioral therapy that is a regular part of the therapy that I do um but I don't have to go back to my childhood I don't have to go back to uncovering and and re-exploring a lot of that stuff um I I I've I've I've learned the lessons and now it's really about practicing the skills I know I know what I want now and I and I know you know you talk about plasticity I'll share one example which I know I wrote about in the book but but just for for folks listening that you'll appreciate so I you know just one of the one of the Hallmarks of my existence has always been you know just a an insane amount of anger and rage it's it's been there as long as I've known so I don't have a conscious memory of not having rage right so earliest memories of life when I'm five years old I have rage like you can't believe and it's it's a problem all my life so as a teenager if I go more than two weeks without punching a hole in the wall of our house it's a miracle I mean I am so good at drywall you can't can't believe how good I am for all the stuff I have to repair around our house like I'm breaking Windows I'm breaking it just doesn't like I just and so in a way and and of course I rationalized how much boxing saved my life because I had this amazing outlet for my rage right if you I got to basically exercise six hours a day I'm hitting punching bags in people all day long and it's just a beautiful outlet that keeps me out of jail um um and a big part of that rage was inward right so it's it's not rocket science to understand that a person who has that much hatred for everyone has an enormous amount for themselves and so one of the things I didn't realize was happening was what my inner monologue was because as you can appreciate your inner monologue is so frequent and ubiquitous and present that it's easy to almost forget that it's there I mean that's the that's the that's the sort of uh dangerous part about it right is kind of the you know the David Foster Wallace this is water thing the fish are swimming through water the water is everywhere they don't even realize they're in water you don't unrealized you don't realize the subconscious stream of thoughts that constantly flow but eventually I became aware of just what that selft talk was and it is it was no longer the case it was the angriest the most violent selft talk you can imagine I mean it was like there is no mistake that I could make that was anything other than my perfect perfect standard that didn't result in what I would call my inner Bobby KN going ballistic so it just didn't matter like it it sounds silly under it didn't matter if I didn't perfectly cook a steak if I didn't perfectly nail something I was doing if if if I didn't do anything that was perfect at what I described as match grade perfect I mean I would want to beat myself to a pulp and I would scream at myself I mean it just it's it's again it's hard to describe and I I hope that most people listening to this don't understand what that feels like well it became very clear that that had to change because when you are when you are that when you hate yourself that much by definition you are going to be an insufferable prick to everybody else like because you're you're just that's going to spill into how you interact with the world so I you know was working with a therapist who was one of the people who was sending me to this place in Arizona and basically it became clear that you know they they they they they they proposed that I could shed this trait if I was willing to do certain amount of work and I was like there's no chance like I'm 47 years old this is the only way I've ever interacted with myself how in the world could this be undone it would take another 40 years to undo this and they're like no no no here's this exercise you're going to do so the exercise was every single time I did something where I would have that selft talk I would have to immediately stop myself and pretend that it wasn't me that just did that but it was one of my closest friends and instead I would audibly speak to that person there was nobody else there but speak to that person as though they are the one that made the mistake and I were to I was to record that on my phone so if I'm out there shooting my bow and arrow and I'm don't get a bullseye instead of screaming at myself I have to say oh imagine it's my buddy Jr who just missed that shot what would I say to him pick up the phone or you know pull out the phone and say of course something different and of course what I would say in that situation was much Kinder I mean infinitely Kinder it's like I'm saying it to my closest friend I'm going to say it in a very kind way and I had to take uh a copy of that audio and text it to my therapist oh wow yeah talk about vulnerability I was all on board this practice until you mentioned that at which point and and I trust my therapist uh um to a very deep level but I thought wow that that's a that's a mountain well this you know this poor person got a lot of text messages a lot lot of audio files but here's the part that just blows my mind it only took I don't know I I can't remember exactly I have to go back to look at my journals only took about four months to get rid of Bobby Knight like you know again we we had kind of a mental model for what this looked like which was Bobby Knight was the chairman of the board he sat in the boardroom and nobody else got to talk and for those that don't know Bobby Knight had a terrible temper yeah yeah the worst right this is the guy that was throwing chairs across the basketball court level 11 y out of 10 and and all of a sudden like we got to the point where Bobby Knight is not even in the boardroom anymore in fact I as I say this today like I don't really remember what he sounded like I mean it's it's amazing to me and and I've had some really amazing opportunities to bring him back like it's not like I'm making fewer mistakes right it's not like I'm better today than I was three years ago at all the things that I do I'm not I'm actually probably worse in many regards uh but the difference is you know I can communicate with myself I think I can say this I think I can say lovingly right and and maybe not as lovingly as some people can I I still think I'm probably maybe just a little higher standard with myself than maybe I need to be at times but but I'm just not beating myself up like I used to and I think by extension I'm beating other people up a lot less well I don't I don't know the extent to which your internal narrative reflects the uh narrative that others have about you but first of all I want to thank you for sharing um what you just shared I think as a practical step it it um first of all it's one I've never heard of before um but certainly represents this incredible phenomenon of neuroplasticity because four months sounds like a bit of time and yet you were 47 years old that's 47 years of accumulated um just absolutely rating selft talk is what it sounds like um so it's something that people can can think about for their own for their own purposes um and their own challenges also you know I've read the book twice now and and love it as as I put in my um endorsement of it um I think it's not just informative but it's indeed important because it centers on so many of the key actionable items related to vit health span and lifespan Vitality longevity whatever people want to call these things that are essential but also this the section on emotional health was um absolutely profound for me it inspired a huge number of changes um and the book as a whole represents a a a very important contribution to everybody there there are numerous points and I would say every chapter is applicable to everybody and there are very few books out there like that um so I want to thank thank you for that and especially for including the section on emotional health and especially for sharing what you did today because I think it doesn't just take a a bit of vulnerability but a ton of vulnerability and humility to be able to share what you just shared and my only request or wish is that you also hopefully internalize the tremendous gift that you're giving everybody through coming on podcasts like this doing your own podcast writing the book you know I look out on the landscape of um front-facing public facing um Health out there and uh you sit uh not alone but in a unique stance as the the medical doctor that I do believe that um people trust the very most because of the fact that you have that intense rigor your I wouldn't even say your desire your um absolute obsession with measurement and and precision um many of the things that a moment ago you were pointing to as as potentially you know hazards for your emotion life but that serve all of us the general public um so preciously and so with it just incalculable value so I hope that internalizes as well maybe uh it'll even weave into your self talk maybe I need to send you a script every day but in all seriousness I also want to thank you for taking the time today and um even though it's a personal thing I I really want to thank you for your um being an amazing colleague to me in the podcast space in the in the health and Medicine space whatever that is and also um just an an incredible friend you've been a tremendous source of support and guidance in every one of the domains that we talked about today and many more and again I just want to say that this emotional health component I I agree with you I think it's um it's not just vital I think it's it's the the most vital of all of them so um you've just made numerous important contributions and I'm just want to thank you for sharing you clearly put everything you have into everything you do so thank you Peter Andrew thank you I really appreciate you uh making the time for us to sit down and talk in a long form way which I enjoy and um yeah it's it's it's an it's an honor and it means a lot to me that you have have read it twice and that you've appreciated it and and uh and praised uh praised it as you have thank you thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Peter AA I hope you learned as much and enjoyed the conversation as much as I did please also check out Dr aa's new book which is releasing on March 28th 2023 entitled outlive the science and art of Longevity if you're learning from Andor enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both apple and Spotify and on both apple and Spotify you can also leave us up to a festar review if you have questions for us or comments about the podcast or topics you'd like me to cover or guests that you'd like me to include on the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments in addition please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast on various episodes of The hubman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep supporting hormones improving focus and so on the hubman Lab podcast is proud to have partnered with momentous supplements if you'd like to see the supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast you can go to live momentous spelled o us liv.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media it's huberman lab on Instagram Twitter Facebook and Linkedin and at all of those places I cover science and science-based tools some of which overlap with the contents of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content covered on the huberman Lab podcast again it's hubman lab on all social media platforms if you haven't already subscribed to the hubman Lab podcast neural network newsletter it's a monthly newsletter that includes free toolkits for things like tool for sleep how to enhance the quality and duration of your sleep toolkit for Focus toolkit for neuroplasticity toolkit for deliberate cold exposure heat exposure and summaries of podcast episodes all of those toolkits can be found by going to hubman lab.com go to the menu scroll down to newsletter and simply give us your email we do not share your email with anybody and again the newsletters and toolkits are completely zero cost and you will also find some PDF examples of previous toolkits again that's huberman lab.com thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Peter IA and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 218 ---
Video ID: 7R3-3HR6-u4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7R3-3HR6-u4
Title: Dr. Satchin Panda: Intermittent Fasting to Improve Health, Cognition & Longevity | Huberman Lab
Published: 2023-03-13 12:00:07 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Satchin Panda, PhD, professor and the director of the Regulatory Biology Laboratories at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies. We discuss his lab’s discovery that “time-restricted eating” (TRE) aka intermittent fasting, is beneficial effects for metabolic health and longevity. Dr. Panda explains how TRE, and also longer fasts, can positively impact obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular health, age-related chronic diseases, and improve mood and cognitive performance. He also describes how the timing of eating, light exposure and exercise that ~50% of all people engage in, negatively impacts their health and explains how specific simple adjustments to these can positively shift their subjective feelings of health and biomarkers of cardiovascular function, glucose regulation and metabolism. We discuss how our circadian behaviors, which include our patterns of eating, sleeping and socializing, have an enormous impact on our biology, mood and health and how by simply confining our calorie consumption to a semi-regular daily window, can positively impact our physical health, mental health and longevity.

#HubermanLab #IntermittentFasting

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
HVMN: https://hvmn.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Satchin Panda
Salk Institute: https://www.salk.edu/scientist/satchidananda-panda 
Panda Lab: https://panda.salk.edu 
Publications: https://panda.salk.edu/publications 
Support Dr. Panda’s Research: https://panda.salk.edu/giving 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/SatchinPanda
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/satchin.panda 

Other Resources
My Circadian Clock app: https://mycircadianclock.org 
Ontime Health app: https://getontimehealth.com 

Articles
Revival of light signalling in the postmortem mouse and human retina: https://go.nature.com/3ZWnGro
Circadian alignment of early onset caloric restriction promotes longevity in male C57BL/6J mice: https://bit.ly/3ywruE3
Time-restricted eating with or without low-carbohydrate diet reduces visceral fat and improves metabolic syndrome: A randomized trial: http://bit.ly/3LeBdqg
Embers of society: Firelight talk among the Ju/’hoansi Bushmen: https://bit.ly/3l65LzK
Circadian Entrainment to the Natural Light-Dark Cycle across Seasons and the Weekend: http://bit.ly/3LhsWlm
Feasibility of time-restricted eating and impacts on cardiometabolic health in 24-h shift workers: The Healthy Heroes randomized control trial: http://bit.ly/3FeR1FC
Access to Electric Light Is Associated with Shorter Sleep Duration in a Traditionally Hunter-Gatherer Community: https://bit.ly/3LivSyj
Daily Eating Patterns and Their Impact on Health and Disease: https://bit.ly/3YGIHW6

Books
The Circadian Code: https://amzn.to/3FixpAv
The Circadian Diabetes Code: https://amzn.to/3FiU7Zm

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Satchin Panda
00:03:02 Sponsors: HVMN, Eight Sleep, Thesis, Momentous
00:07:24 Time-Restricted Eating (TRE), Calorie Restriction (CR) & Health 
00:14:38 Mealtimes & Circadian Clock
00:21:34 Circadian Rhythm, Meal Anticipation, Digestion
00:25:28 Breaking a Fast, Burning Fat 
00:32:49 Sponsor: AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:34:04 CR, Time Restricted Eating, Circadian Rhythm & Longevity
00:47:20 Gender, Hormones & CR; Relative Energy Deficient in Sports (REDS)
00:52:40 Physical Activity, Nutrition & Feeding Window
00:59:04 Nutrition Timing, Quality & Quantity; Low- Carbohydrate Diet 
01:03:00 Caffeine, Nighttime Socialization, Fire, Breakfast
01:15:07 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:16:20 Circadian Rhythm, “Night Owls” & Genetics 
01:26:37 Morning vs. Nighttime Discussions, “Me Time” 
01:30:08 Light Sensitivity & “Night Owls”; Puberty, Melatonin
01:36:05 Shift Workers, Health & Disease
01:45:43 Artificial Lights, Young Adults & Sleep, Metabolic Dysfunction 
01:50:59 Firefighters, Sleep & TRE; Cardiovascular Health, Blood Glucose
02:05:18 Shift Workers & Sleep; Alcohol & Caffeine
02:09:15 12- Hour Feeding Window for Adults & Children, Sleep
02:22:10 Meal Timing
02:25:20 “Complete Fast”, Longer Fasts, Physical Health & Mental Health
02:28:12 “Fat Fasting”, Blood Glucose & Insulin 
02:31:57 Fasting, Metformin, Rapamycin & Longevity; Human Applicability?
02:39:14 Circadian Rhythm & Metabolism
02:41:36 Ontime Health App, Circadian Clock App
02:46:17 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Sponsors, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today my guest is Dr Sachin Panda Dr Sachin panda is a professor and director of the regulatory biology laboratory at the Salk Institute of biological studies his laboratory has made numerous important contributions that impact mental health physical health and human performance for instance his laboratory discovered the neurons in the eye and neurons within the brain that regulate our so-called circadian rhythm circadian rhythms are 24-hour rhythms and everything from gene expression to the overall functioning of tissues our levels of mood and alertness our ability to sleep appetite and much much more in addition over the last decade Dr Panda's laboratory has made critical discoveries in terms of how our patterns of eating over time impact our biology and our health in particular his laboratory Pioneer discoveries related to so-called intermittent fasting also sometimes referred to as time restricted feeding today Dr Panda and I discuss how our circadian behaviors everything from when we wake up to when we view light to when we avoid viewing light to when we eat and what we eat and when we socialize and how we socialize impacts our biology and our psychology energy and how all of that has a strong impact on our health during today's discussion you will learn how restricting your feeding to specific periods within each 24 hour cycle or perhaps even exploring longer patterns of fasting and eating Cycles can impact everything from the health of your liver to your gut to your brain and how all of that impacts things like mood and your ability to perform cognitive work indeed today's discussion goes deep into all aspects of intermittent fasting AKA time restricted feeding we talk about the basic science as well as the recent clinical trials that have explored time-restricted feeding in a diverse range of people including men women children people with diabetes people who are otherwise healthy and much much more I'm quite aware that intermittent fasting is a topic of much debate these days we go deep into that debate and by the end of today's discussion you can be certain that you will have learned all the latest and all the details all all made very clear to you thanks to the incredible expertise Discovery and clear communication of Dr Panda as some of you may already know Dr Panda has authored several important books on the topic of intermittent fasting and how it can benefit various aspects of Health those books include the Circadian code and a more recent book the Circadian diabetes code both of which we've provided links to in the show note captions in addition if any of you are interested in learning more about Dr Panda's work including seeing his Publications and reading those Publications we're supporting his laboratory you can do that by going to his laboratory website which we have also linked in the show note captions before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is hvmn Ketone IQ hvmn Ketone IQ is a supplement that increases blood ketones I want to be clear that I am not following a ketogenic diet most people fall into this category they are not following a ketogenic diet they are omnivores and they do eat carbohydrates so their standard fuel source for the brain and body is not ketones however I found that by taking Ketone IQ which we know increases blood ketones I can achieve much better focus for longer periods of time for any kind of cognitive work and much greater energy levels for exercise especially if I'm going into that exercise fasted and find myself a little bit hungry when I start that exercise this is no surprise we know that ketones are the brains and body's preferred fuel source even if you're not following a ketogenic diet so in other words I and many other people are now starting to leverage endogenous ketones as a fuel source for the brain and body and yet we are not following a ketogenic diet and of course if you are following a ketogenic diet Ketone IQ will further allow you to increase your blood ketones as a source of brain and body fuel if you'd like to try Ketone IQ you can go to hvmn.com huberman to save 20 off your order again that's hvmn.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity as I've talked about before on the huberman Lab podcast there is a critical relationship between sleep and body temperature that is in order to fall asleep and stay deeply asleep your body temperature needs to drop by about one to three degrees and in order to wake up in the morning and feel alert your body temperature needs to increase by about one to three degrees the problem with most people's sleeping environment is that even if you make the room cool the actual environment that you sleep on that is your mattress and underneath your covers is hard to regulate in terms of temperature with eight sleep regulating the temperature of that sleeping environment becomes incredibly easy in fact you can change the temperature of that environment across the night making it a little bit cool at the beginning of the night even cooler still a few hours into your sleep which really helps getting into very deep sleep and then warming it as you approach warnings so that you wake up feeling most alert I've been sleeping on an eight-sleep mattress cover for over a year now and it is completely transformed my sleep if you'd like to try eight sleep you can go to eightsleep.com huberman to to save up to 150 off their pod 3 cover eight sleep currently ships in the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again that's eightsleep.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by thesis thesis makes custom nootropics now I am not a fan of the word nootropics because it translates to Smart drugs and as a neuroscientist what I can tell you is that you have circuits in your brain that allow you to focus you have circuits in your brain that allow you to be creative you have circuits in your brain that allow you to task switch and on and on in other words there is no specific brain circuit or even circuits for being quote unquote smart thesis understands this and has developed nootropics that are customized to different types of mental operations what do I mean by that well they have formulas that can put your brain into a state of increased Clarity or Focus or creativity or that can give you more overall energy for things like physical exercise I often take the thesis Clarity formula prior to law long bouts of cognitive work and I'll use their energy formula prior to doing any kind of really intense physical exercise if you'd like to try your own personalized nootropic starter kit go online to takethesis.com huberman you'll take a brief three-minute quiz and thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month again that's takethesis.com huberman and if you use the code Huber minute checkout you'll get 10 off your order the huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with momentous supplements to find the supplements we discussed on the huberman Lab podcast you can go to live momentous spelled ous live momentous.com huberman and I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding again that's livemomentous.com huberman and now for my discussion with Dr Sachin Panda Sachin Dr Panda so good to see you again yeah good to see you we are colleagues still but we used to be right across the street from one another yeah yeah you remember those days yeah yeah so I'm delighted that you're here um I think we're going to talk about a number of things mainly intermittent fasting time restricted feeding and health but also the many other things that you're doing just before we started recording we were discussing your recent paper in nature uh that involved recordings from post-mortem Human retina so maybe if there's time at the end we can get back to uh your lab has shown that you can essentially maintain or resurrect neurons from uh dead people in order to potentially and eventually provide transplants to rescue Vision in the blind so that's extremely exciting but of course not the main focus of today's discussion so we'll have to uh split it up um the first question I have is how am I supposed to Define fasting and time restricted feeding in meaning when I go to sleep every night I'm not eating so in some sense everybody is doing time restricted feeding to some degree or another yeah at what point can we start thinking about a pattern of eating as time restricted feeding so-called intermittent fasting does it have to do with how regular one is about the start and stop times how do you think about defining intermittent fasting time restrictive feeding and maybe just to simplify the conversation is one term more correct than the other in terms of describing this incredible pattern of feeding well you know that intermittent fasting covers many types of fasting um so actually it started long time ago and it's embedded into the history of caloric restriction um almost 100 years ago people showed that if you reduce calorie intake in a rat then that rat can live for a long time and in those experiments the calories were reduced every single day and that led to the idea that if we cut down our calories by 20 percent say then we can potentially live longer by doing two things one is preventing is related disease or even if we follow fall sick maybe we can accelerate cure and keep the repair mechanism going so that we can live longer but it was very difficult to count calories every day and reduce maintain that um I must say that it's not that calorie restriction is impossible or we are not doing it in fact a lot of us we do um count calories in our subconscious mind means every time you took out it you took out we take out a soda bottle or something I'm looking at it okay or in 60 kilocalo or 30 kilocal or zero kilocal we are doing that so the point is it's it's we are doing subconsciously some kind of calorie counting but reducing calorie by Twenty thirty percent every single day is not possible for many people so then the idea came in mouse and rat experiment whether they can eat every other day um and in fact this every other day feeding um also led to very similar almost equivalent Health Improvement as continuous calorie restriction um so then the idea was well every other day is a little bit hard for humans but just imagine I would just get to eat only one day and then another day then the idea came well for humans can they eat less for one or two days in a week so that led to this pipe two diet where people can eat for five days and then two days they have to reduce calories so that's also intermittently people are fasting um then as you know Walter longer also came with this idea that periodic fasting maybe four or five days in every month or two months three months you can fast or reduce calorie and he also found many benefits of calorie restriction was there were those studies on humans many of the studies started it in mice but alternate day fasting five two and um Walters periodic fasting all of them have now been done in humans not for longevity of course because cannot do this for a long time but for weight maintenance for reducing some signs of aging or reversing those things have been done so all of them have been done in humans mostly healthy humans and in some cases people with pre-diabetes or some aspects of metabolic disease so that led to the idea that that all these forms of fasting in which the total caloric intake on any given day is reduced for one or more days in a week a month that became that umbrella term became intermittent fasting so if you look up the scientific literature most intermittent fasting involves intentionally reducing calories for at least one or two days in a week or um few days in a month so when we publish time restricted feeding um the initial Mouse experiments and even now most of the mouse experiments we want to test what is the impact of time restriction versus calorie restriction so in these experiments we don't reduce calorie on any day of mouse life so the mice is the same number of calories as the adlibitum FED mice but still they say health benefit so that's why we call it time restricted feeding but since it involves living without food for several hours for some people which is it can be very difficult the initial experiments was done they were done for eight hours of feeding and 16 hours of fasting that kind of became popular and so that that's why people use the same term as intermittent fasting and now if you say intermittent fasting and popular literature or popular media then people usually refer to time restricted eating so now coming back to how do you define time restricted fitting um so the way we have been trying to Define experimentally and also in literature is um trying to confine all your energy intake from solid and liquid food combined within a consistent window of 8 to 12 hours because that's something that doable of course people have done time restrictive trading with four hours six hours and some people even try to eat everything within two hours one meal a day um but the point is those are not feasible to maintain for very long time for a lot of people one question about the six hour versus eight hour versus 12 hour feeding window is it important that the feeding window begin and end at the same time more or less yeah and if so how much flexibility is there so for instance I'm somebody that I am not terribly hungry in the morning I like to drink water usually some caffeine and electrolytes yeah in the period before my first meal and my first meal always lands sometime between 11 and 11 A.M and 12 noon there are exceptions yeah occasionally I'll have a breakfast a proper breakfast as it's called Uh I guess it would be improper if you're intermittent fasting for me um but typically 11 A.M or noon is when I first eat my last bite of food is typically around I don't know 39 PM that's what works for me yeah is that consistency affording me any benefit separate and let's just leave aside total caloric number macronutrients plant-based meat Etc but is there any benefit to shortening that feeding window that we are aware of or extending that feeding window or being even more rigid about the start and end of that feeding window yeah so the start of the fitting window um that's interesting because the concept of time history feeding when I describe animal studies it's feeding for humans it's eating so the concept actually came from the science of circadian rhythm so that means um our body has an internal timetable that's present in every cell in every organ that pre-programs many molecular aspects of the cells that leads to physiology and all that stuff so that essentially there is a predetermined timetable for every cell every organ to do certain things at certain time and the Circadian clocks as you and I know are more sensitive to light light is the most dominant um time Giver so for example when daylight saving time changes or when we travel from one time zone to another time zone we feel kind of crappy because our daily activities uh out of sync from our internal clock so that was known for a very long time but then around the year 2000 2002 there was a famous experiment by Uli sibler from Switzerland what he did he just Fair demise at the wrong time mice are nocturnal their night feeders and when he fed the mice during their time and the liver clock instead of following its own routine liver clock actually started following food so that means by changing our feeding time we can change we can tune our liver plot and subsequently the same experiment has been repeated many times and when we repeated that in 2009 and we figured out Yes actually outside this brand Center called Supra chiasmatic nucleus or scn which is considered the master circadian clock almost rest of the brain even follows when we eat and that came out from Pierre shambon's lab in Europe where they systematically looked at even places that are very close to the asean for those who are who node or some medial hypothalamus or paraventricular nucleus all of this within a couple of four or five millimeters of the scn but they were following food queue amazing so then um and now if we think about it so for example when the daylight saving time changes just one hour change um or one hour change in alignment between our internal time and external time leads to kind of feeling groggy and filling not out of Peak Performance for one or two days so the rule of thumb is when the time Giver changes by one hour then our internal clock takes at least a day to catch up so that means if you're flying from LA to New York uh you're moving through three time zones then on an average it will take three uh three days to catch up with the New York Times for some people it can be even slower and for some people it can be two days but the bottom line is yes there is a decentrality so then what does it mean for the body sorry one of the function of clock is to anticipate when you're going to wake up for example so the blood pressure slightly goes up our heart rate goes up our breathing goes up similarly for food almost every organ that is involved in feeding or eating digestion all of them have clocks so even from saliva production that's the first phase of digestion to secretion of all the digestive juice and the stomach and the absorption of nutrients and liver metabolism everything the whole village expects one you're supposed to eat and they're getting ready for you to eat the first meal after fasting for a long time so that's why it's breaking the fast of breakfast and when that time changes when you change it by two or three hours from one day to another then um sometimes they're like oh food didn't come or maybe um will come at a wrong time we were at the wrong time and then they will track the new eating time so suppose say one day you have been eating every day at eight a.m um I ate at 8am is that when you start yeah when do you when does your feeding Windows shut uh 6 p.m so I eat for around 10 hours okay um and then one day if I switch to 10 am then what happens is a clerk is thinking well the food didn't arrive at eight but it arrived at 10 maybe tomorrow the food will arrive somewhere between eight and ten so we'll be ready around nine and next day if I come back and eat at eight o'clock then I may eat but my clock is not ready to digest that food so that's why this idea is you have to be consistent uh to take advantage of this anticipatory activity of our cloth in different systems to get the best out of it is there evidence that those anticipatory systems and as they relate to digestion help us better assimilate our food I would imagine so I mean if you have the gastric juices that are going to help digest the proteins fats and carbohydrates and uh already deployed at the time when you eat I could imagine that food will be better utilized than if you don't so in other words what is the advantage of having these anticipatory signals in terms of potential health benefits the anticipatory signal is really important from even even from working up um the reason why many people feel not ready completely when they'll wake up to an alarm clock because the alarm clock wakes you up but your body is not prepared so that slippiness after waking up to an alarm clock is due to our body is not prepared for that and then the best example is when the when uh the daylight saving time changes particularly when we have to wake up one hour early uh what happens people who have underlying heart condition um when they're waking up when the body is not ready your heart is not ready and all operations from the heart has to start pumping little bit harder then there is chance of heart attack and in fact people have looked at hospital records and that they find that on those days and there is a sharp rise in heart attacks in car accidents and car accidents too because your brain is not coordinated so you cannot make those fine decisions so that's a great example of anticipatory activity but coming back to digestion one thing is um and this is something that many people might have experienced there are many rhythms in our digestive system and one of the rhythms is our look our intestine has this peristaltic function so it kind of contracts and expands and that moves forward more food doesn't move due to gravity so it goes back and forth and that peristaltic axon actually slows down at night a few hours after our last meal and um so that's why when people eat late at night for example then that food doesn't get digested because there is not enough digestive juice first thing and second even if it gets digested in the stomach it doesn't move properly so then the next morning people get up and think um of course people consume some alcohol very often and then they think that this is Hangover but those who don't consume alcohol then they have the food hangover because it doesn't digest so that's one extreme example where food at the wrong time can um so healthy food at the wrong time can be crap or junk yeah I've um experienced that where if I've worked late or I couldn't eat dinner or something and then I get home I always debate whether or not to try and sleep yeah but if I'm too hungry oftentimes it's challenging and so for me sometimes consuming something that at least seems easily digestible like yogurt or something in a liquid form um is better for me than if I eat a meal I've made the mistake of going to the refrigerator being super hungry and eating a bunch of food at 10 or 11 p.m and then falling asleep and indeed the sleep if I'm tired enough can be quite deep but the next morning I feel just completely physically and and cognitively weighed down so I think what you just described makes a lot of sense so is it so if someone were to select a feeding window regardless of whether or not it falls into classic intermittent fasting time restricted feeding sounds like eating your first bite of food and eating your last bite of food at more or less the same time each day yeah has benefits I have this question you mentioned feeding versus eating and I think it's actually not just a grammatical uh semantic issue um and here's why we tend to think about when you take your first bite of food and then when you take your last bite of food but of course Foods digest at different rates more fat in there is going to digest make carbohydrates digest slower Etc I mean there's all these adjustments to the glycemic index and so forth with Foods in combination I is it better to think about not eating but your fed State and blood sugar so for instance I often get asked on social media does blank break a fast so uh and so I like to think about it scientifically like okay is does plain water break a fast no does air break a fast no um does one grain of sugar of sucrose break a fast well probably not but does one teaspoon of sugar break a fast well you could say yes but transiently like so I mean when we're talking about breaking a fast are we talking about a rise in blood glucose or are there molecular signals Downstream of of a rise in blood glucose that um cannot be reversed in other words if I'm gonna eat my first meal every day at noon and I'm gonna eat my last bite of food at 8 00 pm and at 9 00 a.m for whatever reason I have coffee with one teaspoon of sugar in it I suppose in the strictest sense I've broken my fast but maybe by if I went for a hard run that morning maybe by 9 30 a.m I'm back in a quote unquote fasted state so what is the fasted State really because when I'm eating at 8 pm just to give another example I'm start fasting at 801 perhaps yeah but I have my blood glucose is elevated so I'm not really fasted I'm fed yeah it's just that I'm not eating the verb right okay so um so again I I don't want to get overly detailed just for sake of getting detail but I think a lot of the confusion out there about what breaks a fast yeah is related specifically to this issue yeah which is if I eat a whole pizza after sitting around all day it's very different than if I eat a whole pizza after having run a 26 mile marathon that yeah very different yeah um metabolically speaking so how should people think about fasted versus fed can we be mildly fasted versus severe fasted can we be um fed-ish versus very fed anyway I'll I'll uh stop asking questions now because they all relate to the same theme yeah no these are um very interesting question and then unfortunately as you can as you have you might have seen in life the most obvious questions are often unanswered because it's so hard to do these damn experiments because if you really want to address this in humans you have to bring humans put them in isolation just like you said I can now imagine planning five or six different experiments each experiment should involve eight or ten volunteers it's gender sex and then do it so it's difficult so now let's go back to see how do we let's dissect it in terms of say indirect calorimetry so for example indirect calorimetry is based on this principle that whatever oxygen we breathe in and carbon dioxide we breathe out if we can measure these two then we can figure out whether our body in total we are not saying whether it's the liver gut or fat or muscle in total whether it's consuming glucose or fat as energy source the idea is when we fast when we are without food for several hours then ideally our body will tap onto glycogen first and then do a little bit of fat and then when the body is mostly running on fat then that ratio of CO2 to oxygen will come to 0.7 [Music] um but what is interesting is we can do these experiments in mice so we can go to mice and ask okay so what happens in mice so and mice mice are a little bit very different because mice are not simply little people they are the metabolism is different they store relatively less glycogen than humans do in terms of total metabolism so they overnight within 12 to 14 hours the rer respiratory exchange ratio or this ratio will go from one when the consuming mostly glucose or carbohydrate as energy source it will slow down slowly go to 0.7.75 it's after 12 to 14 hours they're kind of mostly running on fat so now as we give them food um within 10 or 15 minutes they are not actually consuming couple of grams of food they might have consumed say 100 or 200 milligram of that child so which is less than say five percent of the food and then the rer will immediately begin to rise as if that small amount of food stopped that fat burning process and cranked up the carbohydrate burning process when you say fat burning process you mean body fat stores being burned right not dietary fat correct yeah so it's all body fat means that that's why I said um we don't know where that fat is being burned because we are just measuring how how much mice is breathing in and out um so for example it can be from the Skin So subcutaneous fat or belly fat but not dietary fat no by that time the dietary fat is already absorbed and digested and hopefully it's sitting in the liver or adipose tissue somewhere but it's the fattest body fat yes thank you yeah the reason I ask is that nowadays I think more than half of the battles about nutrition that I see online relate to this issue where I won't name names but someone will come along and say low carbohydrate diet allows you to burn more fat and the more nuanced people out there will will say well that's true but you're also talking about dietary fat you know the word fat can confuse people I realize you're not doing that you are certainly not one of the people guilty of doing this but indeed you eat more fat you'll burn more fat but that doesn't mean you'll burn more body fat in fact I think the day does say that under conditions of caloric restriction you'll actually burn less I hope I don't I'll probably get I'll probably get um pitchforks uh through the mail toward me on on that one but but I think that's true whereas you know people who consume carbohydrate can still burn body fat even though the majority of the fuel they're burning is from carbohydrates so yeah so here in this case for example from mice we know that as soon as they start eating um the area goes up coming back to your question what would be ideal for us to do the experiment would be okay so we'll go back to that and then give the mouse maybe 100 milligram of food and Mouse runs around in the case and then we'll continue to measure to see how long it takes for the mouse to come back and then so that's one husband so now let's say um let's stay on this and then I'll come back and talk about non-caloric food and whether that is considered I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors athletic greens athletic greens now called ag-1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs I've been taking athletic green since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast the reason I started taking athletic greens and the reason I still take athletic greens once are usually twice a day is that it gets to be the probiotics that I need for gut health our gut is very important it's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain the immune system and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health and those probiotics and athletic greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health in addition athletic greens contains a number of adaptogens vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met and it tastes great if you'd like to try athletic greens you can go to athleticgreens.com huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road in the car on the plane Etc and they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin d3k2 again that's athleticgreens.com huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 so there is a famous experiment that was published last year by jotakahasi Islam and it came out in science and that relates to caloric restriction and we kind of started with this idea we started to discuss on that the rat experiments were done with caloric restriction and researchers get reduced calorie consumption by 20 or 30 percent and get that food the rats and then subsequently mice and they all lived longer what is interesting is in all those experiments the researchers came and gave this bolus of food at one time whereas the adlibitum FED mice or rats they had access to food all the time so they're eating all the time and then these rats were given 20 percent less and what happens is this mice or rats then I'm going to take that less food which is restaurant now and just eat little bit of lunch and then snack after three hours or snack after three hours they double up all that food within two to three hours maximum four hours food is gone so they're sort of on the omad diet the one meal a day yeah they're almost like in one meal a day three to four hours food is gone or you can sit there on four hours eating or feeding and 20 hours fasting um so then the question became well the benefit of caloric restriction as we know is it due to reduced calorie or time restricted feeling or timing there is a timing component to it that they are eating all of that within three to four hours and then there is a long fasting and this is a difficult question to answer because now you have to ask this poor grad students or technicians to come and split that food into eight or ten or fifteen different small portions and then give them to mice in every two hours who actually published the first paper in 2017 showing that most caloric restrictions I mean he used the protocol that was used by Kelly restriction field it actually creates a condition of time restriction so he saw that and then he went back and worked with Engineers to come up with the smart kids where he could actually tell he could program how much food is given to mice at what time of the day or night completely programmed so then he took this uh for example suppose say the adlibitum FED mice it's five grams of ciao in a day and if you want to reduce calories by uh 20 percent and the CR Mouse should get four grams of food and it divided this into 9 or 10 meals and then give them in every 90 minutes so in this case they're eating small meals throughout day and night so there is no fasting so you can say that well this mouse actually is not getting into fasting because in every few hours is getting some food and then he measured how long the mouse is going to live um and he used um accountments this is a very standard protocol people count how many mice have dying on which day and then examine them to see whether they've died because they there was an accident or they actually there was a natural cause and then they calculate at the end what is the half life so 50 survival because that's on an average that's a good indicator because if there is an outlier that will live for a long time then that can skew so what was interesting was the limit unfair mice of course they live certain number of days and then this caloric restricted mice that never got into Super fasting but kind of eating snacking throughout day and night that also lift 10 percent extra 10 percent longer so that means caloric restriction extended lifespan by 10 percent I've wondered about this because recently you know there's been there were a bunch of news headlines about intermittent fasting and and frankly I was frustrated if you looked at one major news outlet they would say time restricted feeding affords no additional benefit Beyond caloric restriction for weight loss yeah then another popular press venue let's call it that same study described as time restricted feeding doesn't work yeah right and then another one maybe someplace um even more extreme you know time restricted feeding um only beneficial because of caloric restriction or something like that so what you've essentially got are three different interpretations of the same data all of which are well two of which are true one of which is false in my opinion but what I think people take away from that is oh time restricted feeding isn't valuable which is not the case it I think for many people it's a convenient way to eat because at least for people like me it's simpler to designate between portions of my day when I'm eating and portions of day my day when I'm not eating as opposed to eating portion control for other people portion control can work but all of that is related to either maintenance or loss of weight none of it deals with the potential health benefits independent of weight loss yeah right so um and so I I think that um if we can segment those out um obviously in humans it's hard to know if a given treatment or experiment is extending life because you don't really know how long people would live anyway yeah right whereas with mice you have some sense of when the mortality was likely to occur so what can we say about time restricted feeding and longevity in terms of biomarkers or in terms of any other indication that people who start and stop their feeding window at a consistent time somewhere between 8 and 12 hours per 24 hour cycle are tilting the scales towards living longer as opposed to living shorter this example of this news article that you mentioned is really interesting because that relates to Joe's Joe takas's study because I described that if you split calories and eat throughout the day throughout day and night then the mice lived 10 percent extra but if you now give Mouse the same caloric restricted diet and fit them during day time whether within 12 hours or two hours then the mice lived 10 percent extra beyond that yes so twenty percent so okay so let me make sure I understand so that uh so that I make sure I understand if you take a certain number of calories and you distribute them throughout the 24-hour cycle yeah it's caloric restriction the mice will live ten percent longer yeah if you however restrict that to the active cycle of the so for humans the daytime then 20 then they live 20 percent long twenty percent so it's not just total caloric intake yeah meaning it's not just important to be sub maintenance and calories for sacral longevity it also is important as to when in the 24 hour cycle yeah you eat those calories do I have that right so now that's still the story is not over because this mice were fed during daytime and they're not supposed to eat that's right so for us it will be the equivalent of being on the night shift and only eating at night but a sub color sub maintenance calorie diet I guess is the right way to say it but when he fed mice during night time when they're supposed to eat and they're seeing this getting the same number of calories within 12 hours or two hours then the mice left 35 percent longer than they control 35 longer so scale to human lifespan which you know we don't know but but a 35 longer would mean that um and again no one knows but um humans now what is the average mortality in the United States yeah so it's around 80 it used to be 18 hours slow uh reduce little bit because of covet but let's take 80 okay so people are then now living somewhere between 25 and 35 years longer but I'm putting some error bars on yeah yeah so that was um really profound but now you pointed out um biomarker and other stuff so now if you look at any given time within that experiment and actually Joe went back and um had a separate cohort of mice very similar and so that he could take tissue samples and of course in this case you have to sacrifice the mouse and he looked for um he did a lot of molecular analysis with non markers for example hemoglobin A1c equivalent or glucose control cholesterol all this stuff he could not find anything [Music] that predicted the benefit of caloric restriction so that means in this experiment whatever we know so far the predictor of longevity none of them could predict whether this um CR only Mouse which throughout day and night that Mouse is going to live less than the night fed mouse that was going to live 35 25 extra does that mean that there are biomarkers related to longevity that we just haven't discovered yet yeah so that's exactly so that means whatever we know so far about biomarkers those he could not use to predict maybe there was a lot of noise maybe he wanted he had to use more number of mice to get that because you know biomarkers are not going to predict in every instance so there is some error what is also very interesting is if you look at the body weight and body composition of all these mice there is no difference in body weight and body composition across all these differences all these groups so it doesn't matter when they ate yeah provided they were submit sub maintenance calorie intake so less fewer calories than is required to maintain their weight didn't matter what pattern of eating they were the same way yeah so that in many ways seems to mimic the human studies where they say look it doesn't really matter whether or not you use caloric restriction or or you start your feeding window in the morning or start your feeding window in the evening or you um or you portion control for sake of weight contr weight loss because you're taking a snapshot of that and then another thing with the human study that we are referring to here um that in that human study people are actually already eating within 10 hours window habitually when they selected these people to have them enroll in the study so they were already eating for 10 hours and fasting for 14 hours all participants had to reduce that caloric intake and they reduced by almost 25 percent the CR group continued with 10 hour sitting window and the CR plus time restricted group had to eat the same number of calories within eight hours so it's just a two hour difference it's just a two hours difference okay so that people I just want to make sure people can understand so in this human study which is the one that I felt that the popular press venues all except one venue um got either semi-rung or badly wrong in terms of their conclusion that was my interpretation anyway was that either people came into the study eating basically in a 10 hour feeding window which goes back to my first question which is that most people are not eating in the middle of the night yeah or if they're on shift work and they are then they're sleeping during the day anyway so they're eating in a 10 to 12 hour feeding window anyway so you're saying they either did caloric restriction portion control within the 10-hour window or another group within the study eight sub maintenance calories so caloric restriction CR as we're calling it the acronym CR but restricted to that to an eight hour feeding window and they didn't see any difference in terms of weight loss yeah but but it's not all that surprising right I mean if it's just a two-hour difference yeah exactly so we have done that experiment in mice and we don't see um difference in not only weight loss many other markers and I was telling you about this um paper where I told you that he allowed this mice to eat within two hours or 12 hours sub calories diet 2 or 12 2 or 12. yeah that's dramatic but still he did not see change in longevity even within those two so that means um when you do caloric restriction and then at least for months and you are within 12 hours window um that's that is giving the mice the best benefit the optimum benefit and um two three or five or twelve per Mouse doesn't matter at least for longevity can we conclude for humans that whether or not a feeding window is four hours six hours eight hours or 12 doesn't matter provided that calories are are similar or same well I won't go to that extent because we don't know many of this particularly we don't know how this sort of eating window will affect both success because you know we always think many of this mouse experiments even that I told you about those are done only in Mel mice but that should be changing right because the NIH I know this because I'm on study section which is just a bunch of people who record who review grants is that every Grant now has to include sex as a biological variable it's hard to get away with um or rather I should say it the way it should be said which is people are required and should want to look at these phenomena in male and female mice yes especially if there are differences so in this case um there are many I mean there is also another paper um in time history repeating that also came out a big paper showing that they um thermogenesis was accounting for loss in fat mass and time just to referred mice that was also done only in male mice um so this is um we are paying attention to it so we are now doing all of our studies in male and female and we do see big differences between male and female coming back to humans what typically happens is when you're trying to do four hours or six hours of time restricting people will inadvertently reduce their caloric intake yeah just because of gut volume I tried one meal per day and and I felt like I was eating so much at that one sitting yeah that it led to a lot of gastric distress and I got tired after the meal and part of the reason I like to do time restricted feeding is I have more energy yeah and certainly in the fasted State I feel more energized especially if I'm ingesting a little caffeine or something like that um so people will reduce um energy intake and then some people who are more active they can actually unconsciously they may be spending more energy in their physical activity and basal metabolic rate all of this combined than homozy eating and that can have a very adverse effect in long term because we know that this energy deficit and in fact there is a scientific term for that it's called red s relative energy deficit in sports energy deficit in sports okay yeah it's because nearly 40 percent of athletes um not the NFL guys but you know a lot of people who do track and field um and nearly 40 percent of athletes actually experience this Reds red S without knowing can male and female athletes both men remains Reds so it's Reds Reds relative energy relative energy deficit in sports interesting is the first I've heard this acronym we have a new acronym folks this is good to add to it a list of other acronyms but I so males and females can experience it so in females I've heard that um Reds um can lead to uh eminaria so loss of of men's of the menstrual cycle yeah so that's uh so common that uh so prevalent that in fact many women many female athletes they take it for granted that yes if they are more active then they will lose their menstrual cycle which is which may be common but it's not normal or Optimum per health and even if they don't want to get pregnant yeah yeah yeah yeah we had an expert on female hormones come on and say the very same thing that regular cycling is a is very important of ovulatory menstrual cycle is is important to try and um maintain yeah yeah so that's one but then what is really concerning is um it does affect bone health and um in this state people actually over a long period of time the loose bone mass and the bone also becomes more prone to injury micro fracture and fractures um so again it's a risk means if some people are trying to eat within very short time and they're Physically Active that happens and it also has impact on means the reason why these women are losing menstrual cycle is the hpg axis is disrupted hypothalamus pituitary gonadal axis and it starts it may start again Upstream at hypothalamus or pituitary so that means that HPA axis hypothalamus pituitary and adrenal axis may also get disrupted one of the symptoms of Reds is also depression anxiety bipolar like symptoms and we know that many um many athletes experience that we think that well this this may be just peer pressure that always trying to compete and we know that I'm unfortunately there are few authors who just can't cope it and there are many attempted suicide or suicide so this is a serious issue and there's also another new topic in the lab to come up with a mouse model of Reds and then study it but this is one risk why we should not reduce our eating interval to two such to one meal or very short time because it can have adverse side effects that we don't know now um maybe in future we'll figure out when we systematically study them there are studies that are published showing four hours and six hours time restricted eating has benefits on weight loss but those are on healthy individuals and they were in the studies so the um you know the study team took a uh well already monitoring the mature that there was no sudden weight loss or weight loss below um some safety level uh so those are very different from regular people who are who maybe even normal weight or even with uh within the healthy range if they do then they can potentially so that's why what we think is eight to ten hours maybe the ideal spot to begin with and um once you are physically active and you are also spending a lot of energy in physical activity or Sports you can even go up to 12 hours because in mice we have done that experiment um after 12 hours they do get a lot of benefits not all but so this is 12 hours of 12 hours of feeding 12 hours of fasting yeah um in humans um again nobody has done systematically 12 hours but there is one study in Europe um from tin High Colette lab and Tin high and I we collaborate so they used our my security and clock app this is a research app we developed just to this is mostly used in time restricted eating studies and he had nearly I think he started with 200 Swiss participants but then at the end he selected and took very small number of groups people who are very um meticulous about recording all their food and divided them into usual feeling whatever they wanted to eat whenever they wanted to eat and they were given the advice of Swiss nutrition advice that's given to improved health and reduce blood glucose almost like diabetes prevention program in the U.S and then the other group was given advice to eat within 12 hours this is very early on in time restorating and we thought that the mice were getting some benefit let's try with the 12 hours has any benefit the bottom line is at the end of three months and six months what he reported is both groups lost same amount of body weight and then there's not too much significant difference between groups but both groups actually improved their health so the bottom line is the Swiss nutritional advice that he was giving Which is the standard of care there it achieved the same amount of weight loss as just giving people this advice that eat within 12 hours so one way to look at it look at the result is like this and then he went to more extent and actually looked at every single meal these people consumed so they're close to I think close to 60 or 70 000 meal records and pictures he went through and then classified them to say whether these are good quality food so they call it the Nova classification one two three four one is the food that you can almost eat raw fruits vegetables um yogurt and dairy products that you can almost without any preparation and then second Nova 2 is kind of home home cooked food that most people will prepare in few minutes and then three and then fourth one is the food that you can never prepare at home so for example biscuit or cookies that we usually purchase and few other things and usually the Nova 4 are unhealthy Ultra processed food so which we should not be eating so the advice is to reduce Novak for and what I found was people who got all this advice um to improve their nutrition quality they actually improve their nutrition quality they reduce their Nova for food and people who were in time frustrating the eight within 12 hours they did not change the nutrition quality but what is interesting is they both got the same modest weight loss so that begs the question that in the maybe tin high will do this experiment again to combine nutrition advice with time restriction and maybe reduce the time to 10 hours and that might help um so 12 hours is something that I say anyone from five-year-old to 100 year old can do and if you are trying to maintain weight that might be a good way and combine that with exercise it'll be great and and people can more easily avoid Reds in that way women and for non-athletes or recreational exercises sounds like women if they distribute their calories across 12 hours are less likely to lose their menstrual cycle yeah so again this is something that we have to look carefully they have to be because we do have the my security and clock app that many people download and self-monitor and they share the data for researchers we won't provide a link to that by the way it's a great it's a great tool yeah but once in a while we do get this input from some women saying oh I started doing your Timeless routing and I I'm seeing all these problems and then I ask them okay so what else are you doing they're typically improve the nutrition quality so they're eating only salad and few and they're trying to increase the fiber intake and it's really hard to eat so much of uncooked food because cooking helps to absorb more nutrient and then at the same time they're running five miles every day and of course all of this combinedly can lead to Reds like symptom so that's why 12 I think is a good point if you're combining physical exercise and better nutrition quality because in mice also we have seen that if mice are eating healthy food and they're eating within 10 to 12 hours then they also live longer than mice that writing healthy food but Distributing that calorie over a long period of time and this is um Rafa di cabbage finding from NIH he has systematically done this study with two different types of diet and in mice and he finds the same thing that even mice that are eating within 12 hours they do live longer than mice that eat randomly even healthy food I I recall a recent study I think it was either published in cell reports or cell reports medicine forgive me for not remembering which we'll both of course cell press journals excellent journals which explored time-restricted feeding in the context of low carbohydrate or non-low carbohydrate diet so it was low carbohydrate versus low carbohydrate and time restricted yeah so these all caloric matched right between groups and then non low carbohydrate diets those are more standard uh I think it was somewhere in the neighborhood of 60 of calories from complex carbohydrates and and as I recall the um the greatest weight loss remember same calories across groups folks um was achieved with low carbohydrate plus caloric restriction yeah um and I wondered why all the popular news venues didn't cover that study um but that's why I'm bringing it up now I thought this is really interesting and um and I'm somebody who's cycled low carbohydrate diet um before I find it hard to sleep after about three or four days of being on a low starch yeah diet just personally I so I like to eat some starches yeah especially if exercising intensely or working intensely that's just a little editorial there that um but look I know many people who do just feel better on a low carbohydrate diet but what do you think of those data because it speaks to the idea that okay it's not just the total number of calories it's not just the quality of those calories it's the timing of those calories and maybe carbohydrate restriction in conjunction with time restricted feeding might be the best path for people who are looking to lose weight no I I totally agree that when it comes to nutrition quality quantity and timing all these three matter nearly 40 percent of people who maintain healthy body weight because sixty percent are overweight and rupees 40 percent of maintaining healthy body weight and out of those 40 I would say nearly majority of them are very aware about how much dieting and what quality of food they're eating so you're really an optimist you're looking at the 40 of the glass that's uh or should we say not full there was a pun intended but the um no it's a very interesting way of looking at rather than saying you know why or 60 of Americans obese uh saying why are 40 not obese that's a very interesting way to look at it yeah I mean um subconsciously we're always making the decision inside no means I'm sure that you are not going and eating um cheeseburger every day because um you want to improve yeah right no yeah exactly I wouldn't feel good yeah I enjoy a cheeseburger now and again but I um no not certainly not this stage or any stage of my life I think that um I think people actually you think the pandemic had a lot to do with this I think that people started to take a look at what they were doing to support or not support their health generally yeah I know people gained a lot of weight during the pandemic other people got really into fitness I've seen some colleagues but you've always maintained um you've always been in good shape actually the first time I've seen you in a while you've seem to have aged backwards so you are a poster uh for your own um ideas and hypotheses about time restricted feeding but but I um I noticed that during the pandemic a number of people emerged from the pandemic in better shape other people in much worse shape it seemed like it was a it was like a bimodal distribution there yeah um so yeah I get the sense that starting and stopping eating at more or less the same time each day even if caloric restriction is not the main focus yeah has additional benefits um can we talk about some of those benefits as they relate to the other things that impact health so for instance if you're starting and stopping eating at more or less the same times each day are you sleeping better are you getting more predictable uh shifts in alertness and sleepiness like can you predict when you'll feel good enough to exercise yeah maybe we could talk about that because you of course um are well known for time restricted feeding and the science around that but also other things as well um not the least of which is circadian biology generally so I always think of the main timekeepers for our system being feeding light activity and social connection did I miss maybe temp and temperature yeah yeah so how do these combine with one another and using timing that we begin and stop feeding is kind of an anchor Point can we explore that a little bit yeah so you know we got into this um beginning and end and then we you asked for the calorie how much calorie will break the fast um one thing that I want the listeners and viewers to bring back to this timing of when wait when you're breaking the fast because we equate Health with weight body weight and that's when you know we are talking about nutrition quality and quantity because both of them have impact so now let's think about mental health because a lot of people do struggle with mental health they have anxiety or depression and also um it's a gut health because there are a lot of people who also have acid reflux or heartburn and we know that acid reflux or heartburn can be exacerbated by caffeine intake in empty stomach those who have acid reflux of heartburn they're prone to that then having black coffee in the morning before any food um Can upset their stomach so that's why in those cases it's very clearly that caffeine for them becomes the trigger and that's something the food is supposed to come and then the stomach is not seeing the food so it's overreacting producing excess acid and that comes up to the esophagus and that's what they're experiencing so if people have that kind of condition then maybe they should consider when they drink their first coffee is breaking their overall fast or kind of putting them putting their health at risk for acid reflux the other thing is people who have anxiety panic attack we know that caffeine can judge you up especially on an empty stomach especially on an empty stomach so for them again caffeine can be a trigger so that's why I want to kind of differentiate that there is this mental health and other aspects of health and these are two clear examples where anxiety panic attack related to brain health or acid reflux related to our gut health in those cases when we consume that caffeine in the morning can affect so do you avoid caffeine in the morning no actually here is the interesting history about caffeine and this is something I did not know and I was once invited to this history of nighttime activity and maybe we can take a little bit of detour and talk about night time activity because that fascinates me as a circadian biologist because over the last 200 000 years means we assume that humans Homo sapiens evolved 200 000 years ago so we have been as a species we have been living on this planet for 200 000 years and only in the last you can say a couple of thousand or five thousand years when we came to control fire or maybe you can even go back to 100 000 years there is some debate um so then the question is well when you control fire and we light it up the fire and we could light up whenever we wanted we can add Fuel and we can stop the fire when we don't want it that's the key ability in humans that differentiates them from all the other spaces no other species we can always say yes there are signs of this intelligent decision making for example we know many crows can make decisions many many animals they kind of figure out strategize how to get food but controlled use of fire is something very specific to Human and when we started um controlling fire fire did not essentially extend the day because fire created a evening that is very different from what people did during the day and what people used to do during day they worked a lot means Gathering food was almost everything that we did and so in the evening after the after the after we brought food mostly tubers or maybe lentils to cook or once in a while animals so that we can we could barbecue um all of these things happen around Fire and Fire was so expensive that it was mostly communal fire so if you go back to for example Maasai and all this and such sorry populations that have no access to electricity and are still living kind of that historical life fire is a communal event and they sat around the cooked food and then what happened they did not talk about work they talked about um culture they told the sang the danced they strategize um that's how politics started philosophy started science started all of this things that are very unique to human civilization started around fireside chat so um in that way if we think about it we are still doing fireside chat the only thing is we have the microwave and the television or social media so now we chat with our thumbs right so it's still so we are hooked to that evening activity because that's when we are completely free from the pressure of the work and we want to express ourselves that's our independent kind so that's why most people find it very difficult to do time resulting and stop eating at six o'clock because it's in Grand in our in our even DNA that we want to eat and socialize in the evening so now let's fast forward and see what is the roll of coffee in this and if you look at Coffee consumption particularly Cafe where people can come and have little bit of coffee and socialize it also started as an evening activity and this is an um now we can go back to Istanbul because that's one place where Coffee Cafe is started in mid 16th century so we are talking about 15 40 to 1570 um and that's when uh I'm sorry I'm forgetting the name of historians who actually invited me and uh okay his name is I must be butchering the name but I'll try to provide the spelling and the wonderful thing about social media is somebody will tell us on YouTube the proper pronunciation so it's a great opportunity if you know the proper pronunciation please put it in the comments on YouTube I'm actually I'm even checking right now in my endnote library it's not picking up that that's right we'll provide a link yeah so what happened was um so coffee was introduced and um people came and drank coffee and talked about politics at night at night at evening and it actually started with with Sufi branch of Islam because they are the ones who uh consumed coffee in the evening and this is the branch of Islam where they actually sing and dance and all that happened in the evening so singing dancing by the stupid and then here in Istanbul people started congregating and having um talk about politics but then around the same time um some you know in Turkey there was a good sizable number of Muslims who have to do five prayers a day number of prayers at set time the first prayer is very early in the morning and then they figured out that if they wake up and immediately have coffee then they can stay awake for the first prayer and in that way they felt pretty good and they woke up I said that's how it started as a morning drink to stay awake and kind of get get on with the day but what happened was I don't know whether you have ever tried Turkish coffee it's very thick yeah a few years ago right before the pandemic 2019 I traveled to Turkey is first of all the food is amazing the coffee is indeed very very thick yeah and I have a pretty high caffeine tolerance yeah um from drinking so much coffee in yerba mate over the years and still do I really enjoy it but um yeah it's it's very intense and so what you're saying is that um coffee intake started as a way to extend into the night the ability to extend into the night at all was because of the ability to harness fire and then coffee stimulatory properties were leverage toward morning which is essentially like the way I think about it we did an episode on caffeine and some uh someone else Michael Paul and not I described it this way that you're sort of taking a loan out on your energy bank account with coffee you're suppressing the adenosine system the density makes you sleepy but that adenosine system will kick in later so you're you're it's a credit card of sorts with an interest right right and the interest being um an energetic lag that you're going to experience in the afternoon yeah but what happened was with the strong coffee um that gave heartburn and acid reflux to a lot of people so then they started eating something with coffee and that's how the culture of breakfast started in Turkey ah so coffee actually led to the development of breakfast not the other way around and that uh yeah so that's very heartening uh no again no pun intended uh for the uh the caffeine lovers Among Us uh which I count myself one of those so essentially the food before coffee became breakfast so you kind of give something to your to your stomach so it's busy digesting that and then when the coffee comes in it's not reacting to coffee and creating um acid reflux so it wasn't this fascinating so it wasn't that breakfast is necessary on its own it was essentially a buffer against the gastric distress caused by caffeine at least in that culture when in that context um we cannot say that whether the same thing happened in all over the world where coffee is not consumed but still people eat something in the morning you said you start your um first meal uh of the day at around eight what time do you wake up I wake up around six if I started to six what time do you have your first caffeine no actually I have so that's why I brought up this story because I have coffee after my breakfast fantastic I'm a big proponent of delaying caffeine intake for a few hours after waking for other reasons that my listeners have heard me talk about endlessly so I won't bother with that now but I think um allowing the suffice to say that allowing some of the natural waking up signals to occur and using light to kind of clear away and adenosine to further extend an activity is better than using a stimulant but until a few hours later this is fascinating because I've never thought about the link between extension into the night socialization or socializing rather feeding and caffeine I'd like to take a brief break and thank our sponsor inside tracker inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term Health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test the problem with a lot of blood and DNA tests out there however is that you get data back about metabolic factors lipids and hormones and so forth but you don't know what to do with those data inside tracker solves that problem and makes it very easy for you to understand what sorts of nutritional behavioral maybe even supplementation based interventions you might want to take on in order to adjust the numbers of those metabolic factors hormones lipids and other things that impact your immediate and long-term Health to bring those numbers into the ranges that are appropriate and indeed optimal for you if you'd like to try inside tracker go to insidetracker.com huberman they have a special promotion right now through Pi Day March 14th where you can get 31 off their ultimate plan this is their biggest promotion of the Year again if you go to insidetracker.com huberman you can get 31 off their ultimate plan now actually I'm kind of um speaking what many other researchers have found and this this particularly this fireside chat I'm forgetting again the name of the scientist I think is from University of Washington Seattle she went to Africa and kind of recorded what people are talking of course you could not understand what they were talking Twitter and whether or not Tesla's stock is going up of course no no just just kidding folks and then came back and tried to translate and then figured out that what they're talking during daytime and in the evening were very different so um so so uh what are they talking about at night so exactly so this is like they're talking about matchmaking and talking about politics and strategizing to gather food or or even singing and dancing uh so this is um if you think if we think about it how we manage sunset to our bedtime what we do between Sunset and bedtime affects most of our health I'm going to think about that for a moment I totally agree um and by the way I'm a huge believer and and I'm in living in great hope for the idea that right now I do think that scientists understand a lot more about the different stages of sleep slow wave sleep REM sleep Etc then we do active waking States like we talk about being focused or being alert but that's not those aren't scientific terms as we know but I do believe and I've noticed a distinct difference between the first eight hours of the day in terms of cognition and we know that the catecholamines are at much higher levels plus court is also dopamine cortisol epinephrine all of that is really at much higher levels than in the later evening and so this evening time it all it's certainly in the context of mental health we know that morning and evening we are basically different creatures yeah yeah so that's why I think in the evening if you think about it um again this is uh again another set of research from um my good friend Horacio who the Iglesias yeah oh yeah yeah I'm a big fan of horacio's another he's a fellow Argentine so occasionally we riff about things related to that but he's a wonderful biologist are you guys collaborating yeah his kind of uh I say he's very humble and it's a low profile but he does amazing amazing research totally agree he does research that um we want to know but nobody is ready to do it because field research is very difficult to go to the Wilderness or go to the places where there is no electricity and then record um when these people are eating sleeping or in this case activity exposure to light that's what Horacio has done and uh it was this active watch which is kind of a modern activity tracker um but it's a little bit more refined because it also collects light information what I found was most of these Argentinian Towers who have no access to electricity they consistently go to bed somewhere between three to three and a half hours after Sunset so this is very important because we always think that um our ancestors when they didn't have electricity as soon as the sun went down they just went to sleep no the fire extended the evening so they were staying awake for three to four hours kind of um you know decompressing themselves that we say and then doing all these activities cooking sharing meals and then they would go to sleep and if you look at the slip onset variability it was very small like they're going to bed almost within 15 to 30 minutes standard deviation so no night owls versus morning people exactly so we'll get to that none of this this uh I get attacked by for many reasons it just goes with the business I'm in of being public facing these days but every time I talk about viewing sunrise or low angle sunlight you know getting some sunlight earlier someone says well I'm a night owl and they just it's almost like a a protest of trying to protect identity it's become this ideological I I identity related thing I'm a night owl I'm a morning person and I'm not but you're telling me that in these cultures where there is intellectricity but there is fire people are going to sleep within all of them within about 15 minutes of one another yeah so there is no such thing as a night owl or a morning person in the context I still actually I asked him pointedly because uh uh and then he said no he has not sinned and says dragged hundreds of people and if we ask there are many many sleep researchers or at least the public facing sleep Physicians or experts they will say yeah we can say one third of people a night hour one third of morning and then one third are in between but yeah they call them like Bears wolves and you know and I'm not being disparaging of that idea I think people really do feel as it as if they Orient towards one pattern or another when I was an undergrad student I never went to bed before midnight and actually midnight was my going to bedtime exactly like 11 45 I'll try to get ready to hit build and then by 12 I'm in bed and I used to get up at six six fifteen that's a pretty short sleep with an alarm of course and but then day time I used to take 45 minutes to one hour nap and that was regular like even if uh whenever I got time of course in college you know you don't have the whole debt unlike in high school you don't have opportunity to nap but in college you can I might have been one of those kids with this hoodie on napping on the desk but they come around and they wake you up yeah but in this case just come back to the dorm and um after lunch usually I used to take a nap so um then in grad school I remember I rarely went to bed before 2 am and I could have clearly said that I'm a night owl and actually I was a night owl it was very comfortable staying up so late I was very productive doing experiments writing all this um manuscripts mostly and but then afterwards when I looked back in postdoc when I had when we had our daughter um then things started changing because you have to put the baby to sleep and then after the baby sleeps it's almost when you have a baby your life revolves around the baby so then we have to dim down the light there is no caffeine and alcohol drinking or any other things after the baby sleeps because we cannot do too much noise and others so then I realized that no I'm actually not a night owl and I became kind of more normal because I could go to sleep between 10 and 11. and um that's how I thought well maybe this was very unique to me but what is interesting is I have another colleague good friend Ken Wright Jr Colorado at Colorado and he also had grad students and um and postdocs like me who strongly believed that there were night owls um just like everybody else and he took Ken took the whole Lab for camping and when they were camping of course there is less light and a lot of physical activity hiking during the day and they all went to bed between 9 and 10 30 p.m I love that study yeah what Sachin just described was a study I think there were two studies uh there were two yeah and um what's interesting as I recall is that after going camping for a weekend where people awake with this more or less with the sunrise yeah and go to sleep a few hours after Sunset yeah their melatonin rhythms and cortisol rhythms and sleep wake rhythms persisted on that schedule for several weeks despite returning to environments where there was a lot of artificial lighting which I find amazing that just a weekend of consistent rising and um going to bed with the sunrise and sunset yeah more or less allowed a reset that was very long lasting yeah so um actually even in Horatio study he found that almost all the tobas they wake up around sunrise time and it's amazing when I look at the standard deviation it's like so tight so take that night owl so-called night owls I also in graduate school I would work until 2 A.M I loved it I'd blast music in the lab everyone was at home pretty much not everyone but there were the the night crew and then I'd get in sometime around get up or sometime around 9 30 10 and then get in around 11 and it was no problem because I was going to stay so very late and then over time I noticed I've become more locked to a standard schedule so I think what we're saying is that the clock can our internal clocks can shift yeah but this idea that we are genetically biased towards one schedule or another may need revisiting that's what that's the conclusion I'm taking from this a couple of aspects one is um you know some people are genetically so pre-programmed because the other flip side is what is called technically familial Urban sleep Fest syndrome so these people um you can give them caffeine or whatever but they will fall asleep say at eight o'clock they cannot stay awake till nine or ten and since it's a very strong phenotype in sleep and circadian rhythm field they are very well studied so in fact Louis potashek and ingwifu they were the first one to track one family like this and then they figured out there was a mutation in one of the clock genes period two that clocked in and that mutation um allowed the clock to run in a way that these people went to bed very early I guess historically given these Fireside Chats those people were probably not contributing much to their political discussion whatever that was decided after they went to sleep is what they woke up into that reminds me because as you were describing the difference between nighttime discussions versus morning discussions is there any theme to what is discussed in the morning versus in the nighttime where people just sipping their eating and sipping their caffeine and just waking up um but is there are there any ideas about what morning discussions really consistent morning discussions or daytime discussions are mostly about um work and like hunting Gathering or farming all that stuff and even these days that's what we do we you know you go to I go to work and it's mostly one meeting after another and we're talking about how means if you're in different communities and we're solving problems or your students come with questions you have your TA or the office hours all these things work related we're not talking I mean serious philosophy of unless you are in a philosophy department and you are talking about political science and also we are not singing and dancing so that's why the evening activity even these days are very different and typically the evening activities uh where we express ourselves we express who we are we feel like we are free and um you know you and I we have this academic intellectual Freedom we can talk about our work just like we are talking now there are a lot of people who work for even in tech industry they may be working for Google and all these big tech companies they cannot talk about their work to anybody else it's all secret it's all secret so just imagine that staying so they're spending more than half of the wake-up time at work thinking and doing work but they cannot talk about that work even sometimes to their own family members so then what happens for them a lot of people also do the same thing like um the person who is going and baking in a restaurant or cooking or the person who is taking trust and driving or nurses and doctors can't talk about their patients reality yeah yeah and some people just don't want to talk about it it's so stressful they don't want to bring that stress home so that's why I always say that from Sunset until we go to bed during that time we try to find time for ourselves people say this is me time the me time is essentially we want to truly Express who we are or we want to entertain ourselves because on the Fireside chart it's not that everybody was a performer there are also some audience so we always switch our roles sometimes we are performing and sometimes we are observing so that's what happens with me time I love this so um maybe social media time should be restricted to just maybe a small portion of that evening time because I would hope that people would also interact socially within in the room maybe in a constructive way or maybe you use that for connect with your family members whom you love or you can have some productive discussion or something so it's it's kind of interesting I think it's extremely interesting because I think again this this conversation about time restricted feeding is really conversation about circadian rhythm and sleep wake activity and human evolution right um so that's why let's go back to this um uh Night Owl because uh we we kind of made a comment that maybe it's not genetic but this is where I'm still wrapping my head around because you know these days there's some J-1 studies where they're trying to look at night owls to see whether there are some genetic Lincolns and you know sometimes we always think yeah if you take half a million people of course you'll find some low side but going back to this idea that are some people more sensitive to light so that it's likely that the same level of light even in the same household may make some people stay awake late into the night whereas other people are more resistant to light so that they can go to bed early and since light has become so prevalent these days and this tobus story that we are talking about or people going on camping that is we have removed that light um so there is some um evidence that People's Light sensitivity particularly the iprgc or this intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cell or the simple speakers the blue light sensors in our eyes um there seems to be even one log unit change in sensitivity as measured by pupil constriction so for some people a small amount of artificial light at night could really shift their circadian clock yeah wake them up essentially and then for some it manner yeah I'm very sensitive to light at night yeah exquisitely sensitive to it oh so then you are like a teenager yes in many ways um I've been told this thank you um yeah I think um I have actually switched to using a red night light but I should be clear not a fancy high cost red light for sake of any kind of infrared simulation but a red party light type light and I find that was based on reading one study that we covered in an episode on jet lag and shift work which was that it seems to reduce the cortisol releasing properties of light at night to use redshifted light yeah so I just use a red light bulb I actually travel with one if I go to an Airbnb or a hotel and I switch to red light and I find that I fall asleep and stay asleep throughout the night much more consistently especially in when I'm in New environments which always makes it disruptive to sleep um it's made an enormous difference in the depth and duration of my sleep and um because oftentimes Hotel lights you know in the bathroom you'll turn them on you're just you're just getting beam and you're right some people don't seem to to be bothered by that I I really struggle with that yeah and in fact in Tina's uh right after puberty um there seems to be a I think that's when the teenagers become more sensitive sensitive to light uh and it's very it's well known that the teenage boys and girls they tend to stay awake late into the night and they can stay up to 12 mid past midnight although they can stay of that lid that doesn't mean that their sleep schedule is reduced their body still needs the same amount of sleep as other teenagers so that's why they are more likely not to wake up at 6 30 or 7 when we expect them to wake up and go to school um I have a question and I ask every circadian related biologists that can come into contact with this and no one has been able to give me an answer one way or the other but I grew up hearing that every hour of sleep before midnight was of more value or potency than the hours after midnight and indeed I find that if I go to sleep at 9 30 or 10 P.M I can wake up at three or four a.m feeling pretty fantastic and ready to lean into the day but if I get the equivalent number of hours of sleep starting at midnight I feel like complete garbage when I wake up after five six hours so um is there any truth to the idea that going to sleep Within three hours of sunset is somehow better for our circadian timing mechanisms well um there are a few things one you said that you are very sensitive to light so I assume that you also avoid bright light in the evening as best I can yeah as best as you could can and then what is happening is with a sense of that bright light your melatonin levels begin to rise so you are prepared for Sleep um of course this is something that we cannot measure because measuring melatonin in every one hour or 30 minutes um is very difficult and there is no consumer fishing product yet so it's likely that your your body is preparing very well under this dim light to fall asleep and when he was trying to stay awake and go sleep at midnight then maybe from Midnight for the first three or four hours you are sleeping well but then after that your melatonin level might be beginning to fall and it's not only melatonin in your core body temperature and then your heart rate and everything is changing to make you awake but the Sleep debt that you have accumulated is pushing you to be in bed so there is this tension between the Circadian aspect and your sleep depth and unfortunately you cannot have good night of restorative sleep for the second half of the sleep because of the tension that makes good sense yeah so that's why um you know you are not the only one means there are many people who who experience that and in fact a lot of people think that well this may be the way I sleep maybe I'm not um I am not designed to sleep restoratively until you know I sleep one day just like the camping trip and then they realize what it feels like what you're missing yeah absolutely um I want to make sure that we talk about the other aspect of fire which is uh you had a paper that came out recently very interesting paper studying firefighters and time restricted feeding and firefighters would you share with us the the general contour and maybe even some of the specifics of that study because I think it's very interesting for for sake of shift workers but for everybody really to understand these results yeah so let's go back to shift workers because um this also relates to all of us because I always say that each of us is a shipped worker or has lived the life of a shift worker um and we have experienced how terrible difficult it is um and now let's start with what is the definition of a shift worker or um shipped work like lifestyle there is no Universal definition unfortunately but there are many European countries and particularly if you go to International level organization um then you'll find some references different European countries have slightly different definition which essentially points to if you stay awake for two or more hours during your habitual sleep time and when they say habitual sleep time they assume that we are just like you said we are kind of programmed to slave somewhere between say 10 pm and then stay in bed and kind of wake up after 5am so the idea is if you stay if you're staying awake for two or more hours between 10 pm and 5 am and you are engaged in some activity whether it's physical activity or intellectual activity you are not lying in bed and wondering worrying about something but actually working so that defines that's defined as shift work and you don't have to do it every single day even if you do it once a week for 50 weeks then that itself is enough to disrupt your physiology and Metabolism Behavior brain function like a shift worker the reason is as you discussed when you change our external timing queue so in this case when you travel jet lag or or traveling across three days three hours of jet lag will take three days to reset similarly if you're staying awake for two hours extra or if you're waking up two hours before your habitual wake-up time then we just don't get wake up and then be engaged in some activity in the dark most of us unmends unless you are wearing a infrared goggles we turn on light and light resets our clock so in that way every time we stay up for two or more hours even for one night then for the next two nights our clock is kind of trying to catch up so in that way for three days the day of the disruption and then two days following the disruption um a clock is trying to catch up with the outside time so clock our body is not on time without clock so that means almost for half of the week or half of the Year our clock is trying to catch up so that's the definition of shift work so now let's come back to Department of Labor Statistics um U.S government um they have not been tracking what percentage of people are doing shift work accurately because there are many difficulties in tracking too but it's generally accepted that one in five working adults is a card carrying shift worker card carrying shift workers means they are nurses doctors firefighters um and Bakers um truck drivers and many in the service industry so that's one in five so twenty percent of working adults then if we think about all the college students just like I was doing and you must have done um they're also deadlines grants granted lines then we are also experiencing experiencing the lifestyle of a shift worker because we are delaying sleep even if you're delaying sleep by two hours for most of the college students for five days and then the weekend you are trying to catch up that's kind of a security and disruption going on then you take 1.5 or 1.6 million new months um in the US every year so when the child is born and that mother is a shift worker and actually that mother is worse than a shift worker because um you know you don't know what time of the night the baby will wake up and how many times and there is no weekend in motherhood so they're also living the life of a ship worker um we don't count many food delivery and Uber drivers Lyft drivers are shift workers but they many of them we know that they live so in that way we think the actual number of people who are experiencing the life of a shift worker is somewhere around 50 percent of the adults population at any given time so that's why it's also another point that you might have heard from people that will say oh I cannot do time restricting because my schedule is messed up or I work in a different way and um that comes into play so that's why we thought um okay so we should try something on shift worker another point is although one in five people are shipped workers they carry disproportionately heavier burden of disease because almost all age-related disease that we can think of whether it's high blood pressure usually high blood pressure starts in 40s or 50s high cholesterol um gastrointestinal problem in digestion um chronic inflammation of the colon and then even colon cancer in many cases and then of course diabetes all of these are disproportionately more prevalent among ship workers but then when you think about clinical trials whether it's a drug or a lifestyle often one of the top 10 exclusion Factor criteria is shift work so people who are doing shift work we exclude them from many of these trials one thing is most Physicians and most scientists even people who do shift work they know that they are their body and mind is so messed up that often time even medications may not help them and so that's why we don't try new medication why to take the risk when we know it may not help them and then when it comes to Lifestyle intervention whether it's sleep extension for example we cannot do because they are supposed to stay awake and do their job we cannot ask them to stay asleep at night and then physical activity and exercise some people can do but some people are so tired after all night that they don't have the energy to do physical activity and then nutrition again most nutrition studies involved the participants to come to the clinic and get um one-on-one or one or attend group sessions and they cannot come and they cannot even sometimes come to the clinic visit um when people have to take draw blood and in fact there is another caveat that just if suppose I am healthy perfectly normal blood pressure blood glucose cholesterol everything is normal and I live the life of a shift worker just for five nights that means I'm sleeping less maybe four or five hours and even if I don't eat at night time of course many shift workers also feel hungry and just for um to keep their work they eat um just after five days my blood glucose level will read almost like I'm pre-diabetic wow I actually saw a study in publishing procedures in the National Academy that showed that even a hundred Lux dim Light present in the room while people are sleeping with eyes closed can lead to disruptions in morning uh blood glucose levels in directions that are not good yeah um one night so the the faint clock in the corner or even a a night light that's too bright yeah could be problematic um by the way folks these effects are reversible so I whenever I say these things I we get a lot of comments about oh my goodness what have I been doing for years but you know kids with Night Lights this is an issue yeah um but what I'm hearing is that one in five people are truly shift workers in the classic sense their jobs require they work at night or into the night and sleep into the day but far more people are shift workers by virtue of the fact that they're Tweeting or working or watching movies at night even though it's not work in that they're not being paid for that time they are essentially operating like shift workers if we add those two groups together would we say it's what uh a third of Americans I would say half of America half of America yeah if you take teenagers because you know high school students and college students because again going back to horacio's uh study because Horatio also collected activity data from high school students and college students and we have replicated that with high school students and college students in San Diego so that's Seattle and San Diego and this study now there are many sleep researchers that have been collecting this data and what we find is um typically the high school students they are going to beds around midnight and college students at least the UCSD students we found maybe one out of 100 who went to bed before midnight that um reminds me that Horacio Iglesias just published this really nice paper um showing that counter to what we believe students now this is the University of Washington in Seattle I should mention where it's very dark in the winter young people see other people in their 20s are staying up later in the winter months compared to the summer months yeah which is you know totally counter-intuitive you think everyone stays up late in the summer and goes to bed early in the winter but because of artificial lighting it's the exact opposite yeah so and another um it's um I don't know whether Horacio monitored it but my other suspicion I'm not saying whether it's true in Winter we are more likely to consume more coffee hot chocolate in the evening and that might also be delaying slip onset that makes sense so in that way again here is another thing which can be related to policy or practice at Educational Institute so what happened during uh kovid was everybody went to remote learning um the assignments became digital and assignments submission became digital and there are many systems online systems that came into play and by default the assignment submission deadline became midnight so then now what is happening is I don't know about Stanford in maybe when you are giving assignment um one is the deadline in line typically midnight yeah so then most of us most students they will try to cram as much as possible try to solve as much as possible and submit at midnight and it'll be really cool to go back to your system administrator to see is there so many frequency plot of frequency distribution of what time people are submitting the um assignment because we know means when we submit our grant yeah so I mean you know you hear about the Obesity crisis the crisis of metabolic disorders not just in the US but everywhere in the world I mean it's really striking I remember going to a keystone meeting scientific meeting in the early 2000s and there was a map of the United States and it showed where the Obesity rates were over 30 percent in adults and the entire country basically was lighting up like crazy now it would be the entire country but there were these kind of zones in the middle um that were almost devoid of of uh obesity Colorado namely Idaho at that time those are now also Fallen Under the Umbrella of rampant obesity and you and everyone is speculating okay is it uh you know is it seed oils is it um is it this is it that is it highly processed foods I'm guessing it's all of those things including lack of activity but one has to wonder given everything we're talking about in terms of metabolic dysfunction late shifted eating all these issues with late shifted eating and staying up late with artificial lighting whether or not that could be one of the major factors in the so-called obesity crisis it's likely you know we always say Freshman 15 that's right because this is a gaining 15 pounds in their freshman year in college and um this is where I think as executor professors um it'll be interesting to go back and see what can we do because another thing that's also becoming more and more common for example I I give a security under the class means I just give two lectures and I remember when I started 15 17 years ago that lecture used to be around 1 30 p.m or 2 p.m in the afternoon and it's a two and a half hour lecture so it's done by five and for the last um before the pandemic I realized that they changed the timing now the lecture was starting at 7 pm so I was finishing by 9 9 30 pm and these kids they had to go and eat after 9 30. studies socialize find aside chat fireside chat and then to express themselves like to feel free from assignments what are they going to do that after they submit the assignment then they're going to do that so that's why we have to go back and revisit this issue say okay so for adults for most of us who are working a day job our deadline is 5 PM in most cases right men's at least an University system the person who is submitting the grant or who is doing taking care of my IRB or I cook they are all living at five o'clock so for me everything has to end by five I think for most people out there so this the race is a kind of macroscopic question which is maybe it's not so much about restricting the feeding window but maybe it's about feeding mostly in and being active mostly in the early part of the day I mean you know I could imagine a Time three four years from now when it's about when waking up early and going to bed within three hours of sunset is the protocol which harnesses all other protocols right you're going to exercise you're going to do it in that time you're going to eat you're going to do it in that time you're going to socialize you're going to do it in that time and in doing so you're also avoiding a lot of the issues related to disrupted sleep so that's why all these things I just said Timeless repeating is just one aspect of the security and health and these are all interconnected and going back to the comment about um within three hours of sunset yes um that's good but then what happens in say Toronto or Vancouver in winter time I guess they're going to bed very very early but also waking up very very early yeah you know one of the things that I hear all the time because I'm always beating on the drum of getting morning sunlight even if through Cloud covers people say there's no sun here this time of year and I I forgive me but there is Sun unless you live in a cave their son is just coming through cloud cover no matter where you live in the world their son yeah unless you live in a cave of course so um I want to make sure that uh we didn't Overlook what was the major conclusion of the firefighters so the reason why we did this study was as I said there are a lot of us who are living the lifestyle of firefighters or shipped workers and shipped workers are excluded from studies so that means whatever we are learning about a lifestyle or even medications that may be beneficial for people who actually have a normal schedule um but not for people who have a disrupted schedule and if you look up um clinicaltrial.gov there are more than 400 000 studies listed and if you search how many studies are on shift workers it's less than a thousand and then if you ask most of them are to see what is wrong with shipped workers like that's how we know that shift work increases our risk for metabolic disease cancer and even some aspects of dementia but if you ask how many studies are done to improve the health of shift work alone and that's less than 50 means I mean so I have to go back and check the actual number but it's less than 50. wow so that's why um we got super excited we thought um from circadian rhythm perspective that's something to address so this study again this kind of study is only possible because I'm at Salk and we are affiliated with UCSD and um I can work with UCSD Physicians to do this study so I collaborate with Dr Pam tobb who is the director of cardiac rehab center in UCSD and Pam has many firefighters as her patients and we both know that the number one cause for death and disability on work for firefighters is not fighting fire but just getting heart attack and stroke uh so they have a very high incidence of heart attack and stroke and they're also highly prone to different kinds of cancer and it may be difficult to ascribe cancer to disruption security and disruption because they're also exposed to a lot of toxins anytime Fire Burns that smell of fire is essentially smell of carcinogens and they're breathing even if they have the um hood on and respirator they're still good so the idea was very simple we know that firefighters nearly 70 percent of firefighters in the U.S full-time firefighters because there are volunteer firefighters and then full-time firefighters the full-time firefighters 70 of them work 24 hours shift so for example in San Diego they come in at their shift is from 8 AM to 8 am the next day and they do at least in San Diego they do one day on one day off on off four cycles and then four days off and but in some fire departments they actually do 48-hour shift so they come for two days two days off two days two days off and then four or five days thank you firefighters yeah I mean um so then the idea was okay so we'll screen firefighters and then find firefighters who are metabolically unhealthy and then we'll see whether they can actually follow 10 hours time restricted eating because the point is if firefighters can follow it then everybody else will pay for us with all that stress if they can and this is again where I should also acknowledge the San Diego fire and rescue Department because without their health we could not have even submitted the grant and at that time David picon who is the health and wellness battalion chief he's the one who actually approached us um because he is very careful he knew that the job that they do makes them weaker and long term and can kill them in long term so he was always looking for new Solutions so he approached us and then we said this is the idea he said well I love this idea because we are not asking them to sleep more or we are not going to cut down their over time or shift or change the work schedule the only thing we'll be doing is ask them to eat within 10 hours and hopefully we can do this so consistently between the days that they're working and not working yes so that means if they're from 8 A.M to 8 A.M working then the next day then they go home then they're going to eat on the same schedule they did when they were at the fire Firehouse yeah but while at home so they're not allowing themselves to to deviate from that yeah so we we thought whether they can do it or not because the number one goal or the primary outcome in this clinical trial was feasibility can they do it and then second was if they do it then what happens to their blood sugar and weight and all this other stuff and then we started the study and we hit the next hurdle and that is um you know firefighters are very very tight-knit community and they want to make sure that you understand their culture and the best way to understand their culture is to live the life of a firefighter so Emily Manoogian who is the first author see and then we had Adina jadurian who is now in med school she was a research coordinator at that time they volunteered they said okay we'll go to the busiest fire station in San Diego and will live the life of a firefighter and the San Diego fire and rescue and the city they all agreed they reported for duty at 7 30 in the morning they were assigned a bed in the station because all fire stations do have some beds for firefighters to rest and they have a sign bed so they've assigned a bet um yeah so every time a 911 call chem and if that fire station in that fire station that fire engine was called then just like other firefighters they had to run get into the gears just issues and um a jacket and a helmet and getting the seat and attend the call of course they won't go to this side they just get out of the truck wait there then come back so in that 24 hours MLA got 10 calls at night that she had to run to but there are more than 10 times the um they got the nine one every time the 911 call came then there is a bit that goes out all firefighters were sleeping or resting they would get up or if they're doing something they'll look up to see which engine is called and interesting so it's not just the ones that go out it's everyone gets woken up everyone gets woken up so that means in a night typical night they're waking up um 10 15 20 times sometimes so they're almost like um you know new months are like firefighters because they don't have any idea what time the baby will cry and for what reason also they don't know so similarly it's five so that's what Emily did and then next morning once you came back she was like no it's practical seem easy yeah so so then we did the study and we essentially assigned uh all the firefighters we recruited 155 Fighters we assigned half of them to Mediterranean diet because you cannot do any harm you have to give them something good so that's another thing they said no we want something that we know works for firefighters and there was a Mediterranean diet study so everybody was supposed to follow Mediterranean diet and then have nearly 75 of them were supposed to eat within 10 hours we did not fix the 10 hours because we said um you pick your own 10 hours that you can stick to but it has to be consistent from day to day so if you start eating at 9am you finish it not at uh you know at seven PM pm and then try to be yeah okay try to try to be consistent because we said yes we understand that there will be some things and you can take maybe half an hour here and there and we'll see how many times you can do it and um what is interesting about although they were all doing 24 hour shift more or less chose to begin eating somewhere between 8 AM and 11 am and they did not skip any meal they had their first meal or what we call breakfast but it was several hours after waking up because they are waking up at five or six and the driving to come to work at 7 30 or 8 and they're eating the first meal say between 8 and 11. and then the finished meal 10 hours later and what we found is more or less most of them could stick to doing this at least five days out of seven days um and then at the end of the study when we look at their health parameters one thing as I said we recruited everybody who can so that means nearly one in three firefighters were completely healthy they had no sign of any um any illness no high blood pressure high blood sugar or high cholesterol depression or anything so since we have one third of the population who are already healthy and then everybody has slightly different conditions some have high blood pressure but they don't have high blood glucose somebody has high blood glucose but not high blood pressure so it was kind of heterogeneous so we did not see big difference in weight loss or any wet change between these two groups another thing is firefighters actually run almost eight to nine miles when they're at the job because that's part of their exercise routine but then one thing that changed significantly in the time restorating group was what we call bldl particle size and particle number because this is something that we know this very low density lipoprotein these are atherogenic and if we can manage them much better and we reduce the risk for atherosclerosis so that's one parameter that changed in the time restricting group even when you combine all healthy unhealthy everybody now if we take firefighters who are beginning with high blood pressure then we saw a significant reduction in that systolic as well as diastolic blood pressure and the change in blood pressure of course we don't claim that in the manuscript but when we talk about it some physician would get up and say wow that looks like almost there on a blood pressure lowering drug so the extent of blood pressure lowering is equivalent to somebody taking a antihypertensive drug amazing yeah and then those who started with high blood sugar of course we didn't have too many type 2 diabetic but there were a few few pre-diabetic and they could better manage their blood glucose and this is interesting because once shift workers become pre-diabetic or diabetic they have more difficulty managing their blood sugar than non-shipped workers because the work schedule itself will mess them up too much even if they're on many medications they have difficulty that's fascinating and I I'm really glad that you explained the study in such detail because I would have thought you know from reading the abstract and I did look at the data but if someone were to look at the abstract they'd say oh firefighters so they're waking up in the middle of the night and they're you know throwing on their gear and going out to calls and doing but if I understand correctly all firefighters are being woken up by the signal which makes the firefighter population a bit more similar to the more standard population who's waking up in the middle of the night to use the bathroom getting on social media for a couple of minutes or flipping on the lights I mean it's maybe not as severe as what firefighters are doing um but we know there are blood sugar regulation issues related to those multiple middle of the night wakings especially if people are then staring at screens yeah um so I think it's really important that people were able to hear about the the deeper Contours of the study uh I mean this result of regulating blood sugar better is really powerful I get asked all the time you know I've got a new kid or I'm a shift worker how can I do this morning sunlight viewing um what I'm hearing is that keeping a regular meal schedule every day at least five five out of seven or as close to every day it's sort of like sleep I always say try and get a really great night's sleep 80 or more of the nights of your life and on the other 20 hopefully it's for fun reasons a great party or something like that or a celebration of some sort um that seems to me a great Anchor Point when one can't reliably control their sleep wake cycle does that mean that if somebody is coming off of shift work and they're very very tired that they would be better off staying awake and eating than sleeping well it's uh yeah so this is where we get into nuances so here the firefighters are 24-hour shipped workers so that means and they have been working this shift for a very long time so they have figured out and one thing is yes firefighters are different from nurses and healthcare workers who have to work throughout the night and they're staying awake throughout the night whereas firefighters they get opportunity to sleep then even with their pen calls they actually have opportunity to come back and go to sleep and in fact when Emily and Adina they were in the fastest and what they observed was firefighters after they after attending a call they are not coming back and playing cards or trying to watch the news or get the score they know they will just go back and lie in the bed and switch off the light so whenever they got any opportunity to sleep they would try to sleep so in that way their sleep debt and sleep pressure during day time is not as strong as a night shift nurse or a truck driver who is driving all night because they have they're staying awake throughout the night so when people say yes you found this and can you extend it to other shift workers my answer is no we have to go back and figure out that's why we went to this station and figured out what would work for them if I have to go and do this for some nurses maybe even I will go or our staff will go and figure out what is the work schedule what happens do they have opportunity to eat do they have opportunity to even take five minutes break what do they do during break and all of these things come into play but here another thing is um I always said that in other time receipt reading paper we see change in nutrition quality and quantity but here we also saw that somehow both groups inadvertently the improve the nutrition quality because everybody was told to eat Mediterranean diet they increase their fruits and vegetables and olive oil and text slightly and when they had to stop eating early they also reduced the alcohol intake and this is very significant because many shift workers just to cope with the shift work that tend to depend on alcohol at night and caffeine in the morning so they begin their day with caffeine and end with alcohol and now we can relate that many normal people who are not doing shift work we also more or less begin our day with caffeine and many of us and with alcohol and then when they reduce that 18 to 10 hours and then we saw a significant reduction in alcohol intake in the time restrating group but not in the standard of care or Mediterranean diet group I certainly support that we did an episode on alcohol and I was shocked when I researched that to learn that zero to two drinks per week is essentially the threshold Beyond which you start seeing health deficits in particular Cancers and metabolic disruption sleep disruption and increased anxiety when people aren't under the influence of alcohol I mean it's a pretty incredible how alcohol has kind of escaped as the the opposite of caffeine and therefore um not a health hazard it's and here I'm somebody I have a drink every once in a while no big deal for me I can have it or not have it but it's just striking how um alcohol despite extensive data that it can really disrupt Health even at three drinks per week yeah is um is just avidly consumed as if it was kind of like food or caffeine it's really incredible um I I want to make sure that I Circle back to something you mentioned earlier because I know they're going to be a number of people that asked this if I recall you said that provided that the feeding window is not shorter than eight hours that men women and children can use time restricted feeding um yeah so what I say is um 12 hours 12 excuse me 12 hours thank you for that clarifying um because we did a study that was published in 2015 and again um behind many of our studies there is a story so we are publishing all these Mouse stories and then I would go to conferences and and of course the um some some people would give me a look saying well you must be doing something wrong we this just breaks the X law of thermodynamics because how come they're eating the same number of calories and not getting wet and of course by that time we figured out that at least in Mouse Timeless repeating also changes the gut microbiome in a way that the mice may be popping out a little bit more fat than sugar than absorbing them so one thing that happens in time restricting at least in mice is the liver cholesterol metabolism to bile acid and bile acids excretion in the gut changes because they gut microbiome changes so this is a very nice study when Amir jarinpar was in the lab now he has his own lab in UCSD and he meticulously did that and we we even did bomb calorimetry from the poop and metabolomics from the poop and then we figured out that they excrete some some calories and then that brown fat activity goes up so there may be burning some of these extra calories so they're more thermogenic more thermogenic but anyway so you know one nice thing awesome thing about Salk is if they say that your science is going well then they will find ways to help you and this is terrific yeah and um this is when Bill Brody was our president he was the president of um um Hopkins for 12 years and then he was president and um that time he had started this Innovation grant program which was funded by arvind Jacob uh Arun is the founder of Qualcomm it was also a faculty at UCSD so he understand there are very few Tech leaders who actually spent some time in Academia so he understood the pain of getting grant money when you have some interesting idea or test some ideas so yeah no knock on the NIH but I'll do it anyway because I sit on study section for the NIH I mean NIH wants to see proposals for things that are so certain to work that they're mostly done and so really groundbreaking work can happen and does happen with NIH funding but more often than not is it is the generosity of philanthropists like Irwin Jacobs and other people that allow the really pioneering um the new stuff the cool stuff yeah the groundbreaking stuff the stuff that really no I'm not gonna say really matters it all matters it's all important no it matters but uh you know it's high risk and um NIH when San is is not just government is not making money from thin air means it's taxpayers money so there is a little bit responsibility or conservative that okay so we should not waste tracks first money on buying this guy we're not talking about politically conservative we're talking about um scientifically conservative to be so careful what language nowadays pretty soon we're just gonna sit and stare at one another at the microphones to stay safe um so so that's interesting so they so that's why I started this and then what we did was we um I had an awesome grad student and we got this funding from Arwin and also there are some any philanthropy matters so actually the way we say is yes if you give me 50 bucks then that 50 bucks towards goes towards buying the gloves and a friend of tubes for one postdoc for maybe seven days so it's so true I think a lot of people don't realize that 99 of laboratory scientists just they they don't make any money off their discoveries and even if there is a patentable discovery typically the The Divide between the institution and the company that will eventually put that to Market is so slim in favor of the the others involved that you know scientists really do this as a work of passion labor labor of love so so we we came up with this app my security and clock at that time and we took some um you know lessons from Tech leaders um particularly from Amazon one click checkout um because we thought most nutrition apps actually ask people to detailed describe or they add go to their food library and then person size they said okay so we'll just shortcut all of that I just ask people to take a picture of the food open the app one click take a picture second click and press save third click and when they said the picture actually came to our server did not stay on their phone and we asked 156 people who are not shipped workers just regular worker or Homemakers to be part of the study no student was allowed to be part of the study because we know that there's a lifestyle is like ship workers and we monitor for three weeks and so here is some nuances and I want people to understand when somebody is starting to eat at say 7 A.M and since the recording everything we've we've got every single thing even if they ate half a cookie they had to take a picture and they actually took picture because it's not it becomes second nature after three or four days that every time they add something even if there is a glass of water they actually take a picture because we asked them take picture of everything we'll figure out what it is what is surprising what we found the median uh so the median number of times people eat within a day 24 hours a day is actually seven so it's not it's not that we are eating three times a day we actually snack a little bit seven times per day seven times and there are 10 percent of people the top decile was eating 12 times a day wow um and it makes sense in retrospect sometimes maybe I'll fall into that seven or eight before um I did this study because you know getting up having coffee with cream and sugar is one and then I ate my breakfast that's two then I came to the love and I found that cookie that's three I went to a meeting and there was some cookie and something else that's another one and lunch and then afternoon somebody asked me to go out and have a meeting and so if you think about it it's very normal that we can go seven to eight times ten times but then if we look at what time say I start breakfast and as I said and we see that in many people they'll start at seven o'clock Monday then 7 30 another day then 8 15 another day or they go back to 6 a.m because they had to get up early and go to work so we took all this food data from three weeks and then asked what is the time when your body's system is expecting it to eat because it's kind of averages Southeast kind of thinking okay maybe for you if you're eating breakfast at say somewhere between 6 AM 7 30 7 45 I eat it maybe you are expecting food around seven o'clock let's forget about 6 15 that's an outlier and then similarly at the end of the day if somebody is eating finishing the last bite or the night Gap whatever you call it say one day at 9 pm 9 30 p.m 10 11 12 30 or 1. Let's ignore that 1 and 12 30 but still we got somewhere between seven to eleven thirty for that person over three weeks time so this is how we kind of figure out what is the likelihood that your body will encounter food so when we do that what we found was nearly 50 percent of our dogs in our study ate for 14 hours 45 minutes that window when your body is expecting food so it's easy to say that 50 of adults are eating within 15 hours or longer wow and and quite frequently throughout quite frequently too and then if we ask what fraction of our adults were actually eating the conventional within 12 hours three meals a day or something like that it was 10 percent so this snacking has gone up dramatically however you wanted to find snacking the frequency of food intake throughout the day and outside this breakfast lunch and dinner there are all these small snacks here and there and also for a lot of people the dinner is delayed and we went back and looked at okay so what kind of food people are eating late at night and all that stuff and what came out interesting which is very counterintuitive is people who prepare their own dinner they're more likely to eat later at night because they're coming home and then they're taking some time to prepare dinner and then they're sitting down and eating or maybe they're eating next to the computer whatever it is so it's kind of interesting that came out um but coming back to your point that's why I say that nearly 90 percent of adults are eating for more than 12 hours so that means a lot of people can there is scope or there is enough head space to reduce and eat within so as I said all of this are interrelated so when you think about children most sleep researchers agree that children and teenagers should sleep somewhere between 9 to 10 or 11 hours because young children even five to ten year old they should sleep nine to ten hours they're just pumping out growth hormone and growing growing and then the teenagers actually the recommendation is and they should be sleeping nine hours because if you take teenagers take out all the stimulatory inputs to them and then remove homework assignment and everything and then let them kind of equilibriate to their homeostasis what are likely how many hours they're likely to sleep that turns out to be somewhere between eight and a half to nine and a half hours which also means that going back to sleep nearly 90 percent of high school students in this country are chronically sleep deprived because most high school students don't get nine hours of sleep on a regular basis maybe in the weekend probably because of devices yeah on iPads and also as I said this new idea that midnight is your assignment submission time I'll come back to that again and again I'm hearing that again again so teachers take note it's an issue it's a very interesting idea as a way to kind of anchor Behavior earlier in the day yeah learning to in I mean Public Health uh is complicated because people are incentivized by fear but they you know you get more bees with honey as they say right you know there's uh incentivizing people to wake earlier not necessarily with the sunrise but wake earlier and go to sleep earlier and eat within an 8 to 12 hour window um 12 if it's yeah so that's my children yeah it sounds to me like you know all these health benefits are what I think are going to incentivize people more than for instance this idea that well if you don't do this you're going to get Dementia or something right but like every day people will feel more healthy and more productive and so that's why I said that even if children are supposed to sleep for nine hours of course they're not eating during those nine hours and we're not uh feeding children and putting them down to slay because you know their core body temperature will be high they cannot fall asleep so at least they should have their last meal one or two hours before going to bed because typically parents feed them and maybe give them a shower or a butt and then they read the bedtime story so it's one to two hours before bedtime they're finishing food similarly on the other end after they wake up it's not that we're waking them up and then feeding them so hopefully we're not doing that so that's at 12 hours seems to be Optimum and it's not only I'm saying that if we put all the health recommendations together from pediatrists and then it makes sense um fascinating I have a question about structuring meal intake or food intake um during the eating window um I have a good friend actually he's um he's the neurosurgeon at neurolink now but he came up through Stanford and um and he has a habit of eating of skipping one meal per day within a feeding window so it might be breakfast lunch skip dinner one day then it might be breakfast dinner the next day lunch and dinner the next one so it's not in keeping with the same start time always but the end time is either going to be earlier or there's a gate it's never later yeah it's never later um what do you think about that as a strategy um you know in many ways it feels like that fits with the way that a lot of people's lives run so sometimes for instance if I'm in a podcast I don't tend to eat much in the middle of the day because it makes me a little bit groggy the post perennial dip in energy so I'll do breakfast well but again at 11 and that's a first that's when I break my fast 11ish and then dinner maybe a snack in the middle of the day but other days it's three meals so does it matter um overall as long as um one isn't allowing the start time and the ending time to drift out is it okay if you go from 12 hours to ten to eight eight ten four twelve as long as you don't exceed that the the brackets are you okay uh so this is where the Circadian aspect come in because if you're going um if you're moving that breakfast time or dinner time three four hours essentially causing maybe a metabolic jet lag you know in short term in weeks months or maybe even few years you may not see any change um at the same time we don't know what is the long term consequences one thing is we always think I'll come back to this point again and again we think that a body weight is a marker of Health or body composition is a marker of Health it's not always true because as I said issue drift locks um filling um you know having some Pang of depression or anxiety or LDL like high LDL a lot of thin people have or low body fat people have very high LDL yeah so those are the things that um we don't connect with our habit and since security under them and meal timing meal structure now is a very new um field um I think good studies will come out only in a few years because right now people are just going back and retrospectively looking at some Diet record one day of diet record and trying to glean too much out of it but I think hopefully things will improve where people will become it will become standard to at least look for one week of diet record meal time and what they're eating all that stuff because uh are now Mouse studies also showing what a front loading carbohydrate or front loading fat or protein has benefit over so I think this studies are starting so I should not comment whether that's good or bad no I think it's great to hold off until then we have you back on to discuss um I have a question about um fasting on the longer term um and there it's a near Infinite Space we could explore of two days of fasting one day I know people that every once in a while they just decide I'm fasting they've either been eating too much at parties or they're not feeling well or whatever they just decide I'm fasting for 24 hours and um they'll still consume water and caffeine but they'll just fast is there any health benefit or detriment um you mentioned the circadian clock shifting effects but if somebody wakes up on Sunday and they you know they ate too much or they feel they ate too much or they don't like the food they ate on Saturday they're not really feeling it and they're just going to fast into Monday is there any known benefit or um Health detriment to doing that kind of thing yeah there's a actually a rich literature on this complete fast um an impact in many religions people practiced complete fast as you were to cleanse their body and people have seen that there are benefits to that so in fact the every other day eating in Mouse model or even in humans are also initially some studies were done there are many health benefits and right now there are even fasting clinics in Germany where people check in and they're under strict supervision and then they do complete fast or maybe a small bowl of soup which has 100 200 kilocal and that's all they get to eat sometimes two three days four days five days even they have gone up to three or four weeks for sake of weight loss is that why from many different things and um they come out pretty well healthy of course they're under supervision make sure that they're getting macro micronutrients sorry the micronutrients vitamins and electrolytes so those studies are pretty solid people have observed that and then in fact there are even idea that fasting this kind of fasting can have huge impact on brain and people may come out of treatment resistant depression or something but you know so those studies are very difficult to do they're only case of one here and there that we hear once in a while but hopefully in future we'll see um whether the depression anxiety the mental health aspect will benefit from fasting because now as there is more and more evidence that there's this gut brain axis and whether the presence of food or the microbiome changes in the gut if they can affect brain then maybe long-term fasting periodic fasting a few days of low calorie diet back to back will be interesting to see how it impacts brain health very interesting what are your thoughts on fat fasting where people try and limit their blood glucose by only eating mainly fats mainly healthy typically they'll eat healthier Fatso of avocados olive oils and nuts you know and some animal fats perhaps but um as a way to keep blood glucose low and also time restrict this goes back to the kind of low carbohydrate um thing what are your thoughts on that as as a general strategy for health I mean it combines sort of two general themes that are out there I think both of which are you know data are still incoming that restricting the feeding times it can be beneficial as well as keeping overall blood glucose lower can be beneficial yeah I think there is too much uh emphasis now on blood sugar spiking or um we don't know um this kind of eating pattern for example means we are essentially telling pancreas that okay it's or the eyelid cells that produce uh insulin and it's okay you can take um take a break go on vacation for you for a month or two or three months um my question is it will be interesting to see what happens to those eyelets because for example we know that if we this user unused our muscles that is muscle atrophy muscles will become weaker we don't know whether long-term consequences of this very low carbohydrate diet where you are not essentially engaging the eyelid cells periodically what is its impact so if there is no impact maybe it's okay maybe because as you know many people who actually work on ketogenic diet the researchers themselves they find it very difficult to stay in true ketogenic diet because the true ketogenic diet is consuming less than 10 percent of calories from carbohydrate and not very many from protein a lot of people think ketogenic diet allows them to eat massive amounts of meat and that's not necessarily the case just one clarification for people um uh Sachin was referring to islet cells of the pancreas which are the ones that manufacture insulin so the question is whether or not taking in low levels of blood glucose by way of a low carbohydrate diet those islet cells are going to shut off their production very interesting I mean the liver is a very plastic tissue I mean it tends to um react very dramatically to to Lifestyle Changes yeah so that's why it was interesting to see what happens means we know that even muscle issues for example people who become bedridden the loss of muscle mass but when they come back and exercise they gain it back so it'll be interesting to see what happens in these people who are going through long-term ketogenic diet and of course once in a while because of social pressure or something else if they don't have access to food or something happens they may consume some sugar some blood glucose will Spike but it's not that every spike is bad I mean the reason why we have insulin is for good reason to buffer that Spike to buffer that Spike and also you know people always say that well if you have insulin produced or insulin like growth factor those are really bad and it should avoid that and I think that's a little bit extreme and I mean that's the insulin growth factors involved in muscle protein synthesis tissue repair yeah maybe even cognition so yeah yeah and it also goes back to as a m tour activation and all that stuff people get really excited about how to reduce them to activation rapamycin and all that stuff so this is where um again from circadian point of view um I ask people to think okay so two very popular drug like molecules or drugs that people think will increase longevity or metformin which many people agree not all will come to a consensus that it activates MP kinase or the sensor and the cells that sense that your cells are fasting so metformin kind of activates it so that it kind of you can say although it may not be scientifically accurate uh the um you know fasting and appeal so it sort of mimics fasting yeah and the and the thing I'd lump in there with metformin is that berberine is kind of the Poor Man's metformin it's a tree bark extract that also dramatically lowers blood glucose yeah yeah and it mimics kind of that um fasting and then rapamycin um also kind of reduces Emptor activation and people have shown that rapamycin and Metformin can extend Mouse lifespan and in improve health okay so now let's go back to the calorie restriction study that I mentioned in calorie restriction people are giving food as a lump sum and they were essentially doing time restriction the mice were doing time restriction if we think about it during day time when experimenters are coming to the bivarium the mice should be sleeping and fasting and they should naturally have high level of MP kinase if they're truly fasting and they should also have low level of interactivity because M2 responds to insulin and that should go off at night so my suspicion is um in many of these experiments where the mice were allowed to eat at Louis Vuitton even normal standard Char now we are we know that as mice get older they actually consume little bit more food during day time which is the equivalent of human night humans nighttime it is like nighttime eating we know is an issue I didn't realize that was more of an issue as people age but yeah so we don't know but at least in mice because you know we can put demise in calorimetry look at every single by dieting how much they're eating so I guess it was natural to see that researchers found that there is some mtor activity during day time when the mice were not supposed to have M3 activity because they should be fasting and since they ate little bit they were snacking during day time amp kinase activity was not at its peak so giving metformin kind of mimic that fasting state and reducing M productivity by drug like rapamycin also kind of mimics some aspect of the fasting state so my suspicion is um since these studies were done always in mice who are supposed to be in the fasting State and both enter sorry rapamycin and mpkin is activated or metformin kind of are mimicking that fasting State that's why we have seen those benefits and it will be interesting to see if that experiment will be done in humans in the long term because many people are very excited about you know there is M total long-term metformin study and then a lot of people are actually consuming good amount of rapamycin off level they can get their own so that's my curiosity I'm not saying whether it's good or bad or whether there is science or not that's something that will be interesting to control for and see because recently I saw one of my again close friend and colleague at Scripps suited a very simple elegant study people should have done in metformin field so it took mice and then measured their blood glucose at different time of the day and in fact just like human blood Lookers our blood glucose fluctuates a little bit uh she saw that rhythm and then in every two hours or three hours um on different days of course so you have the same dose of Metformin to mice and what she found was a different time of the day metformin had very dramatic change in glucose reducing ability so which means that even if you take metformin and give a different time of the day for the mouse or even for humans in very long term of course in this mice this mice were not diabetic or anything they were healthy mice to begin with so in long term we might see um benefits that are very different so this brings to this idea that well maybe metformin say at the end of the day evening metformin May trigger that fasting State much earlier than end of digestion whereas metformin in the beginning of the day may not at least from longevity perspective I'm not talking about Diabetes Type 2 diabetes here so the same thing with Emptor um is mtor going to have much better impact if taken during evening morning before meal so um these are my thoughts that go along with all this fat um story that we talked about do you take Metformin or Burberry I know I haven't taken although you know um I have close uh friend and colleague um Ruben Shaw who is now the director of Cancer Center at salki extensively works on MP kinase and its mechanisms and um so it's always fun to talk to him he's a he's a fan yeah I've taken berberine before and I've had two different very distinct experiences with them first of all um berberine when ingested with carbohydrates in particular carbohydrates to have a lot of simple sugars definitely I know this because I measured my blood glucose I did the experiment allows you to flatten out your blood glucose response so you know in some sense if you're you know there is this idea if you're going to eat a particularly big meal or sugary meal and you don't want to get a massive blood glucose rise you take berberine or metformin metformin is yeah prescription that's I went with berberine because it's as far as I know it works as well yeah um at least for healthy people yeah for healthy people that's right um when I took berberine and did not ingest large amounts of simple sugars or carbohydrates along with it I experienced profound hypoglycemia I felt like complete garbage for about eight hours and I had one of the worst headaches of my life because which makes sense you just got a blood sugar crash so if you lower blood your blood sugar when you already have fairly low blood sugar and you're not ingesting carbohydrates you can really bottom out your your blood glucose so just say it's I say that as a for two reasons one is kind of a cautionary note and the other one that um when you think about the biology of these compounds it makes perfect sense and I think that um and I did not pay attention to circadian effects yeah yeah I mean you know when I joined Salk um is the kind of the um big liver and sick in metabolism and he works on nuclear hormone receptors um these are the master regulator of metabolism and normal cells cancer cells and many other and what was interesting was in the first few years Ron did a very simple experiment he just looked at what time of the day this nuclear hormone receptors are turned on at gene expression level and some are protein level and he found that almost all of them have a circadian pattern at least in some tissue so he went to that length to say even that circadian is metabolism and metabolism is circadian the reason why we have a circadian rhythm is to have a daily rhythms in food seeking behavior and eating and also go through a period of time when we should be fasting and then on the other hand all the metabolic Regulators also have to follow that rule and almost all metabolic Regulators everything that we can think of connected to metabolizing macronutrient protein carb and fat they should also have a circadian rhythm or diurnal cycle to align or misalign so for example fat oxidation should be in opposite phase with feeding and um you know in retrospect at that time it was kind of amazing to see Ron could foresee of course he's smart enough to foresee and predict that this is going to happen to circadian field because at that time we're thinking about the suprachiasmatic nucleus sleep quick cycle and we are not thinking too much about metabolism so that's the awesome thing about song being at Salt because we have 50 pis really crammed into two awesome buildings and with Open Lab structure so you bump onto each other and talk to you so and with an ocean view oh it's awesome view yes it's an amazing place I was lucky enough to have an adjunct position there when I when my lab was at UCSD and uh it is an amazing Place doing incredible groundbreaking work which of course includes yours listen uh Sachin I I'm clear now that um we have to have you back on for another uh series of discussions seriously speaking if if you'd be so so uh kind and willing to do that I want to thank you for several things first of all for your taking the time today to sit down and discuss these um incredibly interesting ideas in detail you know much of what we talk about on the podcast is uh obviously grounded in science and and often but not always as actionable and so much of what we talked about today is actionable in the sense that many people are already doing certain dimensions of these things some are not some are hearing about it and considering it you've given us dozens I've listed some out dozens of tools and considerations based on whether or not people are engaging in shift work or not I think a lot of people are going to realize that they are shift workers yeah even though they didn't think they were um because of the nature of their habits now to light and activity and so forth um I absolutely love the firefighter study because of its relevance to the general population also not another nod to fighter fighters and shift workers everywhere thank you and you know I think among the colleagues I've known for several decades now you really are one of a very small few who've managed to do both animal studies and human studies but also animal studies with a very clear eye and a pointer toward human health and um that's such a vital and rare thing especially in this day of um extremely competitive funding so I want to thank you for your time today for the knowledge you share the actionable aspects of that knowledge the science that you're doing in your laboratory we will provide links for people to learn more about you and of course to go to the app yeah um so people can um engage in some of the science directly and of course you have several wonderful books now that we will also link to both of which I've read and are wonderful in particular the book um the first book but also a book related to diabetes and um so for diabetics and people interested in metabolic and blood sugar regulation um there so yeah on behalf of myself and my team here at The huberman Lab podcast and all the listeners I just want to say thank you so much your time is valuable and the fact that you'd share it with us and educate so many people is really a gift yeah thank you and actually likewise there are very few scientists who have taken this leadership role that you have taken to uh come and communicate science to the public it's not easy because sometimes you have to distill it down to a simple sound bite to the point where the scientist and they'll say oh that may not be right but we always have to keep in mind that we are always living in the dark is of science because the reason why I say that this is not my quote actually this is from one of my scientific hero Paul simel from Scripps Yola says think about it 10 years ago what do you what you thought was right and the best has already changed but one thing is the Circadian rhythm and aligning it to our internal clock to our habit is very important and as you mentioned uh we have our my security and clock app which is research facing but we have also distilled all of this down to five or six timing component and we have a new app called on time health or get on time Health to people access that through the standard app stores yeah so now it's available in in app store uh sorry uh Apple App Store and we want to see uh how because people always think about fasting but as we discussed today feeding fasting or eating fasting and activity and sleep a kind of interlinked and we have to kind of balance both of these so that's that was the idea behind this on time health program and um thank you Andy because what you're doing is immensely necessary particularly these days when science is moving at a very past phase there are a lot of results coming out sometimes something can be very confusing and you spending your time to communicate science is exceptional so thank you well you're most welcome it's um days like today where I get to sit down and and talk to brilliant colleagues like you who are doing the important work that that really matters so much and so as you um mentioned a moment ago that there's uh a lot of darkness and confusion out there but uh thank you for being uh one of those whose Shining Light thank you thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Sachin Panda all about circadian biology and time restricted feeding if you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zero cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both apple and Spotify and on both apple and Spotify you can also leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for us or comments about the podcast or topics you'd like me to cover or guests that you'd like me to include on the huberman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments in addition please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast on various episodes of The huberman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep supporting hormones improving focus and so on the huberman Lab podcast is proud to have partnered with momentous supplements we've done that for several reasons first of all momentous supplements are of the very highest quality and are used with various sports teams and various studies through the Department of Defense and so on and momentous supplements tend to be in single ingredient formulations single ingredient formulations are absolutely essential if you are going to develop the most cost effective and biologically effective supplement regimen for you because simply put they allow you to adjust the dosage of individual ingredients to alternate days that you take different ingredients to cycle them and so forth in addition momentous supplements are available internationally which many other supplements are not if you'd like to see the supplements discussed on the huberman Lab podcast you can go to live momentous spelled ous live momentous.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media it's huberman lab on Instagram Twitter Facebook and Linkedin and at all of those places I cover science and science-based tools some of which overlap with the contents of the huberman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content covered on the huberman Lab podcast again it's hubervin lab on all social media platforms if you haven't already subscribed to the huberman Lab podcast neural network newsletter it's a monthly newsletter that includes free tool kits for things like toolkit for sleep how to enhance the quality and duration of your sleep toolkit for Focus toolkit for neuroplasticity toolkit for deliberate cold exposure heat exposure and summaries of podcast episodes all of those toolkits can be found by going to hubermanlab.com go to the menu scroll down to newsletter and simply give us your email we do not share your email with anybody and again the newsletters and toolkits are completely zero must end you will also find some PDF examples of previous toolkits again that's hubermanlab.com thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Sachin Panda I hope you found the conversation to be as informative and actionable as I did and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 219 ---
Video ID: at37Y8rKDlA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=at37Y8rKDlA
Title: How to Optimize Your Water Quality & Intake for Health
Published: 2023-03-06 13:00:02 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss our body’s most vital and essential nutrient—water. I explain the structure of water and how it is used by the cells and tissues of our body, how much water we each need to drink and when in order to optimize our mental focus and physical performance; and I include how exercise, humidity, heat, and caffeine affect our hydration needs. I explain how temperature and pH influence water’s physical properties and if there is any scientific basis for drinking so-called “pH water” or “alkalized water” to improve health. I explain how to test your tap water for contaminants (e.g., endocrine disruptors) and the documented problems with fluoride in drinking water. I provide options for filtering drinking water and describe different water types (e.g., reverse osmosis, hydrogen-enriched, electrolyzed reduced, deuterium depleted, etc.). Since the human body is mostly water (55-80% depending on one’s age) and water has essential roles in health, disease and cellular function, everyone ought to benefit from understanding how best to clean our tap water, hydrate effectively and in some cases, adjust the type of water we drink to allow our brain and body to function optimally in regard to health and performance.

For recommended water filters, tests and the full show notes, please visit https://hubermanlab.com/how-to-optimize-your-water-quality-and-intake-for-health

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman 
HVMN: https://hvmn.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Impact of cold exposure on life satisfaction and physical composition of soldiers: https://bit.ly/3kMxG7G
Circadian rhythms and the kidney: https://go.nature.com/41RHUnV
Endocrine Disruptors in Water and Their Effects on the Reproductive System: https://bit.ly/3L7rjXc
Impact of Drinking Water Fluoride on Human Thyroid Hormones: A Case- Control Study: https://go.nature.com/3ZFoFfu
Regulations for calcium, magnesium or hardness in drinking water in the European Union member states: https://bit.ly/3SOdnU4
Electrolyzed-Reduced Water: Review I. Molecular Hydrogen Is the Exclusive Agent Responsible for the Therapeutic Effects: https://bit.ly/3Zn9oAp
Electrolyzed-Reduced Water: Review II: Safety Concerns and Effectiveness as a Source of Hydrogen Water: https://bit.ly/3SQyu88
Hydrogen-rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells in healthy adults: a randomized, double-blind, controlled trial: https://go.nature.com/3ZoUGJ6

Other Resources
Using Deliberate Cold Exposure for Health and Performance: https://hubermanlab.com/using-deliberate-cold-exposure-for-health-and-performance
ClearlyFiltered Pitcher: https://www.clearlyfiltered.com/products/clean-water-pitcher
Berkey Filters: https://www.berkeyfilters.com
Molecular Hydrogen: https://amzn.to/3mrs0AG

Timestamps
00:00:00 Water
00:03:33 Tool Deliberate Cold Exposure, Immersion & Showers Mood & Fat Loss
00:15:26 Sponsors: LMNT, Thesis, HVMN, Momentous
00:19:27 Water: Physical Properties & Chemistry
00:26:32 Bonds & Water Phases, “Structured Water”
00:34:07 Body, Cells & Water
00:36:22 Sponsor: AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & pH
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants
01:01:20 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health
01:53:40 Water Temperature
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH
02:14:05 Structured Water
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter
02:19:42 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Sponsors, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
Andrew Huberman: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we're discussing water. Now, to some of you, water might seem like a boring topic, but I assure you that water is anything but a boring topic. In fact, water as a substance is incredibly interesting for a variety of reasons that I'll explain today. In fact, we are going to discuss the physics and chemistry of water, and I promise to make it accessible to anyone and everyone regardless of whether or not you have a physics or chemistry background, and I will discuss how your body needs and utilizes water depending on what type of water you drink, the temperature of that water, when you drink the water, and indeed how you drink that water. Now, water is actually a pretty controversial topic. In fact, in preparing for this episode, which took me several months, in fact, I ran into highly contradictory information and had to go on some real deep dives in order to ferret out the best and most accurate knowledge for you. I also found that there are generally two camps of people out there in terms of how they think about water and the consumption of water. One camp generally speaking, is of the mind that tap water is completely safe. Perhaps it needs a little bit of filtering, but that in most areas of the world, if it runs out of the tap, and unless there's a warning sign directly above the faucet, that you can drink the tap water. The other camp seems to be the camp that does not trust anything that comes out of the tap and is excited by and in fact, relies on things like reverse osmosis, deuterium depleted, hydrogen rich, or other forms of water that sometimes can be very expensive or at least involve some substantial steps in order to clean, filter, alter the chemistry of, or in some other way, adjust before they are willing to consume it. So today what we're going to try and do is to address all the stances around water. For instance, we will discuss whether or not tap water is indeed safe, and I will give you some tools that will allow you to address whether or not the water coming out of your tap is safe, as well as some tools that will allow you to address how to clean that water if indeed it does need filtering and cleaning. In particular for things like fluorides and endocrine disruptors, which it turns out, are quite prominent in a lot, not all, but a lot of tap water sources. I will also talk about the more "esoteric forms of water" that I mentioned a few minutes ago. So I will go systematically through the list of distilled reverse osmosis, spring water, deuterium depleted water, high pH water, and for those of you that are already screaming out as you hear this, oh no, he's going to tell us that pH water can alter the pH of our body in helpful ways. I'm not going to tell you that, but I will tell you that the alkalinity or acidity of the water that is the pH of the water that you drink has a profound impact on your ability to absorb and utilize that water and the impact that those water molecules have on specific biological systems. So it turns out pH is very important, but not for the reasons that you've probably heard about previously. I'll talk about how the temperature of water that you drink does indeed turn out to be important for the rate of absorption of that water and its impact on the cells, tissues, and organs of your body, and thereby your health. And I will talk about various zero cost and low cost tools that you can use in order to get the most out of the water that you drink. And finally, I will talk about when and how to hydrate your body best. Before we dive into today's topic, I wanna share with you some very interesting results that were just published on the use of deliberate cold exposure to benefit fat loss. Now, deliberate cold exposure is a topic I've covered before on this podcast. We have an entire episode about that, that I've linked in the show note captions. Deliberate cold exposure can be done by way of cold showers or immersion in cold or ice water up to the neck. That's typically the ways that it's done. It has been shown to reduce inflammation, to increase metabolism, and I think some of the most exciting results that have been published are the results certainly in humans showing that deliberate cold exposure can increase the release of so-called catecholamines, which are dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. And those increases in those three molecules are quite long lasting and lead to substantial increases in mood and focus throughout the day. Now, many people out there hear about deliberate cold exposure and cringe. Other people hear about it and cringe because they've heard that deliberate cold exposure, especially by way of immersion in water, can block the adaptation to strength or hypertrophy training. What I mean by that is yes, indeed there are data showing that if one gets into very cold water up to the neck in the six hours, anytime that is in the six hours after strength or hypertrophy training, that some of the strength and hypertrophy increases that one would observe, are blocked by that deliberate cold exposure. However, after six hours does not seem to be a problem. So it can be done on other days besides the strength and hypertrophy training. It can be done before strength and hypertrophy training. It can be done after endurance work. And I should mention that it does not appear that cold showers disrupt the adaptations to strength and hypertrophy training, even if they're done immediately after strength or hypertrophy training. Okay, with that said, many people do enjoy the effects of deliberate cold exposure, in particular for those increases in mood and alertness that are the consequence of those increases in the catecholamine, dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. And again, those increases are very long lasting. So it's not just during the exposure to cold. It is for several hours up to four, maybe even five or six hours, depending on how cold and how long the deliberate cold exposure happens to be. Again, there's a lot to say and explore about deliberate cold exposure. So again, I'll just refer you to the episode on deliberate cold exposure. If you want to explore the mechanisms and the positive health outcomes, some of the controversies within the data, etc., within that episode. Meanwhile, I definitely want to share with you the results of this recent study that just came out. The title of this study is "Impact of Cold Exposure on Life Satisfaction and Physical Composition of Soldiers". The reason this study is very interesting is that it's one of the few studies that used, or I should say, explored both deliberate cold exposure by immersion in cold water, as well as deliberate cold exposure by way of cold showers as it relates to weight loss. Now, there's already data out there on the effects of deliberate cold exposure and metabolism, and here I'm mainly referring to the beautiful work of Dr. Susanna Søberg and colleagues in Scandinavia that showed that people that do 11 minutes total of deliberate cold exposure by immersion and cold water up to the neck per week, so 11 minutes per week total, spread out across some different sessions by way of getting into water that's uncomfortably cold up to the neck, and then getting out and then doing that several times per week to hit that 11 minutes or more threshold, and, this is very important, we'll come up in a moment in the context of this new study, and warming up not by getting into a warm shower, which is frankly what I do after my cold showers or getting into the ice bath or cold water immersion, but rather forcing their body to warm up naturally by using its own metabolic abilities. In those studies, they observed substantial increases in brown fat stores, which are fat stores that you really want around the heart, and clavicles increases in metabolism that were quite dramatic in my opinion, and that could be very beneficial for allowing people to feel more comfortable at cold temperatures when they're not in cold water and on and on. So lots of benefits shown in that study. In this study, what I thought was particularly interesting is, again, they explored both immersion in cold water and cold showers, and the duration of cold exposure that they found led to substantial fat loss, especially around the abdomen, was very brief, deliberate cold exposure. Let me give you a few details about this study. The study involved 49 subjects that include both males and females. This is also really important. The beautiful work of Susanna Søberg and colleagues, as far as I know, only looked at males. This study looked at males and females. They were 19 to 30 years old, and there basically were two groups, people who either were assigned to get deliberate cold exposure, or they were not assigned to deliberate cold exposure. The form of deliberate cold exposure involved one session per week of cold immersion in cold water up to the neck. And to just give you a sense of how cold it was, it was 3 degrees Celsius, which translates to about 37.5 degrees Fahrenheit. That's pretty darn cold, but it was only for two minutes. Okay, so one session at 3 degrees Celsius, otherwise known as 37.4 degrees Fahrenheit for two minutes every week, once a week. In addition, the same subjects did five cold showers per week, or a minimum of five cold showers per week. And those cold showers were slightly warmer than the immersion in cold water condition. So they were 10 degrees Celsius approximately, or 50 degrees Fahrenheit, still pretty cold. And the duration of that cold water exposure in the shower was just for 30 seconds. Okay, so this is interesting to me because many people don't have access to cold water immersion. They might not have an ice bath or any place they can do that, but they, most people do have access to a cold shower of some sort. Plus, I think most people could do probably one ice bath per week or find a place where they could get into cold water safely. Now, I should point out that some people will not do well going into 37.5 degree Fahrenheit, aka 3 degrees Celsius water, having never done anything like this before. So if you're going to try and employ these sorts of protocols that were used in the study, I do recommend that you ease into it over the course of a week or so and become somewhat adapted to the, the shock of cold water exposure. So maybe start at, you know, 50 degrees Fahrenheit, kind of ease your way back in terms of the cold water immersion, especially. Now, another critical feature of this study is, as with the beautiful work by Susanna Søberg, the subjects were told to warm up naturally after the deliberate cold exposure. So they basically hung out outside of the cold water immersion or outside of the cold shower for 10 minutes after they were exposed to the cold in their bathing suit, or I'm, I'm assuming they were wearing something, but the point is that you are not going from deliberate cold exposure directly into a hot shower or a sauna or something of that sort. So again, their bodies were forced to heat up again naturally after the deliberate cold exposure, but after the 10 minute period, they were able to do whatever they wanted, essentially, reclothe, take a warm shower, and so on and go about their day. Now the results of this deliberate cold exposure protocol, again, 2 minutes in cold immersion at 3 degrees Celsius, 37.5 degrees Fahrenheit, plus 5 cold showers per week of 2 minutes long, a little bit warmer, 10 degrees Celsius, 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Now, the deliberate cold exposure used in this study caused many different statistically significant positive changes. They had a very extensive questionnaire that related to mood, everything from levels of anxiety to sexual satisfaction, and on and on. In fact, they saw a statistically significant improvement in sexual satisfaction in the subjects that were exposed to deliberate cold exposure. Not in the control group, although they didn't look at this, chances are those improvements in sexual satisfaction were the downstream consequence of the known increases in testosterone and free testosterone that occur in both men and women who do the sorts of deliberate cold exposure. Again, testosterone being an important hormone for libido in both men and women. They also saw improvements in regulation of anxiety, which I think is very interesting given that the deliberate cold exposure often causes people anxiety. But here and in other studies we've seen it can lead to an better ability to buffer against anxiety in the normal happenings of everyday life. Perhaps the most interesting and significant results that they found in the study however, were that in particular in men, there was a reduction in waste circumference following 8 weeks of this deliberate cold exposure, as well as a 5.5% on average, 5.5% reduction in abdominal fat, that was quite statistically significant when compared to the other groups. Now, why there was no observed reduction in abdominal fat or waist circumference in the female subjects isn't clear. Could have to do with just the way that body fat is stored and metabolized in females versus males. That is going to be a topic for future exploration. So I do think the study is very interesting because when you look at the landscape of science and discussion around deliberate cold exposure, I think there's a general consensus now that deliberate cold exposure can change one's sense of mood and wellbeing through this increases in catecholamines that I mentioned earlier. But the impact on metabolism itself has been somewhat controversial because the overall changes in metabolism that are observed while statistically significant in many studies, have not ever really been shown to translate into weight loss or body fat loss in any kind of specific way. And of course, a great advantage of this study is that by exploring soldiers, they were able to really hold constant a number of other features like the amount of daily activity that those soldiers are exposed to, their diet, their living conditions, and so on and so forth. So at least insofar as human studies are done, it's a, it's a very well controlled study. We'll provide a link to the study in the show note captions. And for those of you that are thinking about employing the protocol that's used in this particular paper, or combining it with existing deliberate cold exposure protocols, to me it seems pretty straightforward in of pretty minimal time investment. Just 2 minutes of deliberate cold exposure by way of water immersion up to the neck, and 5 times a week of 30 seconds each of deliberate cold exposure by way of cold shower. And just a quick mention about cold showers. If you're going to use cold showers to do deliberate cold exposure, you're going to want to stand under the shower itself, right? And essentially have it hit your head, the back of your neck and your upper back, which is where most of your brown fat stores are concentrated. And it turns out that cold exposure to those regions of the body in particular, are going to trigger the adaptation of increased brown fat stores, which involves increases in mitochondria in those fat. Again, this is not the blubbery fat beneath the skin. This is the fat that acts as kind of an oil in the furnace that is your thermogenic properties of your body to generate heat and burn off so-called white adipose tissue elsewhere in the body. Now, anyone that understands the laws of physics and thermodynamics will be saying, wait, in order to get fat loss, you need to have a caloric deficit. Calories in, calories out still applies. And yes, that's absolutely true. We can only conclude on the basis of the results of this study that the people that lost body fat were indeed in a caloric deficit, presumably because all other factors were held more or less constant in this group of soldiers, presumably because the deliberate cold exposure itself elevated metabolism, thereby increasing the calories out component of the calories in calories out equation, which of course, governs the rules of weight loss and body fat loss as well. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink with everything you need and nothing you don't. That means plenty of salt, magnesium and potassium, the so-called electrolytes and no sugar. Now, salt, magnesium, and potassium are critical to the function of all the cells in your body, in particular to the function of your nerve cells, also called neurons. In fact, in order for your neurons to function properly, all three electrolytes need to be present in the proper ratios, and we now know that even slight reductions in electrolyte concentrations or dehydration of the body can lead to deficits in cognitive and physical performance. LMNT contains a science backed electrolyte ratio of 1000 milligrams. That's one gram of sodium, 200 milligrams of potassium, and 60 milligrams of magnesium. I typically drink LMNT first thing in the morning when I wake up in order to hydrate my body and make sure I have enough electrolytes and while I do any kind of physical training and after physical training as well, especially if I've been sweating a lot. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt, that's lmnt.com/huberman to claim a free LMNT sample pack with your purchase. Again, that's drinklmnt.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics. Now, nootropics is a word that I don't like. I don't like it because it means smart drugs and as a neuroscientist we know that we have brain circuits for focus, brain circuits that enable creativity, brain circuits that allow task switching and on and on. So there's really no such thing as a brain circuit for being smart. Now, Thesis understands this and has designed custom nootropics that are designed to get your brain and body into the optimal state for the specific types of work that is physical or cognitive work that you want to do. I've been using thesis for more than a year now, and it's completely changed the way that I approach work. I typically take the clarity formula prior to doing any kind of cognitive work, and I'll take their energy formula often before workouts. If you'd like to try your own personalized nootropics starter kit, you can go online to takethesis.com/huberman and take their brief three minute quiz. That quiz will allow them to send you four different trial formulas that you can use for a month, and then you can iterate with them to find the ideal Nootropic formulas for you. Again, that's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by HVMN Ketone IQ. Ketone IQ is a ketone supplement that increases blood ketones. Now, many people have heard of the ketogenic diet, and indeed the ketogenic diet has been useful for many people out there. However, most people out there, including myself, do not follow a ketogenic diet that is I eat carbohydrates. However, it's important to note that even if you are not on a ketogenic diet, you can benefit from increasing your blood ketones. In fact, I'll use Ketone IQ after lunch or in the afternoon with some coffee or sometimes first thing in the morning. If I'm particularly hungry and I want to do exercise or I want to do cognitive work, but I want to delay my first meal using Ketone IQ allows me to curb my hunger and gives me a lot of focus and energy, and that's because ketones are one of the brain's preferred fuels for cognitive work. In fact, ketones have been shown to be associated with four brain function, which is associated with context switching focus and formulations of strategies, etc. All the sorts of things that are important for doing deliberate focused work or physical performance. If you'd like to try Ketone IQ you can go to hvmn.com/huberman to save 20% off your order. Again, that's hvmn.com/huberman. The huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. To find the supplements we discuss on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to livemomentous spelled O-U-S livemomentous.com/huberman. And I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Let's talk about water, and let's start off by answering the question, what is water? Water is of course H₂O, most everybody knows that from an early age, but what H₂O means is that each molecule of water consists of two hydrogens and one oxygen. Now, the physical arrangement of those two hydrogens and one oxygen turns out to be really important for how water functions in the body, and frankly, elsewhere in our world and life, if you were to make a peace symbol, that is to put up your index finger and your middle finger simultaneously. In fact, I'm gonna recommend you do that now, unless you're using your hands for something else important. In which case do it later. Well, if you make that piece symbol and you look at your hand, you have a pretty good impression of what an individual water molecule consists of, which is H₂O two hydrogens and an oxygen and, with that piece symbol, the fingers or the tips of your fingers rather are gonna represent the hydrogens. Your fingers, that is the length of each of those fingers is going to represent the electron bonds to the oxygen and the palm of your hand and the fingers that are down are going to represent the oxygen. Okay? Now, what's important about that visual impression or visual image of the individual water molecule is that it is polarized. That is the hydrogen's over on one side. Both of them are over on one side and the oxygen is over on another. And what's really important about water molecules being polarized is that they can bind to one another by way of that polarization. And this has to do with something that we all kind of learned in chemistry at one point, but many of us forgot. Maybe we didn't even understand it the first time around, which is that positives and negatives attract. So when you have individual water molecules, they have the opportunity to interact and essentially bind to one another and they bind through what are called covalent bonds. Covalent bonds are relatively weak bonds, and so as a consequence, water can change its confirmation. However, covalent bonds are strong enough that water actually can maintain some structure and that structure will vary, of course, depending on its temperature. So, what you need to know about water is that indeed it consists of lots of individual H₂O , and those H₂O can arrange themselves in different ways, and that temperature is a strong determinant of the arrangement of those water molecules. That is, they're bonding to one another. And in fact, even they're spacing between those bonds. So again, even if you don't have any chemistry, stay with me because you'll definitely understand this. Water can exist in at least 3 forms and maybe 4 forms. We know that it can be liquid, of course. That's really what normally what we think of when we think of water. It can be gas, so we think of steam, right? So if you heat it up, it takes on a not a semi-solid or a semi-liquid form, it takes on this property of steam or gas. Okay? So when you see steam or when you breathe on a cold day through your mouth or through your nose and you see your air, those are water molecules that are condensing, that is bonding in certain ways, based on differences in temperature between the inside of your body and the outside air. And of course it can be a solid, it can be ice. Now, ice is fascinating and important in understanding how water works, and this will become relevant later when we think about how water works within the body as well, especially how different temperatures of water impact the health and behavior of our cells. And the most important point to understand about water in its solid state is that unlike most substances when water is in its solid state, it is actually less dense than when it's in its liquid state. So just think about that. Most substances, like most metals, for instance, when they are in a solid state, they're more dense than when they're in a liquid state. So, for instance, if they're in a solid state, they will sink in a container filled with their liquid form, not water. Water is very interesting because as you cool water and water transitions from a liquid to a solid. It still binds. That is, it can form bonds between those different molecules of water, but the spacing between those H₂O , so again, those peace symbols with hands, so if you had a bunch of those, so if you had, you know, a thousand hands all making peace symbols, they can bond to one another. But when it's cold, those bonds are actually made further apart from one another. And as a consequence, ice, as we all know, floats in water. In other words, put very simply, water is unusual and special in that, in its solid form ice, it is actually less dense than when it's in its liquid form. And that's why ice floats in water. Now this is important not just to our biology, but to all of life. Because if you think about it, if it were not the case that water is less dense in its solid form ice than it is in its liquid form, the bottoms of our oceans would be covered with thick sheets of ice. And if that were the case, you can be absolutely sure that life would not exist on our planet the way that it does. And there's a good chance that we would not exist as a species because so much of what allows us to exist on this planet and the other animals to exist on this planet, relies on photosynthesis pathways in plants that are dependent on the sun and interactions with the oceans and lakes and other bodies of water. And of course, the ice caps are vitally important. That is the presence of ice, especially at the poles. But elsewhere, in bodies of water as well, so-called icebergs are a critical part of the ecosystem that allows for everything from photosynthesis to the ability of certain animals to extract food from each other and from their local resources. Now, there's a whole discussion to be had there, but the important point for now is that the physical properties of the bonds between water that are made and changed depending on temperature, turn out to be essential for us to be present on this planet at all and for our cells to function in the ways that they do for sake of health and for sake of disease. And we'll explore this later when we talk about the critical relationship between temperature pH, which is the relationship between alkalinity, how basic or acidity, how acid a given liquid, or in this case we're gonna be talking about water is and the ways that our cells can or can't use water. So I realize that this is fairly in depth for those of you that don't have much of a background in chemistry. I've tried to keep it really top contour, but if you can make a piece symbol or if you can just imagine a piece symbol in your mind and realize that that's a water molecule and that those water molecules combine to one another through bonds that are relatively strong, but weak enough that they can be broken if they need to, and that the temperature that those water molecules are exposed to changes the distance between those bonds and that's what allows ice to float in water, then you are gonna have no problem with the remainder of the discussion today. In fact, You will also have the ability to understand things that you've observed many times over, but perhaps have never thought about or really understood, which are, for instance, that water has a certain level of surface tension. For instance, if you've ever been to the ocean and the waves are coming in, what you'll notice is if you walk on the dry sand or gravel, pebbles that is of the ocean, it's very easy, right? I mean, the pebbles move down or the sand moves down. It depresses a little bit due to the weight of your body. But as you get closer to the water, you're gonna sink deeper because that sand is more saturated with water. But at some point, you won't be able to actually walk on top of the water, right? It has been said that Jesus walked on water. There's the so-called Jesus Christ lizard so named because it can actually walk on the surface of water. A leaf can float on the surface of water under some conditions. A coin can float on the surface of water. If you make coffee in the morning, you can actually take a spoonful of that hot coffee and pour a little bit on the surface of your coffee, and you'll notice that it will bead up, and you'll get little round spheres of water. Those are little water molecules bound to one another that spin on top of the surface before they sink under. That has everything to do with the bonding between water that's dependent on temperature, but also as with the difficulty for essentially everybody, to walk on water or for animals to walk on water. The surface tension of water allows certain things to float there or to stay at the surface. But there's a very thin layer of water molecules at the surface of water that are more dense than the water that resides at deeper depths. And that's why most things, including us sink in water, we are more dense than water. Now, I did mention earlier that there are 3 forms of water. Those are the ones that we all are familiar with, the solid liquid and gas forms of water. However, there are data mainly from Gerald Pollack laboratory at the University of Washington that have described the so-called fourth phase of water, which is structured water. And we'll get into this a little bit later because structured water has really been a prominent topic in the, let's call it the water health aficionados. It's a heavily debated topic as to whether or not structured water is somehow better for ourselves if it exists within our bodies. We'll get into that in full detail later. But the whole notion of structured water is that in the presence of certain solids or certain liquids, the confirmation of water that is the water molecules actually change somewhat. This has been demonstrated. Whether or not it has relevance to the biological function of our body is a different issue. But we know that there is this fourth phase of water called structured water. Structured water is a fairly complicated topic, but we can make it very simple for sake of today's discussion. I mentioned earlier that opposite polls attract that is positives and negatives attract, and typically, things that are negatively charged when presented with another negative charge either repel or don't attract. Things that are positively charged in the presence of another positive charge also tend to repel. This is the basis of magnets, either sticking to one another or repelling from one another. There's also the idea that human beings who are opposites attract, but that's a different episode that we need to do in the future. The point here is that structured water is a unique condition in which the local environment that these water molecules happen to be in allows positive charges between different water molecules to attract one another. So again, whereas normally it's positive and negatives that attract in the configuration that we call structured water. Positives and positives attract and form bonds that are stronger than the typical bonds that would be formed between water molecules. And just as it kind of prelude to our discussion about structured water, as it may or may not relate to health later, there are a number of people that believe that within the body, because of the presence of certain liquids and solids, that the water within our cells, and in particular within the interactions with so-called organelles, organelles are things like mitochondria. The Golgi apparatus, they have fancy names. These are, these are the things within cells that allow cells to do everything from make proteins to traffic proteins out to the surface of cells. Things like neurotransmitters and receptors and so on. A lot of people who are interested in structured water as it relates to biological function, have I hypothesized or like to debate rather whether or not in the body water is not just present in its liquid form or gaseous form. We know it's not present in its solid form unless you gulp down some ice cubes, for instance. But, There is a cohort of people out there, including some fairly accomplished scientists that believe that within the body, the organelles of our cells act as a substrate for water to exist in this fourth form, this structured water form. And that's led to this whole niche industry of people, who are proponents of consuming so-called structured water, and again, we'll get to that a little bit later. So now you know what individual water molecules consist of when you hear H₂O hopefully you'll get that visual image in your mind of an individual water molecule being the peace symbol and a bunch of those binding to one another through these relatively weak bonds, but strong enough that certain things can take place like surface tension. Keep in mind that surface tension of water may relate to either standard bonds between water or this fourth phase. That's heavily debated still, but we certainly know that for instance, if you were to take a piece of wax paper or glass and you were to pour some water on it, you would notice that the water would beat up or kind of aggregate at particular locations. When you see that beating up or the aggregation of water molecules on a particular surface, you're seeing two things. This is actually kind of fun. The next time you see it, you'll know that the, the aggregation, the beating up of water with itself, so individual water molecules or many water molecules kind of aggregating at one location and making a bead of water that's due to these bonds, these covalent bonds occurring between water molecules. Also, you'll notice that on a vertical pane of glass, say in rain or on your windshield, that the water will look almost like it's sticking to the glass. And that's because there are actually bonds between the water molecules that have beat it up themselves and the glass. So water can not just bind to itself. It can also bind to certain surfaces. And the fact that perhaps if you drive your car, if you were to tap the window, or if a big enough bead of water formed on a window that it would start to drip down. And that's because those bonds with the surface are strong, but they're not so strong that it stick at that location quite different than water that is in its solid form ice that can actually really adhere if you've ever had to scrape ice off a windshield. So for you, those of you who live in cold regions, you're familiar with this, scrape ice off a windshield, you realize that the bonds between water in its solid form and different services is quite a bit stronger than the bonds between different water molecules with each other. Or the bonds between water and different surfaces when they're warmer. Okay, so I do realize that for a lot of people listening, that's gonna be a pretty deep dive into the chemistry and physical properties of water. But all you really need to know is that these water molecules are incredibly versatile and can bind to each other, and can bind to different surfaces, and can allow things to float or to sink or even to move across surfaces of water based on the three, perhaps four different, states that water can be in. And that versatility that you observe in the natural world on window pans and rain and clouds and hail and ice and snow and scraping ice off your windshield in the cold of winter and perspiration and so on. All of that is fine and good, but realize that almost all of those same sorts of properties of water become extremely relevant when thinking about how your body actually utilizes water. And the key thing here is that temperature and the so-called alkalinity or acidity that is the pH of water turn out to be very important determinants of how water is used by the cells of your body. In fact, as I'll describe in a moment, we have entire sets of biological mechanisms solely devoted to trying to get water into our cells in very specific ways, including at specific rates and to use water in different ways because as you've probably heard before, we are mostly water. What's kind of interesting to me and what I found researching this episode is that the percentages of our cells and bodies that are purported to be water is a pretty broad range. Some people say we're 55% water. Other people will say We're 70% water. Some people will say We're 95% water. The exact percentage doesn't matter so much. And really just boils down to whether or not the person that's stating that percentage is talking about how much water is present in our cells and body at a given moment versus how much water was involved in the process of creating the sorts of proteins and other things of our body that are required to have hair, cell skin cells, brain cells, etc. So if you really want a number out there, I can't give you a single number if you wanna be accurate, it's gonna have to be a range. And basically we are anywhere from 70% to 90% water depending on how you define being water. That is whether or not you're talking about water being present in cells in its liquid form or maybe in this fourth structure water form. If you're, of the mind that that exists within us and whether or not you're talking about water that was used to create a given protein, like a receptor or a neurotransmitter, or whether or not you're talking about the water, just being water as H₂O. Okay, so again, it's very easy to go down that rabbit hole, and this is part of the reason why there's such a wide discrepancy of assertions as to how much of us is water. But let's be direct. Most of our body is water, and there isn't a single other molecule in the universe that we can look to and say that it has as important a role in our health and biology and frankly, our presence of life on earth at all than water. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens, now called Ag One is a Vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens, and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or usually twice a day, is that it gets to me the probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important. It's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health. And those probiotics and athletic greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health. In addition, athletic Greens contains a number of adaptogens, vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met and it tastes great. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and they'll give you 5 free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, etc., and they'll give you a year supply of Vitamin D3 K2. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the 5 free travel packs and the year supply of Vitamin D3 K2. Okay, so now at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular structure. So when you hear H₂O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the water molecules can change their confirmation. That is they can bind to other water molecules and it turns out they bind to other things and actually change the confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt. And that is because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water. And when we say they like water, it just means that the chemical structure of salt, sodium, or the chemical structure of say, sucrose like table sugar, can actually interact with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar molecules, turning them from solid into liquid. Essentially creating what are called solids, which is basically the dissolving of solids into liquid solutions. In fact, water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many solids than is acid. All right? That's how incredible water is. And there are a number of reasons related to the chemistry of water that can explain that. But as we transition from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can be hydrophilic. Or as we know, oil and water don't mix. That's because oil's, lipids are so-called hydrophobic. What's hydrophobic? We'll, just think "Ahh" phobic. Certain molecules such as lipids don't dissolve well in water. And we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for instance, and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form little spherical or amoeba like shapes within the water. And that's because oil lipids are hydrophobic. So different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic. That is they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic to have less of a propensity to interact with and bind with water molecules. And I've sort of been alluding to this numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on whether or not a hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve say a big tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup of water, and that's because the temperature of water actually changes how well that sugar molecule is able to change its confirmation and interact with the water molecules. Likewise, if you want to get something that's really hydrophilic into an aqueous, that is a water containing solution, the temperature is also going to strongly impact that. Now, there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature in pH impact the tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not. We're not gonna go into all those details, but as we migrate from our discussion about the physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what we're gonna do now, and then as we continue into the third part of our discussion, which is why and how certain types of water that some of you are familiar with, like different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of water are thought to and in some cases do in fact change the ways that our cells function, for better or for worse, all of that will come together and make sense for you. Okay? So all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them require water. In order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are basically two ways that water can access those cells. Now, if we zoom out for a second and ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think, oh, well, we drink that water into our body. Of course, that's the main way we can also breathe water molecules into our body through humid air. When you hydrate your cells, that is when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type that may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way has been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the outside of most cells is made up of fatty stuff, lipid. So for instance, neurons, nerve cells have a lipid bilayer. It's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very hydrophobic. Okay? Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its confirmation and lipids can change their confirmation just enough so that the bonds between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact, allowing the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid because it can bond very weakly or in some cases, not at all, but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through to the other side. Really incredible. If you think about it, if there was too much of a hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to the surface of that fatty outside of our cells, and then would be repelled away from it, or it would just stay there right at the surface. And that would be no good because we actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, or actually it's a double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers. So water and lipids of cells can interact with just enough affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell membrane barriers. But, and this is an important but, the diffusion of water molecules across those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other way that water accesses cells and this other way that water accesses cells is really something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent discovery, but turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of water called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes at a rate of about 1 million H₂O, 1 million water molecules per second. And the way that water molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is very interesting. The inside of those channels, and the way you think of these is they're literally tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jot really quickly and almost as if in your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water. Although it's not really lubricated, the the water molecules can move through in single file a million per second. Now, why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes? One fairly slow through basic diffusion, and again, diffusion folks is the movement of things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which you just think about this as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower concentration. They try and create equilibrium across space. So, you know, if you had a bunch of marbles on one side of a box, they're just imagine that these were water molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens, there's a tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even confirmation. That's basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also move from higher concentration to lower concentration cross cell membranes, and then you have these portals, these tubes or these channels as they're called, these aquaporin channels where water molecules can move very quickly. Now, the reason why biology seems to have created these aquaporin channels, and again, I wasn't consulted the design phase, but the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our body that often need water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. Let's think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that on occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination here, but I'll just tell you that for instance, your tear glands or tear ducts need to release tears very quickly. So you need to take water that's stored in your body if there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance or you know, God forbid if you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're gonna start to tear up. And those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's gonna be the very rapid release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin channels. And in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need to absorb water from the gut. And the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell lining and mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach into the rest of the body. And one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin channels that are expressed all along your gut. So, the discovery of these aquaporin channels is really highly significant in terms of understanding the different ways that water can interact with and get into the cells of your body. Now, there are aquaporin channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in many tissues within your body. And there even have different distributions within those tissues. In fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, cause it turns out there are different forms of them. Across all the cells and tissues of the body. There's really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent, that don't have these aquaporin channels. Some of you out there may have heard of the so-called fascia, fascia and sheath muscles. They're unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. It's incredible tissue. We'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point. Fascinating, fascinating tissue fascia, even contained aquaporin channels. So the role of aquaporin channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or lying down or sitting, you're not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're running or performing some repetitive behavior. It turns out that the aquaporin channels in certain tissues, like the fascia can be used when we transition from low mobility states to high mobility states, allowing more perfusion or access of water into particular cells of the body when we need it. Such as fascinating, fascinating channels. These aquaporin channels, and again, only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new things about our biology all the time. Now, in a very important feature of the Aquaporin channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH of water. This becomes especially important in our description and our deep dive into so-called alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I'll just give you a little teaser for now because I'm sure that a number of people are, are wondering about this. If you go into the store or even a convenient store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has a pH, right? Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, or more basic. You'll see pH water. That is 7.4. You'll see 7.8, you'll see 9.8. You'll see a huge range of these things, and there are many, many different claims about how the pH of water is important for regulating the pH of the body. Here's the real story. The pH of your body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly, strongly homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the pH is maintained, for instance, in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye, in your brain cells. Now, It is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have fairly widely varying pH. You know, it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut, and keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body. That entire pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut and intestinal pathway. And in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain locations along your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything from neurotransmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death, the pH of the rest of the cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment to moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline water or alkalized water as it's sometimes called, In order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. Now, what that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important. In fact, if the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is if the water that you consume is too acidic, it will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body, and therefore, the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it as readily. You've probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's just somehow staying there, or you feel it, its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel the little waves of water along the inside of your gut. Now, sometimes that can relate to temperature, but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water, and it turns out it is true that water that is more alkaline, that is pHs of 7.4 or higher can move more readily across the Aquaporin channel. And in terms of absorption of water from the endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body. It is true that higher pH water provided that pH isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH water. Now, this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated absorption. And as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it can adjust the function of certain cells that are within your immune system and thereby reduce certain inflammatory responses. So I realize as I'm saying this, some people out there will probably think, oh no, this guy's like a pH water proponent. He's saying we have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now, I want to be clear that is not what I'm saying, and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drank. It turns out there are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and a few other tricks that I'll tell you a little bit later that will allow you to increase the absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting, but also potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types in your body, including rapid hydration of your brain cells, which as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can greatly enhance cognitive function. Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways, diffusion and movement through these aquaporin channels. We've earmarked the discussion that the temperature and the pH of water, that is the confirmation of water. And here I really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of water and pH of water, we're really talking about the arrangement of those H₂O, those water molecules. So keep that in mind. We've covered how water can get into cells through those two different ways, diffusion and through the aquaporin channels. What we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the different proteins and organelles. Again, organelles are things like mitochondria, the nucleus of the cells, which is contained to the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or in some case aren't. That's an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions, none of which we need to go into in any specific detail now, but the one thing that we do need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward is that many of the biological processes in our body that involve the movement to molecules such as water and interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack of bonding between water molecules and proteins. And anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the same thing. We're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or not there are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on. If you've ever heard of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are ROS or reactive oxygen species or so-called free radicals or antioxidants? All of that is really just describing the presence or absence of charges that are bound or unbound. So for instance, if you hear about free radicals, sounds pretty wild, right? Free radicals. What are free radicals? Free radicals can damage cells. They don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge that's sitting out there not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things. And in that way cause damage to those proteins and potentially damage to cells. Now fortunately, our cells have ways to deal with those free radicals, and those are called antioxidants. Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well that essentially bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells so that the proteins are no longer undergoing these, let's just call them bad confirmations, that damage the functioning of our cells. So there are many different theories of aging. There are many different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease, either of brain or body that doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species, these free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual organelles and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brain or body that has not been shown to benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature. For those of you that haven't already realized it, what you're learning here is organic chemistry. So you can feel pretty good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little bit about what free electron is, which is basically a charge that's out there that can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive oxygen species and the ability of, of stable bonds to buffer against or repair certain damage to cells as we're describing it here. Well then what you're essentially thinking about and what we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry as a service to try and understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that water itself, believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things in the proper way, which requires that it get into cells in the proper amounts and rates, which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things, it's not containing salutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes that allow cells to function well. Okay, so that's a bit of a trench of information, and I don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water, drinking it down, or when you breathe water vapors in the steam room or on a humid day, that water is entering your system, it's accessing your cells through these two mechanisms, diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels. And then once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the confirmation of different proteins and accelerate or slow down different cellular reactions. Everything from normal metabolism to blood pressure to damaged cells, depending on a number of different features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its temperature, its pH, how much we drink, or how little we drink when we drink that water, etc., how that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues, and organs of our body. I'd like to just take a brief moment and thank one of our podcast sponsors, which is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform. They analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that blood work is the only way that you can monitor the markers, such as hormone markers, lipids, metabolic factors, etc., the impact your immediate and long-term health. One major challenge with blood work, however, is that most of the time it does not come back with any information about what to do in order to move the values for hormones, metabolic factors, lipids, etc., into the ranges that you want. With InsideTracker, changing those values becomes very straightforward because it has a personalized dashboard that you can use to address the nutrition-based, behavior-based, supplement based approaches that you can use in order to move those values into the ranges that are optimal for you, your vitality and your longevity. InsideTracker now includes a measurement of Apolipoprotein B, so-called ApoB in their ultimate plan. ApoB is a key marker of cardiovascular health and therefore there's extreme value to knowing your ApoB levels. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTrackers plans. Again, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Let's talk about how much water, or more generally speaking, how much fluid each and all of us should drink each day, and how much fluid to drink depending on our specific activities and environment. Now, this is perhaps the most commonly asked question when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing that comes up is a question, which is, can't we just follow our natural thirst? That is, can't we just pay attention to when we're thirsty? And then drink fluids? And then that leads to the other question, which is, does the color of our urine provide any indication as to whether or not we are under hydrated, over hydrated, or hydrating correctly? So let me answer each of these things one at a time. And in the backdrop, I want to highlight the fact that there are many, many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well and our body doesn't function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, even 2% dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact, that is a negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is going to be negatively impacted. That is we will be able to perform less work for less period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired when we are in states of dehydration. Now, that raises an additional question that deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand and it takes more than three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that, you hear, okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue, just be below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its original color within one to three seconds, then you're dehydrated. You hear things like this if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs, that means you're dehydrated. You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true? To some extent, it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are, whether or not the skin on the top of your hand tends to be looser or not depending on whether or not you're leaner or not. So in other words, those are not absolutely objective measures of dehydration. Now, it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top of your hand and it returns to its normal flattened position within about one to two or three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds, there's a decent probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid, or that if you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original pinkish color within a few seconds, well then there's a chance that you're dehydrated. But again, these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a 2% dehydration state, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures of reductions in water intake, which is a different thing, right? It's saying that ordinarily, a person of a given body weight needs X amount of fluid per day, and when they get even just 2% less than that amount of fluid than their cognitive and or physical performance is impaired, rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay? Now that might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now, there we can really point to some solid numbers that, believe it or not, are fairly independent of body weight. Now, I say independent of body weight. I'm referring to the amount of fluid that most healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert ultra marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments that are very, very hot. Here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life in indoor environments, could be air conditioned or not air conditioned, heated or not heated. What we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the board, because of course there are an infinite number of different conditions that each and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by activity, by environment, by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable frameworks. That is levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are exercising, that will ensure that you are hydrating with the one exception being if you are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're not heat adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring to fluid. I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda, tea, and so on. I'll discuss that in a moment. We can reasonably say that for every hour that you are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important, in the first 10 hours of your day, you should consume on average, 8 ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that are using the metric system, not ounces, 8 ounces of fluid is approximately 236 milliliters of water. And for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to thinking about ounces and vice versa, just think about a typical can of soda. In the United States, it's 12 ounces. In Europe, sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit smaller, but that's a whole discussion unto itself. But 8 ounces of fluid, that is 236, let's just say 240 milliliters because we don't need to be too precise here, of fluid on average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day, or 2,360 milliliters of water. In other words, approximately 2 liters of water plus a little bit more for the first 10 hours of your day. Now, I wanna be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest 8 ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour, every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. I'm certainly not saying that. And in fact, most people are going to find that they're going to ingest water in bolus. That is, they're gonna have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 milliliters of water at one portion of the day, and then maybe a couple hours of later that they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and another portion of the day. I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 2.4 liters of water for that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 10 hours later. Now, why am I setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later, as compared to the later evening and nighttime. And here I'm referring to people that are not doing night shifts. But if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, that's going to be 8 ounces of fluid or 240 milliliters of fluid on average for every hour from the time when we wake up until 10 hours later. That's the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're getting sufficient baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. Now, if you are engaging in exercise, whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether or not it's resistance training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration. And there too, we have some excellent numbers that we can look to. Excellent, because they arrive from research. And this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr. Andy Galpin, professor of Kinesiology at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about exercise, everything from strength training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, supplementation, recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at hubermanlab.com. And one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but that some of you may have not heard, is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid to ingest on average. Keep in mind, this is on average when you are exercising, and I refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should take your body weight in pounds, divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of ounces of fluid to ingest every 15 to 20 minutes on average while exercising. Okay, your body weight impounds divided by 30 equals the number of ounces of fluid to consume on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is it is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment. You could wait half an hour or an hour and then consume a larger bolus of fluid, a larger amount. Although it is recommended for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout your training. One's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing, whether or not it's running or jumping, is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis. Or whether or not you need to do it at different intervals than every 15, 20 minutes. Maybe it's every 5 minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you. But if you were to take the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the 3 hours of exercise and ask how much fluid to ingest, it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds to buy it by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the metric system? And there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that you need approximately 2 milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight, every 15 to 20 minutes. Again, the Galpin equation converted into the metric system is going to be 2 milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. I'm sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before, approximately 8 ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours of waking, that should establish a good baseline of hydration heading into exercise, which then prompts the next question I often get, which is, is the amount of water that needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of, or separate from that? That is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level, that 8 ounces or 240 milliliters? And there the answer sort of goes both ways. I think if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way. Again, you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are ballpark figures that will ensure hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher perhaps than needed to ensure more hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is if you're exercising for about an hour, most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. Well, then you can replace the 8 ounces or the 240 milliliters of water that's required at baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation during that bout of exercise. A common question is if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor, outdoor, or you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot, and by the way, we can all get better at sweating, by sweating more. Sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna more, you're gonna get better at sweating. If you exercise more, especially if you wear more layers, or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're gonna get better at sweating over time. And sweating is an adaptation that helps cool your body. If you are sweating a lot or you're in heat, how much fluid should you ingest? In general, I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin equation by about 50 to a 100%. So either increase by 50% or double those numbers if you're in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly recommend consuming at least 8 ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna. And then of course, people ask, well, how hot? And it, okay, that starts getting really detailed and we can't distinguish between dry saunas and wet saunas. And again, too many variables. But I would double your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. Also if you are feeling dehydrated, okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean? That actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later. But what we're really talking about here is if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are "parched", or you're very thirsty, well then there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more fluids. So 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour while you're feeling parched. My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's level of dehydration. And we know that based on some really nice studies that have explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination, compared to the amount of physical output compared to the environment that one happens to be in. And these are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology. But here's the basic rule of thumb that's gonna work for most people. If you are feeling parched, consume fluids, ideally you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics. Diuretics being substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are consuming caffeine either prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you work in a air conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment, that you try and include some sodium and ideally sodium, potassium, magnesium, the electrolytes in that beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink, an LMNT or some other sort, they're a lot of different types out there. For most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many people do just like the taste of pure water. Chances are you're going to have enough electrolytes unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot, and under conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete more fluid. If you are ingesting caffeine, whether or not it's from tea or coffee, I highly recommend increasing your non caffeine fluid intake about two to one for every volume of caffeine. So in other words, if you have a 6 ounces or 8 ounces of coffee, you're gonna want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes, or a little pinch of salt in order to offset that dehydration. So hopefully those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when they're just moving about their day. Again, underscored by the fact that even slight levels of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance largely by creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog. You know, I get so many questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration that matches the demands of humidity and output as described in the equations that we went over a little bit before, really can enhance clarity of focus and overall energy. And we'll talk about why that is, but I'll just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient fluids can enhance our ability to focus, and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase physical vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real mouthful. But basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, as many of you've heard me talk about before, is the aspect of your nervous system that makes you more alert. Has nothing to do with emotional sympathy, has to do with a bunch of neurons in the middle of your spinal cord called the sympathetic chain ganglia, and some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain, like the locus coeruleus, that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you more alert and in a kind of magnificent arrangement, or I think magnificent arrangement, when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated, and believe it or not, when our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the sympathetic nervous system by way of two pathways. One is mechanical. In fact, we have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut, these stretch receptors have fancy names like TRP trip channels as they're called, or piezo, which are these stretch sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many laboratories, but in particular David Julius and Ardem Patapoutian. David Julius is at UC San Francisco, Ardem is at the Scripps Institute. They've discovered a bunch of channels in cells that sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues so-called Mechanosensation. And basically what it all boils down to is that when our bladder has some fluid in it, when our stomach has some fluid in it, and when our cells are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that distension even. And then here, I'm not talking about being like overly full or, you know, full of chock-a-block, full of fluid or your bladder feeling, you know, really, really full. We'll talk about that in a moment. But when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical signature of that, which is the expansion of our tissues because it has more fluid in it. And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those aquaporin channels is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic arousal and makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the night. If we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate, we wake up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed. And believe it or not, in both humans and in dogs, our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we actually learn. Babies just pee in their diaper. Dogs just pee on the floor until their house broken or until a child learns to hold onto their urine, until they go to the bathroom, in the bathroom, or particularly appropriate location outdoors or otherwise. The point is that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the tissues of our body, when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived to the cells and tissues of our body, that is signaled to the brain in the form of alertness. And that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have when we are well hydrated. It's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need fluid and we need water. But it also prompts the question of, well, does being well hydrated actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive performance? And indeed, the answer is yes. Now, earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply. And here again, I really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to the decimal point. They were really meant and are meant as crude, but sufficient guides for you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of activity and at rest. If you recall when we talked about those equations, I said, you need about 8 ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day after waking. Now, why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration of fluids from your body, which is accomplished of course, by your kidneys and by way of your bladder, and the excretion of fluid out urethra, so-called urination, is strongly, strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells even of your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which filter the fluid that comes into your body, and that makes certain hormones like vasopressin, which is antidiuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes, circadian clock genes are genes that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact whether or not that organ, in this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level. And we can make all of this very simple by simply stating what's contained in this beautiful review that I'll provide a link to if you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney. And basically what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within your body at a very rapid rate. There are a number of different cell types that do that, but they are basically taking that fluid, pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as antidiuretic hormone, vasopressin to adjust whether or not you're gonna hold onto fluid or release more fluid from your body in the form of urine. Depending on the salt concentration, depending on how much fluid you need, your work output, the conditions you're in, all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking your kidney really starts to reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, and thank goodness it does because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the same rate at midnight, assuming you wake up at say, 7 or 8 or 9:00 AM that it was filtering fluid at 10:00 AM. In fact, we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime waking in order to urinate, which is a common, common question and concern that many people have, how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate? And there I say it's perfectly normal to wake up once, maybe twice each night to urinate, but if you want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing 3 things. First of all, make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the equations that we talked about earlier, that will ensure that you are not excessively thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid. Second, and related to that first point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you hydrated sufficiently throughout the day. And believe it or not, the rate at which fluid moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the rate at which you ingest that fluid and you might be thinking, that's crazy. That makes no sense at all, right? If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to urinate a ton? Yes and no. It also stands to reason that you might ask, if I ingest very little fluid, but I do it very fast, is it gonna be the case that I'm gonna urinate it out very quickly? Well, yes and no. The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney, of course, depend not just on the volume, but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those Mechanosensors that we talked about earlier. If you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete those fluids more quickly than if you sip them slowly, excuse me, sip them slowly. So here's what I recommend throughout the day. When you're trying to get your adequate yield of water or other beverages, feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'm a gulper, not a sipper, but many of you are gonna be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate that feels right to you, but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the night, reduce your fluid intake provided you hydrate properly throughout the day, and I suggest consuming no more than 5, maybe 8 ounces of fluid between the time of 10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep. Again, if you're very thirsty or you under hydrate or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid please. But most people will find that if they reduce their fluid intake to about 5 ounces or less of fluid in that later part of the day, after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep, and they sip those beverages as opposed to gulping them, that they will have fewer bouts of waking up in the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. Let's talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp, but a deep breath because in researching tap water and what's contained in tap water in different regions, not just in the US but around the world, I confess the picture is a pretty scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or conspiracy theories. However, in researching tap water for this episode by way of looking at the peer reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles where specific hypotheses were tested, and in talking with experts in toxicology and so on, it's a pretty grim picture frankly. When one looks at what's contained in most tap water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health. And the bad news is that much, if not all, tap water, believe it or not much if not all, tap water contains things that are bad for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the silver lining is that very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So that's the good news, and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can negatively impact reproductive health in males or females, or both, there is a wonderful review, wonderful, because it's so thorough. Although the news isn't great, it's very thorough, which is great, which is entitled Endocrine Disruptors in Water and Their Effects on the Reproductive System. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals. That is magnesium and calcium within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible, right? But hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium. Other water contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is going to impact the pH of water. In general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and calcium and water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is, and the lower levels of magnesium and calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be. The other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called DBPs: dog bulldog, porcupines, DBPs. Which are disinfection byproducts contained in water. So obviously local governments, the government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't want contaminants in, they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water. Water treatment plants, treat water with disinfection products, and those disinfection products create things called disinfection byproducts. And the presence of those DBPs or disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH of water by way of changing the concentrations of magnesium and calcium. Put differently, I do believe that governments are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce things to that water that are not good for us. Now, it's very clear that DBPs can cause endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for reproductive health. I did a very long, in fact, 4 and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality. That was male and female fertility, by the way. And vitality that again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm and, and creating healthy embryos, implantation embryos, and so forth. It's very clear that DBPs have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility outcomes. Even at concentrations of DBPs that are present in drinking water that comes from the tap. Now, does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer to that is it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First of all, I highly recommend to everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and unfortunately, there's no specific one site that I can send everyone to, to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking water that comes out of your tap. However, I highly recommend that you go online and put in your zip code or municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water contains X amount of DBPs or Y amount of DBPs. Now, of course, you're gonna get a bunch of values back, and unless you're a toxicologist, You are probably not gonna know what those values mean. But what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high, low, or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body. Now, thyroid hormone has a lot of different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything from metabolism to levels of energy. When thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression. When thyroid hormones are optimized, it can lead to optimal mood if there is such a thing. But in other words, it helps keep your mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction, thyroid hormones involved in many, many things including bone health and tissue health generally. So essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone, and there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the study is Impact of Drinking Water Fluoride on Human Thyroid Hormones. This was a case control study so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it shows is that fluoride negatively impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 levels. So you have thyroid hormone, T3, and T4 even in the standard concentrations that are present of, and here's an important number, 0.5 milligrams per liter. Okay? So if you can get ahold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you'll find is that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid function. And this is going to be a particular concern for people to have familial, so genetically related thyroid issues, or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get ahold of some data about the water that comes out of your tap if you intend on drinking tap water. And probably even if you don't just know what's in your drinking water, your local government should provide that information and or it should be readily available online. And in particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present in your drinking water. Again, I don't want to create a lot of scare. I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just referred to a moment ago, again, links to these are going to be provided in the show note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking water are simply not good for us. Now, that could open a whole discussion of why fluoride is in our drinking water in the first place at all. But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much fluoride is in their drinking water. And ideally, everybody, yes, everybody is filtering their drinking water. Now, that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water. And that brings an answer of it depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or unhealthy do you know yourself to be? Okay? So if you're somebody who has no health issues, you have plenty of vigor, you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune disease, you're not aware of any health concern, minor or major, well then perhaps you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why wouldn't you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or both, that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water, if they're getting their drinking the water from their tap because it is pretty well established now that tap water contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts, as well as in most cases, exceeding the threshold of fluoride that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filters. So these are gonna be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a compartment where you can pour the water over it and goes into the compartment below. Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough. However, it is not thought, unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly recommend is depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and inexpensive tools to do that. And here I don't have any relationship to any of the water filters or things that I'm gonna mention. Now, I wanna be very clear about that there's no brand code or affiliation here. I'm simply trying to direct you to resources that will allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that meets your budget with the understanding that people have very different disposable incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just wanna get that outta the way first. , you know, there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. So these are what I'll refer to as pitch filters that are less than a hundred dollars. Now keep in mind that that's a one-time purchase except for the replacement of the filters, which fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters. I'll provide a link to one that I found that is at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, BPAs, glyphosates, hormones, and some of the other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for some people, even an 80 US dollar cost is going to be prohibitive. But do realize that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly, over and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches that I'll talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that you would use, say for an entire week or for an entire month in one pitcher. You're gonna have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, you can find you know, whole house water filters that are, you know, $2,000 or more. Again, these are gonna be filters that are gonna be in your garage or in a, a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the, the piping system of your house and deliver purified water. I technically, it's not purified, but that's removing these contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. So you could effectively drink from any or all sinks in your house. That's what explains the higher cost. I think most people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's important to you, you could do that. And then there are going to be what I would call intermediate systems. So systems that cost somewhere between 200 and $500. Probably one of the more common ones or popular ones is a so-called Berkey filter system. These are filter systems that, again, remove the things that you want removed from your tap water, and they can do it at higher volumes. And they're typically countertop units. They don't require any plugin typically, or they only require brief plugin and electricity, and they're going to filter out many, many liters or tens of liters of water so that you can always have access to that clean filtered water time or day or night without having to pour over into the pitcher. So I mentioned these different options because again, I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable, you know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants. If anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants, please put in the comment section on YouTube. That'd be the best place. So that I and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems that I mentioned we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the range that one could potentially afford. An important note about filtration. Just as in our body, there are mechanisms to signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that occur in our gut, in our brain, etc., elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes, whether or not those are, you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or more asleep, etc. So too filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. What I mean by that is when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter, those filters are doing two things. They are physically constraining which molecules can go through by creating portals, pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and not others. And almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves, right? Those filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. Okay? So you may be wondering how when you filter water, you know, magnesium and calcium could get through, but fluoride doesn't. And that's because these filters have been very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules, such as sediment and dirt, which is kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow certain small molecule, like calcium, which is small-ish, or magnesium, which is small-ish to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful because what it means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about before, you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that water while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay, well here you have an interesting zero cost option. It's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it is an option, and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any disposable income for the purpose of filtering their water, which is to draw a gallon or 5 gallons or maybe even more, tap water out of the tap and put it into some, some container, some vessel. So it could be one gallon, 5 gallon, 10 gallon container. And then to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to the bottom. Now you might say, well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water. And indeed the answer to that is yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the contaminants in that water. If, however you are filtering the water using any of the methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay? I realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the sun or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they get ingested. That to me, seems a bit extreme. If you wanna do that, be my guest, but I don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap water, they're taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and keeping it room temperature for a half day or a day or more, and then pouring off the top two thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would need to be concerned about. And here I should mention something that I neglected to mention a few moments ago. If you were going to do this zero cost option and, and let the water sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry, I should have mentioned that before. Uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that water. In fact, you could even put a a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you also want some of the sediment to drop down. And the reason why this process of letting water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that water, but rather because of the pipes that that water arrives to your glass or your, the pot that you have from. Okay? And here again, there is an infinite number of variables. So some people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old, but very, very clean. Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures. They have new pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while, you are able to remove some of the contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the building and even the pipes that lead to your home or apartment. Now, some people get really obsessed with this old tap water thing and really wanna find out all the details about the pipes and what sorts of, you know, hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those sorts of things. Most people, I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these lower cost filters. Or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of fluid that later I'll tell you, I've been doing an experiment for sake of this episode looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric and almost a little wacky. But it turns out has largely to do with the amount of magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely. But it does require a few of these steps. So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the "hardness" of water. So what of the hardness of water, you know, is it better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less? Some people don't like the taste of hard water. They prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium in calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some of the literature. In fact I'll mention a paper in particular now, published in 2019, which describes the quote, regulations for calcium, magnesium, or hardness in drinking water in the European Union member states. Turns out in Europe, they do very detailed water analysis and that's present in a number of really high quality scientific publications. This was a paper published in regulatory toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here I'm quoting statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular mortality. Now, again, that's a, an association, this is not causal, but higher magnesium in water, lower cardiovascular mortality. They go on to say the highest exposure category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your water analysis, you can compare against some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of cardiovascular mortality by 25% compared with people consuming magnesium content of 2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter. Okay, so what this basically shows, and, and by the way, the reference to that I'll also provide a link to, in the show note caption. What this basically states is that higher magnesium containing water, and it turns out higher magnesium and calcium containing water, so-called harder water may not taste as good to you, but turns out to be better for you. Now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting cardiovascular disease, I don't know. In fact, I would probably just state no, it probably won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebral vascular disease. For that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to listen to the episode with Dr. Peter Attia, that's coming out in a few weeks that gets deep into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease. But basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and epidemiological evidence along with clinical and nutritional evidence that's strong enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and calcium in that water. Now, this ought to raise a very important question in all of your minds, which is why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out that's not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease, and other aspects of cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells of our body to stay in particular ranges as I mentioned earlier, but having more magnesium and more calcium in our water that is increasing the hardness of our water changes the pH of that water. And it turns out that the elevated pH of water, that is pH of water that tends to be somewhere between high sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I wanna restate this because I'm a little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is gonna be taken and, and send elsewhere. And someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH water, that we all need to buy expensive high pH water. Turns out that's not the case. If you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of a magnesium are sufficiently high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per liter of water, that is, if the water coming out of your tap is hard enough, well then chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium concentration. If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I would hope filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium, well then chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough that it's not going to be lending itself to some of the favorable health components that higher pH water can. Notice, I did not say that lower pH aka more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say that. I said that higher pH water can be good for you. So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you. And some of the best, and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher pH magnesium enhanced or simply tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby decontaminate the tap water. There I want to caution you, it turns out that some of the contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water. And again, I don't want to open up you know, a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I presume, use water to cook pasta, rice, because I'm an omnivore, I do consume those things. I confess if I make Yerba Matte or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher quality water source than tap water, even if that tap water is filtered, because I like the taste far more if I use a really good source of water, and again, because I'm not consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a, a relatively inexpensive endeavor. But I would caution people against using boiling or heating of water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on some of the filtration systems that I talked about before. And as long as we're talking about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It's not a huge debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking really cold water or room temperature water is better for you or worse for you. This is a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very, very cold, that is if you drink it and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually feel it as cold within your gut, that's sort of a, a you know, back of the envelope, , or I should say direct within the gut measure of cold versus body temperature water, that it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're gonna feel it sloshing around in your stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water that is slightly warmer. Now, that is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. However, many people find that when they drink very cold water or ice water, that indeed it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at least to them feel like it's altering their digestion. And that makes sense. The cells that line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so for a number of reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your gut. But in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a warmer or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? No, of course it doesn't. You're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other. So drink fluids at the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment. In other words, what you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as opposed to cold water. So now with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship between magnesium, calcium, and the pH of water, and remember our earlier conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out of the gut and into the body a bit more readily, and across those aquaporin channels more readily than lower pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether or not all these different forms of water that are out there, reverse osmosis water, distilled water, double distilled water deuterium-depleted water, alkaline water, as it's often called, whether or not any or all of that has meaningful health outcomes. Here we can address some of those items pretty quickly. For instance, distilled water and double distilled water is essentially distilled of that is it has magnesium and calcium removed from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood magnesium or calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only distilled water. But that seems like a very isolated kind of niche case. So in general, consuming distilled water is just simply not necessary. Now in terms of reverse osmosis water, what is reverse osmosis water? Reverse osmosis water is water that has been passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like disinfectant byproducts, fluoride, and some other large and small molecules that leaves the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink reverse osmosis water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the magnesium concentrations present in that water that we talked about earlier. But in general, reverse osmosis water is considered safe, but, and for many people, this is gonna be an important but but very expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing of the filters. Purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers, these are typically glass containers, is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth. They think of reverse osmosis water as "giving them energy". To be quite honest, there's no direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut, and its relative health effects. Again, the smoothness of water as one drinks it and goes down. The gut really has no direct relationship to the "hardness or softness" of water. I know that's going to shock a number of you. You probably think, well, hard water is gonna be hard to drink, and it turns out that's not the case. In fact, many people find that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water, it actually tastes smoother or softer in their mouth. So hard water tastes smooth or soft. I know it's all very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out because a number of times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better. And oftentimes that's happening because the "hardness" of water that is the concentrations of magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered please be my guest. You know, drink it. I'm certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it, but there's no peer reviewed evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked about earlier. So what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this, or hydrogen enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen enriched water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you. Now, fortunately, for sake of today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of, let's call it unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium-depleted water. And by the way, deuterium is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen ions in water. And put very simply, water that is extracted from sources that are closer to sea level tend to have more deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources further from sea level. So up in the mountains, for instance, and from springs further away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the sources water separate from seawater tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of hydrogen within that water or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all gonna sound pretty niche and that we were gonna get a little bit into the chemistry, but now I'm gonna make it all very simple for you, at least for the non aficionado. Electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well, as well as so-called hydrogen rich water, or hydrogen enriched water or deuterium-depleted water, all have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as distilled water, reverse osmosis water, and generally higher pH than the kind of water that comes out of your tap. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your tap does not have enough magnesium, meaning not as much magnesium in it as you would like. And this, I believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH enhanced or alkaline waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium-depleted water. There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime someone is consuming a specialized form of water, chances are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant byproducts, fluoride, and the other things that you really don't want in water. So already the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So that's going to indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming these other let's say more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a step back and ask, what is that? You know, what are we really talking about? Because it turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched water by putting tablets of magnesium itself, small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of gaseous solution. You'll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about, you know, five to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving. Now, why would you do this? And I should say that I have now started doing this not because I necessarily think that it's so necessary or so beneficial. I'll talk about my experience in a moment. I did it in anticipation of this episode because I was researching water and hydrogen enrich water and all these alkaline waters. And what became very clear to me based on reading a fantastic two-part review, it's a very extensive review entitled, or at least the first part is entitled: Electrolyzed Reduced Water Molecular Hydrogen is the Exclusive Agent Responsible for the Therapeutic Effects. And then there's a second part to this review. This is how extensive it is, entitled: Electrolyzed Reduced Water number two, safety Concerns and Effectiveness as a source of Hydrogen Water. What this review, which we've linked to in the show notes, points to is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of water that you hear about out there, deuterium-depleted, hydrogen enrich, etc., all seem to boil down, no pun intended, no boiling included, I should say, to the elevation in hydrogen that translates into, and here's the really meaningful change, the elevation in pH that occurs when you hydrogen enrich water. Now, there are not a lot of clinical studies looking at hydrogen enriched water, but there are starting to be more than a few. And one that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to, was published fairly recently, which is entitled Hydrogen-rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death, by the way, removing cells that need to be removed. Again, the title of the paper is: Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells in healthy Adults. A randomized double blind controlled trial. Now this paper looked at the effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation, and they found these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They controlled very nicely for the fact that people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee, etc., although they made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda in addition to this hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed, increasing the free hydrogen in water can improve certain health metrics in these cells. And this is in keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there, and that I myself experience, I have to say that by drinking hydrogen rich water, which I'll tell you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of having more energy, of "feeling better". Now, keep in mind, of course, the placebo effect is a very real and powerful effect, so it could just be placebo, although in this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were getting hydrogen rich water or non hydrogen rich water. I should also mention that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know, the conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals older than 30 achieved lower levels, or I should say reduced levels of inflammation and improved markers of other aspects of biological function is that the hydrogen water improved the biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types. And again, the cell types that they mainly focus on were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study. Now, how could this be? Why would this be? Well, this goes back to our earlier discussion about reduction in reactive oxygen species, so-called ROSs, and reductions in free radicals that can damage cells. So if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a moment ago is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what's essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in pH of water that enhancing the hydrogen in water can create, is what leads to the enhanced either absorption and or ability of cells to utilize that higher pH water. Again, not by changing the pH of the body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water or we could perhaps more accurately state less acidic water, that is harder water that contains more magnesium and calcium, seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and therefore it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more efficient levels of hydration. Okay, so if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear. I do not believe that we all need to drink deuterium-depleted water or that we all need to drink electrolyzed reduced water, nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink hydrogen rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration, and therefore can reduce inflammation, blood pressure, and improve a number of other health metrics because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water treatment methods achieve. And that elevated pH, again, is not changing the pH of the cells and tissues and organs of your body. You actually don't want that, rather that elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the simple takeaway is this, if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the professional analysis of water that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant byproducts and fluorides, etc., from that magnesium, or I should say sufficiently magnesium containing water. Okay? Put simply, if your tap water has enough magnesium, filter it, but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier in that case, I do think, and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that water can make that water not only more palatable, right? Give you the sensation that it's softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink than more acidic water would be. But also that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating in the cells and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range, perhaps every biological function within your brain and body. So how can you hydrogen enrich your water? That actually can be done fairly inexpensively. I've been doing that as I mentioned earlier, as part of an experiment in preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create hydrogen-rich water is you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets, which in reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that can interact with the other water molecules. Now, the chemistry behind it has been substantiated, and I'll provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of free radicals. But keep in mind, again, this is all through increases in the pH of your water, and please keep in mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen waters. The dissolvable tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing pre-packaged and sealed hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those brands because they are quite expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those waters. In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I'll provide a link to a few of them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment. And indeed, that's why I'm telling you this, for those of you that want to experiment with raising the pH of your water without having to purchase what is ordinarily quite expensive, higher pH water, you can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablet. My experience with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated hydrogen tablet approach, it is not the case that you want to put these in all of your water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind. That will lead to a lot of gastric discomfort, nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice, maybe three times a day, and you can find out for yourself and sort of measure subjectively whether or not you like the experience and whether or not you "feel better". Now, earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of water. I know a number of people out there are curious as to whether or not ingesting structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can say about this is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems ranging anywhere from a couple of hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more. To be quite direct, when one goes into the peer reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is there is essentially no real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological outcomes. Now, as I say that, I'm sure there are people out there who have still had tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not that's due to a placebo effect or a real effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear. Just to give you a sense of what my stance is on things like structured water, I think that they are interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist, in the absence of any quality peer review data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured water nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be really, really good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured water given the fact that structured water does exist. I don't think anyone debates that, and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase of water as we're calling it, has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do so within organelles of cells. So different components of cells that control different functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's a promise there, is a another question entirely. So I don't wanna shut the door on structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are aware of good clinical studies exploring the biological effects of structured water in either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on YouTube because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured water is evolving and continues to evolve. So today we discussed water, and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the physics and chemistry of water in its various forms. And we talked about hydration because I think that's the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned about water. We also talked about contaminants and tap water, which unfortunately do exist and are very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some information about what's coming out of your tap. I also wanna throw in one other piece of information that's really critical that I learned about when researching this episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your tap is not just dictated by the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment, your pipes are also important, and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but it turns out that a lot of debris and contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't cleaning often enough. So here, I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in water because people aren't cleaning those filters often enough. And in fact, prior to researching this episode, I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I took it off and I looked at the other sign, there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your building or apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug that you would put that water into, and also that mesh that that water passes through as it goes into that glass or jug. We also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve that question. For those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume during exercise. And by providing these other formulas of about 8 ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour for the 10 hours from waking until post waking on average, remember it's averages. You don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, and no need to be neurotic. Hopefully you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in blood pressure improvements in appetite, mood, and focus. And I really think that it's the improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance strength and other forms of kind of readiness in the body, readiness to perform work in the body that really are best supported by the hydration literature. And then of course, we went through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and addressed which ones are going to be beneficial or not and perhaps more importantly, why any of them would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode, now that you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and physics of water and the way that water can powerfully impact your biology. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both Apple and Spotify. And on both Apple and Spotify, you can also leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us or comments about the podcast or topics you'd like me to cover, or guest that you'd like me to include on the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. On various episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep, supporting hormones, improving focus, and so on. The Huberman Lab Podcast is proud to have partnered with Momentous supplements. We've done that for several reasons. First of all, Momentous supplements are the very highest quality and are used with various sports teams in various studies through the Department of Defense and so on, and Momentous supplements tend to be in single ingredient formulations. Single ingredient formulations are absolutely essential if you are going to develop the most cost effective and biologically effective supplement regimen for you, because simply put, they allow you to adjust the dosage of individual ingredients to alternate days that you take different ingredients to cycle them and so forth. In addition, Momentous supplements are available internationally, which many other supplements are not. If you'd like to see the supplements discussed on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to Live Momentous, spelled O-U-S livemomentous.com/huberman. If you're not already following me on social media, it's Huberman Lab on Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And at all of those places, I cover science and science-based tools, some of which overlap with the contents of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content covered on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. If you haven't already subscribed to the Huberman Lab podcast, Neural Network Newsletter, it's a monthly newsletter that includes free toolkits for things like toolkit for sleep, how to enhance the quality and duration of your sleep, toolkit for focus, toolkit for neuroplasticity, toolkit for deliberate cold exposure, heat exposure, and summaries of podcast episodes. All of those toolkits can be found by going to hubermanlab.com. Go to the menu, scroll down to newsletter, and simply give us your email. We do not share your email with anybody, and again, the newsletters and toolkits are completely zero cost, and you'll also find some PDF examples of previous toolkits. Again, that's hubermanlab.com. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion all about the science, including the chemistry, physics, and biology of water, and how your body utilizes water. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 220 ---
Video ID: CDUetQMKM6g
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CDUetQMKM6g
Title: Dr. Oded Rechavi: Genes & the Inheritance of Memories Across Generations | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-02-27 13:00:10 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Oded Rechavi, Ph.D., professor of neurobiology at Tel Aviv University and expert in how genes are inherited, how experiences shape genes and remarkably, how some memories of experiences can be passed via genes to offspring. We discuss his research challenging long-held tenets of genetic inheritance and the relevance of those findings to understanding key biological and psychological processes including metabolism, stress and trauma. He describes the history of the scientific exploration of the “heritability of acquired traits” and how epigenetics and RNA biology can account for some of the passage of certain experience-based memories. He discusses the importance of model organisms in scientific research and describes his work on how stressors and memories can be passed through small RNA molecules to multiple generations of offspring in ways that meaningfully affect their behavior. Nature vs. nurture is a commonly debated theme; Dr. Rechavi’s work represents a fundamental shift in our understanding of that debate, as well as genetic inheritance, brain function and evolution.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman 
HVMN: https://hvmn.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Rechavi 
Academic Profile: https://en-lifesci.tau.ac.il/profile/odedrech_66 
Lab Website: https://www.odedrechavilab.com 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/OdedRechavi 
TEDx Talk: https://www.ted.com/talks/oded_rechavi_transgenerational_biology?language=en  

Articles
Neuronal Small RNAs Control Behavior Transgenerationally: https://bit.ly/2HZxrzO
Transgenerational Inheritance of an Acquired Small RNA-Based Antiviral Response in C. elegans: https://bit.ly/41xRf47

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Oded Rechavi
00:02:08 Sponsors: ROKA, HVMN, Eight Sleep
00:06:04 DNA, RNA, Protein; Somatic vs. Germ Cells
00:14:36 Lamarckian Evolution, Inheritance of Acquired Traits
00:22:54 Paul Kammerer & Toad Morphology
00:28:52 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:30:06 James McConnell & Memory Transfer
00:37:31 Weismann Barrier; Epigenetics 
00:45:13 Epigenetic Reprogramming; Imprinted Genes 
00:50:43 Nature vs. Nurture; Epigenetics & Offspring
00:59:06 Generational Epigenetic Inheritance 
01:09:03 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:10:20 Model Organisms, C. elegans
01:21:50 C. elegans & Inheritance of Acquired Traits, Small RNAs
01:26:02 RNA Interference, C. elegans & Virus Immunity
01:34:13 RNA Amplification, Multi-Generational Effects
01:38:41 Response Duration & Environment
01:47:50 Generational Memory Transmission, RNA
01:59:36 Germ Cells & Behavior; Body Cues
02:04:48 Transmission of Sexual Choice
02:11:22 Fertility & Human Disease; 3-Parent In Vitro Fertilization (IVF); RNA Testing
02:17:56 Deliberate Cold Exposure, Learning & Memory
02:29:26 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Sponsors, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English
Andrew Huberman: [OPENING THEME MUSIC] Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Dr. Oded Rechavi. Dr. Oded Rechavi is a Professor of Neurobiology at Tel Aviv University in Israel. His laboratory studies genetic inheritance. Now, everybody is familiar with genetic inheritance as the idea that we inherit genes from our parents, and indeed, that is true. Many people are also probably now aware of the so called epigenome, that is, ways in which our environment and experiences can change our genome and therefore the genes that we inherit or pass on to our children. What is less known, however, and what is discussed today, is the evidence that we can actually pass on traits that relate to our experiences. That's right. There is evidence in worms, in flies, in mice, and indeed in human beings, that memories can indeed be passed from one generation to the next. And that turns out to be just the tip of the iceberg in terms of how our parents' experiences, and our experiences can be passed on from one generation to the next, both in terms of modifying the biological circuits of the brain and body and the psychological consequences of those biological changes. During today's episode, Dr. Rejave gives us a beautiful description of how genetics work. So even if you don't have a background in biology or science, by the end of today's episode, you will understand the core elements of genetics and the genetic passage of traits from one generation to the next. In addition, he makes it clear how certain experiences can indeed modify our genes such that they are passed from our parents to us, and even transgenerationally across multi generations. That is, one generation could experience something, and their grandchildren would still have genetic modifications that reflect those prior experiences of their grandparents. Dr. Rechavi takes us on an incredible journey explaining how our genes and different patterns of inheritance shape our experience of life and who we are. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two all-American swimmers from Stanford, and everything about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. I've spent a lifetime working on the biology of the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges in order for you to be able to see clearly under any conditions. Roka understands this and has designed their eyeglasses and sunglasses accordingly. Originally, Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed for sport, that is, for things like running and cycling, and many of the features they have reflect that. So, for instance, they are extremely lightweight, they won't slip off your face if you get sweaty, and they can indeed be worn for running and cycling and things of that sort. However, they also come in a number of different aesthetics and styles that make them perfectly suited, not just for sport, but also for wearing to the office, to work. If you'd like to try Roka eyeglasses or sunglasses, go to Roka, that's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's Roka, R-O-K-A.com, enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by HVMN Ketone IQ. Ketone IQ is a ketone supplement that increases blood ketones. And most everybody has heard of the so-called ketogenic diet. Most people, including myself, do not follow a ketogenic diet. That does not, however, mean that ketones cannot be valuable because ketones are one of the primary sources of brain fuel and body fuel that allows us to think clearly for long durations of time and to perform well physically. Which is all to say that even if you're somebody who's not on a ketogenic diet, such as myself, increasing your blood ketones can be immensely beneficial for cognitive and physical performance. Indeed, that's how I use KetoneIQ. I'll take one or two servings per day typically, sometimes before a workout, but most typically before doing a bout of cognitive work. So I'm going to sit down and prepare a podcast. or focus on research for my lab or a writing project or anything that requires a high degree of concentration for a prolonged period of time, ingesting ketone IQ prior to that, I've noticed greatly increases my level of concentration and I can sustain that concentration for much longer periods of time than if I don't take ketone IQ. If you'd like to try ketone IQ, you can go to hvmn.com slash Huberman to save 20% off. Again, that's hvmn.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. So I've talked about many times before on the podcast, there's a critical relationship between sleep and temperature and indeed between waking up and temperature. That is your body temperature needs to decrease by about one to three degrees in order for you to fall and stay deeply asleep at night. And when you wake up in the morning, in order to do that feeling refreshed, your body temperature actually needs to increase by about one to three degrees. So it's critical that you control the temperature of your sleeping environment and that temperature be controlled very specifically across the night and into the morning. With EightSleep mattress covers, that's all extremely easy to do. You can program the temperature of your mattress in the beginning, middle, and throughout the night, and when you wake up. I've been sleeping on an 8Sleep mattress cover for over a year now, and it has greatly improved the quality of my sleep. And indeed, I know that because EightSleep also includes a terrific sleep tracker built directly into that mattress cover. If you'd like to try EightSleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 off their pod three cover. EightSleep currently ships in the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU and Australia. Again, that's 8sleep.com slash Huberman. And now for my discussion with Dr. Oded Rechavi . Oded, thank you so much for being here. Oded Rechavi: Totally my pleasure. Andrew Huberman: This podcast has a somewhat unusual origin because I am familiar with your work, but we essentially met on Twitter, where you are known for many things, but lately, especially, you have been focusing not just on the discoveries in your laboratory and other laboratories, but also sort of meme type humor that relates to the scientific process. And we'll return to this a little bit later. But first of all, I think it's wonderful that you're so active on social media in this positive stance around science that also includes humor. But today, what I mainly want to talk about is the incredible questions that you probe in your lab, which are highly unusual, incredibly significant for each and all of our lives, and very controversial, and at times even a little bit dangerous or morbid, so this is going to be a fun one for me and for the audience. Just to start off very basically and get everyone up to speed, because people have different backgrounds, I think most people have a general understanding of what genes are, what RNA is, and so on. But maybe you could explain to people in very basic terms, and I'll just preface all this by saying that I think most people understand that if they have two blue eyed parents, that there's a higher probability that their offspring will have blue eyes than brown eyes. Similarly, if two brown eyed parents, higher probability that they will have brown eyes rather than blue eyes, and so on, but that most people generally understand and accept that if they spend part of their life, let's say, studying architecture, that if they have children, that there's no real genetic reason we should assume that their children would somehow be better at architecture because they contain the knowledge through the DNA of their parents. They might be exposed to it in the home, so called nature nurture. That's nurture in that case, but that they wouldn't inherit knowledge or other traits. And today I'm hoping you can explain to us why eye color, but not knowledge is thought to be inherited. And the huge landscape of interesting questions that this opens up, including some evidence that, contrary to what we might think, certain types of knowledge at the level of cells and systems can be inherited. So that was a very long winded opening. But to frame things up, what is DNA, what is RNA, and how does inheritance really work? Oded Rechavi: Okay, so DNA is the material, the genetic instructions that is contained in every one of our cells. We have the set of genes containing the entire set, called the genome. And this is present in every cell of our body. The same set of instructions. And genes are made of DNA, and they also contain chromosomes. Chromosomes are the DNA and the proteins that condense the DNA, because we have a huge amount of DNA in every cell that you need to condense it, too. Andrew Huberman: Sort of like thread on a spool, right? Oded Rechavi: Huge amount that you have to condense. And we have the same genome, the same DNA in every cell in our body. Andrew Huberman: Can I just interrupt? And I'll do that periodically, just to make sure that people are being carried along. I sometimes find that even remarkable, that a skin cell and a brain cell, a neuron, for instance, very different functions, but they all contain the full menu of genes. And the same menu of genes. Oded Rechavi: No, it is amazing. It is amazing. And perhaps it's good to have an analogy to understand how it works. So I hope this is not a commercial, but this is like the IKEA book that you have in every cell in your body, the instructions to make everything that you need in your house, the chairs, the kitchen, the pictures. But in every room, you want something else. So in the kitchen, you want things that fit the kitchen, and in the toilet, you want things that fit the toilet. So you only remove one particular page of instructions, which is the instructions of how to build a chair. And this you place in the living room. And the toilet, you put in the toilet. So the DNA is the instruction to make the genome, is the instruction to make everything. This is the IKEA book. And in every cell, we take just the instructions to make one particular furniture and this is the RNA. This is the RNA. This is a set. And then in the end, you'll build a chair. The chair is the protein. So the RNA is our instructions to make one particular protein based on the entire set of possibilities. And this is true for one particular type of RNA, which won't be the star of this conversation, which is messenger RNA. This is the RNA that contains the information for making proteins. In fact, this is just a small percent of the RNA in the cell. So we have a very big genome, and less than 2% of it encodes for this messenger RNA. However, a lot of the genome is transcribed to make RNA that does other things. Some of these RNAs we understand, and many of them we don't. Andrew Huberman: It's a beautiful description, and IKEA is not a sponsor of the podcast, so it's totally fair game to use the IKEA catalog as the analogy for DNA. The specific instructions for specific pieces of furniture is the RNA, and the furniture pieces being the proteins that are essentially made from RNA using messenger RNA. Oded Rechavi: Correct. Andrew Huberman: Okay, thank you for that. So, despite the fact that the same genes are contained in all the cells of the body, there is a difference between certain cell types, right? Is it fair to say that there was basically one very important exception, which is somatic cells versus germ cells? And would you mind sharing with us what that distinction is? Oded Rechavi: Sure. So, yes, every cell type is different because it brings into action different genes from the entire collection and assumes an identity. We have cells in the legs, we have cells in the brain. We have in the brain. We have cells that produce dopamine, cells that produce serotonin, and so on. And we can make different separation, different distinctions, but we can make one very important distinction between the somatic cells and the germ cells. The germ cells are supposed to be the only cells that contribute to the next generation, out of which the next generation will be made. So each of us is made just from a combination of a sperm and an egg. These are two types of germ cells, and then they fuse, and you get one fertilized egg, and out of this one cell, all the rest of the body will develop. And what happens in the soma, which are all the cells that are not the germ cells, should stay in the soma, should not be able to contribute to the next generation. This is very important and is thought to be one of the main barriers for the inheritance of acquired traits, the inheritance of memory and so on. Because, for example, like the example that you gave with learning architecture, if I learn about architecture, the information is encoded in my brain. And since my brain cells can't transfer information to the sperm and the egg, because the information is supposed to reside in synaptic connections between different neurons in a particular circuit that developed. So, what happens is the brain shouldn't be able to transfer to the next generation. Even simpler, a simpler example, if you go to the gym and you build up muscles, you know that your kids will have to work out on their own. This shortcut won't happen. This is something that we know intuitively, even if we don't have any background in biology. And this is connected to the fact that, as we said at the beginning, every cell in the body has its own genome and the next generation will only form from the combination of the genomes in the sperm and the egg. Even if you somehow acquire the mutation or a change in your DNA in one particular brain cell, it wouldn't matter, because this mutation, there's no way to transfer it to the DNA of the germ cells that will contribute to the next generation. Andrew Huberman: So despite that, there is, as you will tell us, some evidence for inheritance of experience, let's call it. And here we have to be careful with the language. I just want to put a big asterisk and underline and highlight that the language around what we're about to talk about is both confusing and at the same time fairly simple and controversial, right? It's a little bit like in the field of longevity, people sometimes will say anti-aging, some people say longevity. The anti-aging folks feel that longevity is more about longevity clinics. They don't like that anti-aging is related to some other kind of niche clinics, sometimes FDA approved or government approved, sometimes not. And so there's a lot of argument about the naming, but it's all about living longer and living healthier. In this field of acquiring traits or the passage of information to offspring, what is the proper language to refer to what we're about to discuss? There is this idea, and I'll say it so that you don't have to, that dates back to Lamarck and Lamarckian evolution. Very controversial, right? And maybe not even controversial. I think it's very offensive even to certain people. This idea of inheritance of acquired traits, the idea that one could change themselves through some activity, let's use the example of going to the gym. We could also use the example of somebody who becomes an endurance runner, then decides to have children within another endurance runner, and has in mind the idea that because they did all this running and not just because they were biased towards running in the first place, but because of the distance they actually ran, that their offspring somehow would be fabulous runners. Okay, this Lamarckian concept is, we believe, wrong. So how do we talk about inheritance of acquired traits? What's the proper language for us to frame this discussion? Oded Rechavi: Right. We have to be very careful, as you said, and there are many complications and many ambiguities. Andrew Huberman: And maybe you could tell us why Lamarckian evolution, for those that don't know, is such a stained thing, r ight? I t's not polite. Oded Rechavi: Right. Perhaps we'll start with, just say that we can talk about inheritance of acquired traits, transmission of parental responses, inheritance of memory, all of these things. And we can also talk about epigenetics and transgenerational epigenetics and intergenerational epigenetics. There are many terms that we need to make clear for the audience. The reason that is so toxic or controversial is very complicated, and it goes a long time back, even way before Lamarck. So even the Greeks talked about inheritance acquired. Lamarck is associated with the term, but it's probably a mistake, although everyone talks about including people who studied. So Lamarck worked, he published his book a little more than 200 years ago. And he believed in the inheritance of acquired traits. Absolutely. But just like anyone else in his time, just everyone believed in it. It seemed obvious to them. It was long before Mendel and the rules of genetic inheritance. And also Mendel was long before the understanding that DNA is the heritable material. So this happened a long time ago. Everyone believed in it, including Darwin. Darwin was perhaps more Lamarckian than Lamarck. Andrew Huberman: Really? Oded Rechavi: Yes, absolutely. Andrew Huberman: All right, now we're getting into the meat of it. Oded Rechavi: And this is in The Origin of the Species . It's in all of his writings. Lamarck didn't even really make the distinction between the generations. He had many other reasons for being wrong, but he connected the terms inheritance of acquired traits to evolution. And this is some of the reasons that he was very controversial, even in his time. There were other reasons. For example, he rejected current day chemistry and thought that he could explain everything based on Aristotelian fluids; earth, wind, fire and water. Andrew Huberman: There's still some people on the Internet that think they can discard chemistry and explain everything based on earth, wind, fire, and water. Oded Rechavi: And this wasn't only biology, it was also the weather and everything. So that was part of the reason Lamarck made many mistakes, but he did have a full tier of inheritance, which was a big step towards where we are today. So he had important contributions nevertheless, although he was mistaken about the mechanism. What he believed, like everyone else, drives evolution, is the transmission of the traits that you acquire during your life or the things that you do or don't do. We talked about use and disuse of certain organs that shape our organs and eventually also the organs of the next generation. Andrew Huberman: He sounds a little bit like the first self-help public figure, right? Well, this mean, this is heavily embedded into a lot of the health and fitness space on Twitter and Instagram and on the Internet, which is that, it's the idea that we're sold very early in life, at least here in the United States and probably elsewhere, which is that we can become anything that we want to become and that that will forever change the offspring, either because of nature or nurture. Oded Rechavi: Right. And this is a very dangerous idea, as I'll explain in a second. And it led to horrible things. This is part of the reason that this is such a taboo. It's not only self-help you're helping, or this helping yourself. The problem is when you apply to others. And this happened in a very, very dramatic and horrible way in the recent past, as I'll tell in a second. So Lamarck, this is what he believed and he thought this is how evolution progressed. And later Darwin showed that it's really natural selection. The selecting of the organisms that already contain the particular qualities are selected based on whether they survive or not in particular environments, and therefore their evolution progresses, they are more common and take over. This is very different. Two different explanations. The most common way this is contrasted is the neck of the giraffes. This is a classic example. According to Lamarck, the giraffes had to stretch their necks towards the trees to eat when the trees were high. And because of that, they transmitted these traits, long necks, to their children, who also had long necks. By the way, he only mentioned this example a handful of times, he didn't really focus on that. And according to Darwin, just a giraffe that happened to be born with a long neck survived because it ate. So its genetic, heritable materials didn't know about genetics, but take over. And the rest of the giraffes that have different heritable materials just die. So this is natural selection versus inheritance for acquired traits. So this is natural selection versus inheritance for acquired traits. There are many reasons why Lamarckism and inheritance for acquired traits became such a bad term. One of the biggest is what happened in the Soviet Union under Stalin. There was a scientist named Lysenko, who thought that Mendelism, normal genetics, is bourgeois science, shouldn't be done. And whoever did normal genetics was either killed or sent to Siberia. And he thought that, just like you said, not only we can become everything that we want, but we can grow everything that we want in every field, can take a frozen field and grow potatoes there and so on. And this led to massive starvation, ruined agriculture in the Soviet Union, also ruined science for many, many years, and put a very dark cloud on the entire field. And only probably in the 80s or something like this, the field started to recuperate. For that aside, for that, which is a very dramatic thing, there were also crazy stories around, and attempts to prove the inheritance of acquired traits. Despite the realization of many scientists, this is something that is very rare, or that normally doesn't happen, that is not a normal way that inheritance works. And I can tell you about two such dramatic cases that will illustrate it. Andrew Huberman: Yeah, please. Oded Rechavi: So, in the beginning of the 20th century, in Vienna, there was a researcher called Paul Kammerer, who was a very famous and also very colorful figure, who did experiments on many different types of animals. He did experiments on toads that are called the midwife toad because the male carries the eggs. And there's a beautiful book about it from Koestler, telling the story of what happened there. And there are a couple of types of toads. Some of them live underwater and some of them live on land. And these toads are different in their shape and in their behavior. So, of course, the capacity to live underwater is one thing, but also their morphology and appearance changes. The toads that live underwater develop these nuptial pads, these black pads on their hands that allow the males to grab onto the female without slipping. Andrew Huberman: For mating. Oded Rechavi: For mating. And the ones on land don't have them. He claimed that he can take the toads and train them to live underwater, changing the temperature and all kinds of things. It's a very difficult animal to work with. Eventually, according to Kammerer, they will acquire the capacity to live underwater and also change their physiology and develop these black nuptial pads on their hands. With this discovery, he traveled the world, became very famous. This was in just the beginning of the previous century, as the person who found the proof for inheritance of acquired traits, despite the controversy and so on. In the beginning of the realization of how it actually works with DNA and so on, not with DNA, but with natural selection. DNA came later and people didn't believe him. He was actually under a lot of attacks, but it seemed convincing at the end. What happens is that they found that he injected ink to the toads to make them become black. To have these nuptial pads. So he faked the results, and he couldn't stand the accusations and killed himself. Andrew Huberman: Wow. Oded Rechavi: In this book by Koestler , it suggests maybe it was the assistant who did it. Andrew Huberman: Who killed? Oded Rechavi: No, no. Who injected it to sort of save him from failure. Because the samples lost the coloring or something like that. So it might be. Who knows what happened? Andrew Huberman: Well, in science, whenever there's a fraud accusation or controversy, it's not uncommon to see a passing of responsibility. Oded Rechavi: Right. Andrew Huberman: There are recent cases, there are ongoing cases now where it's a question of who did what, etc. Actually, I have two questions. Before the second story, I'm struck by the idea that he was traveling and talking. I'm guessing this was before PowerPoint and Keynote, but also before transparencies, which actually were still in place when I was a graduate student. For those of you who don't know, transparencies are basically transparent pieces of plastic paper that you put onto a projector, and then you can write on them and do demonstrations, but can show photographs and things like that. So how was he giving these talks, and would he travel with the toads? Oded Rechavi: So he traveled with the samples. Andrew Huberman: I see. Oded Rechavi: And I'm basing this on this Koestler book, which is, on its own, very controversial. It's more of a beautiful story than perhaps the truth. And according to the story there, he had to stand on one side of the lecture hall with his hands behind his back while others would examine the samples and pass them around and so on. Andrew Huberman: But he cheated. Someone cheated. Oded Rechavi: He probably did. At least that's what most people think. But this wasn't replicated. I mean, also, I don't think anyone tried to replicate it. Andrew Huberman: Interesting. This is just a point about replication. And actually, another tragic example, not but a few years ago, Sasai, who, as far as we knew, was doing very accomplished work on the growth of retinas, literally growing eyes in a dish. I think everyone believes that result. But then there were some accusations about another result that turned out to be fraudulent, and Sasai killed himself. This was only about maybe five, 10 years ago. So it still happens. Oded Rechavi: Yeah, it happens. I think it's rare, but it does happen, especially in this very high profile situation. Andrew Huberman: I would argue. I'd love to know what your number is, but I would argue that 99% of scientists are seeking truth and are well meaning, honest people. Oded Rechavi: I totally agree. And I think that even when people are wrong, it's mostly not because they're evil and trying to act inflated. Maybe they don't really want to believe the results, or there are all kinds of ways to be wrong and even to bend the truth without just blatant fraud. But this is, according to the story, an example of very bad fraud, which, I agree, is rare because most scientists, as you said, this is also my opinion, are just trying to discover truth and do the best they can. Andrew Huberman: Well, why else would you go into it? Because it's certainly not a profession to go into if you want to get rich. Oded Rechavi: Not for the money. Andrew Huberman: And it's probably not even a profession to go into if you want to get famous. If you want to be famous, you should go to Hollywood or become a serial killer because they'll make specials about please don't. But please don't do either. No, Hollywood, I suppose for some is fine, but in any case, okay, so Kammerer, around 1907, 1906? Oded Rechavi: This is slightly before the controversy broke out after the First World War. Andrew Huberman: Okay, yeah, great. Kammerer is gone. His toads with their either ink or whatever nuptial pads they have to go back to mating on land. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens, now called AG1, is a vitamin, mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or usually twice a day is that it gets me the probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important. It's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long term health. And those probiotics in Athletic Greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health. In addition, Athletic Greens contains a number of adaptogens, vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met. And it tastes great. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, etc. And they'll give you a year's supply of Vitamin D3K2. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of Vitamin D3K2. Oded Rechavi: Yeah, okay, forget about that. We also had the Lysenko episode. That's a very big thing. And then in the US, there was the researcher named McConnell, who did very different experiments. And he was also a character. So he was the joker type of thing. And he published many of his results in a journal that he published that was called Worms Breeders Gazette and had many cartoons. Andrew Huberman: And so he started his own journal. Yes, that's one way to publish a lot. Oded Rechavi: But he also published in very respected journals in parallel. He was a psychologist, an American psychologist, and he worked on a worm, which is a flatworm, which is called Planaria. This is very interesting. This is different from what we'll discuss today, a different type of worm. You know, worms are very common. So four out of five animals on this planet is a worm. Andrew Huberman: Really? Oded Rechavi: Yes, numerically, if you just count the individuals. So we are the exception. But I'll talk about a very different worm later. This is a flatworm. This is called planaria, and it is remarkable in many ways. It was also a model that many people worked on, including the fathers of genetics, that people who started genetics, like Morgan, they worked on it in the beginning. But it's very, very hard to study genetics in this worm, because unlike us, unlike what we explained before about how we all develop from sperm and egg, these worms most of the time reproduce just by fission. They tear themselves apart. So they have a head and a tail. And the part of the head will just tear itself apart from the tail, grow a new one. The head will grow a new tail, the tail will grow a new head. You can even cut them into 200 pieces. Each piece will grow into a new worm. Andrew Huberman: Wow! Oded Rechavi: And they have centralized brains with lobes and everything, and even these degenerate eyes. He studied these worms and he said that he can teach them certain things, associations, by pairing them all, I don't remember exactly what he did. I think it was either lights or electricity to shock them, which shocked them with other things. And he could train them to learn and remember particular things. Andrew Huberman: Like they might get shocked on one side of the tank. Oded Rechavi: Exactly. Andrew Huberman: And then avoid that side of the tank. Oded Rechavi: Yes. Andrew Huberman: And then I guess the question is whether or not their ripped apart selves and their subsequent generations will know to avoid that side of the tank without having ever been exposed to the shock. Oded Rechavi: Right. So without ever being exposed to the shock or whether the new generation, the new head will be able to learn faster. That's another. The subtlety that might happen. Okay. And this is what he said happened. He said he can teach them certain things, remove, cut off their heads and new heads with all the brain will grow and that it will contain the memory. This was the start of the controversy. Not the end of it, only the beginning. Then he said something even much wilder, which is he can train them to learn certain things and then just chop them up, put them in a blender and feed them to other worms. Because they are cannibalistic, they eat each other and that the memory will transfer through feeding. Andrew Huberman: This sounds like such a dramatic field. Oded Rechavi: And by the way, this opened the field. So people did experiments not only in planaria, but in goldfish and certain rodents, and did these memory brain transfer assays, implanting brain. And this is back when they had an idea that some memories could be molecular, could have a molecular form, which is very appealing. It's almost like science fiction. You can have a memory in a tube, unlike the way we think about memory normally, which is something that is distributed in neuronal circuits and encoded in the strength of particular synapses and so on. But the idea that you can take a memory and reduce it into a molecule and transfer it around is very, very interesting. So this is why it attracted so many people. This ended up in a catastrophe. So there was an NIH investigation. No one could replicate anything. It was a big mess, although there were always scientists who said, yes, we can replicate this and this. So they were in the background. The McConnell stuff was different. Again, people thought that there are problems replicating, but it wasn't necessarily, but some people replicate, but it wasn't necessarily about replicating the whole thing. But the question was the memory, the transfer, specific, or is it an overall sensitization that transmits and so on? Andrew Huberman: Right. Like you could imagine that what gets transmitted is a hypersensitivity to electricity, as opposed to the specific location that the electricity was introduced. Oded Rechavi: Or even more than that, even just a hypersensitivity. In general, you're more vigilant and you'll learn anything faster. That's also a possibility. But his problem wasn't the accusation. It was much worse that he was targeted by the Unabomber, this terrorist who sent letters with bombs to many scientists for 15 years. And his assistant, again it is the assistant, I think, exploded. And this is how his line of research ended just recently, a few years ago, a researcher from Boston, Mike Levin, and his postdoc, [inaudible] , replicated some of McConnell's experiment with the cutting of the head, but using very fancy equipment and automated tracking. And they could say that they can replicate some of his experiments. Andrew Huberman: Really? And they don't open packages in that laboratory. Oded Rechavi: [LAUGHS] They have interesting stories. You should have Mike over. Andrew Huberman: Yeah, I'm familiar with a bit of his work. I didn't realize they had done that experiment. Oded Rechavi: They published it a few years ago. And this is very interesting, but of course, they don't know how it happens. The mechanism is unclear. McConnell went a step further than this, and what's fascinating is that these are experiments that were done in the 70s and 80s. He said that he can not only transfer the memories through chopped animals, but he can take the animals that learned and break it down into different fractions. So just the DNA, just the RNA, just the fats, the proteins, the sugars. And he said that the fraction that transmits the memory is the RNA. And this is very, very interesting because it was a long time before everything that we know about RNA today. I'll soon go into my research, explain what we do, and then you'll see that you can actually feed worms with RNA and have many things happen. This is, everyone knows this is true. Okay, so this is why it was so appealing to go back to that and study it. By the way, at the time it became popular knowledge. Everyone knew these experiments. There's a Star Trek episode about it from '84. There are comics, books about it, books about it. And people were eating RNA because they thought that there was RNA in memory. This was, of course, complete nonsense, but it made a lot of noise in these years, which is part of the reason it was so toxic. Until recently, you couldn't touch it because it was considered pseudoscience, like Lysenko, like Kammerer, and all of this. So this was just something you didn't want to touch at all. And then we go back to these studies about inheritance of memory or inheritance of acquired traits in other organisms, in mammals, in humans. And aside from the dark cloud that these episodes left, there were also theoretical problems of why this can't happen, barriers that have to be breached for this to happen. And you can talk about many different types of barriers, and you can also narrow it down to two main barriers. First barrier, we mentioned it. This is the separation of the soma from the germline. Andrew Huberman: Right. The somatic cells, they can change in response to experience. The sperm and the egg, the so-called germ cells cannot. That's the idea. Oded Rechavi: Or they are isolated from what happens in the soma. Okay. The man who first thought about this barrier is called Wiseman, August Wiseman. This was in the 19th century, so it is called today the Wiseman Barrier, separation of the soma from the germline. Only the germline transmits information to the next generation. And this is also called the second law of biology. So this is very, very fundamental. So natural selection is the first one, this is the second one, because it's so important to how we work, to how our bodies work. Wiseman, by the way, thought that if you will have direct influence of the environment on the germ cells, then perhaps this could transfer to the next generation. So he wasn't as strict as his barriers suggest. But this is not how most people remember it. But he thought that this was unnecessary. It's possible that natural selection can explain everything. And he compared it to a boat, which is in the ocean, it is sailing and it has a sail open. So you don't have to assume that it has an engine. The wind is blowing. You don't have to assume other things. The natural selection might be enough. So this barrier is still standing, but not entirely. It is breached in some organisms. We'll go into that in a second. The other barrier is now we have to understand the other barrier. We have to talk about epigenetics. We have to define epigenetics and what it is. And epigenetics is another term which people misuse horribly and say about everything that is epigenetics. Even people from the fields. The word itself, that the term was defined in the 40s by Weddington, Conrad Weddington. And he talked about the interactions between genes and their products that, in the end, bring about the phenotype of the consequences and how genes influence development. Later, people discovered mechanisms that change the action of genes. There are different mechanisms and started talking about these as epigenetics. For example, DNA is built out of four basic elements. These are the A,T, G, and C, and they can be chemically modified. So in addition to just the information that you have in the sequence of the DNA, you also have the information in the modification of the bases. The most common modification that has been studied more than others is modification of the letter C of cytosine methylation, the addition of a metal group to this C, and this can be replicated. So after the cells divide and replicate their genetic material, in certain cases also, these chemical modifications can be added on and replicate and be preserved. Andrew Huberman: For those who aren't as familiar with thinking about genes and gene structure and epigenetics, could we think of these? You mentioned the four nucleotide bases, C, G, A, T, but could we imagine that through things like methylation, it's sort of like taking the primary colors and changing one of them a little bit, changing the hue just slightly, which then opens up an enormous number of new options of color integration. Oded Rechavi: It's just more combinations, more ways, more information. There are the modifications of the DNA, and also there are the modifications of the proteins which condense the DNA that are called histones. So they are also modified by many different chemicals. Again, methylation is a very common modification. Acetylation, even serotonin, serotoninlation of histones. Andrew Huberman: Serotonin, right. Oded Rechavi: This is a new paper from nature. Andrew Huberman: From a few years ago, can change. Oded Rechavi: DNA, not the DNA itself, but the protein that condenses it, essentially. Andrew Huberman: How, in the analogy I used before, of how the thread is wrapped around the spool, essentially? Oded Rechavi: Yes, a nd this determines the degree of condensation of the DNA, whether the gene is now more or less accessible, and therefore can perhaps be expressed more or less. This is one way to affect the gene expression and bring about the function of the gene. There are many additional ways, not the only one. So then, when all of this was starting to be elucidated, people talked about epigenetics, they started talking about these modifications, forgot the original definition. And when people said epigenetics, they talk about methylation and things like that. Andrew Huberman: And again, to just frame this up so we could imagine two identical twins, so called monozygotic twins, we could go a step further and say that they're monochorionic and they were in the same placental sac, because twins can be raised in separate Sacs, slightly different early environments. Let's say those two twins are raised separately. One experiences certain things, the other things, they eat different foods, etc. And there is the possibility, through epigenetic mechanisms, that through methylation, acetylation, serotonin production, etc., that the expression of certain genes in one of the twins could be amplified relative to the other, correct? Oded Rechavi: Yeah. So we know that even totally identical twins, genetically, they're identical, but they look different, and they are different. We all experience it. And this can happen because of these epigenetic changes, or it can happen because of other mechanisms, because genes respond to the environment. Genes don't exist in a vacuum. Genes need to be activated by transcription factors, and there's a lot of machinery that is responsible for making genes function. So we are a combination of our genetic material and the environment. So when people talk about epigenetics and talk just about the modification, they're also not exactly right. My definition of epigenetics is inheritance, which occurs either across cell division or more interestingly, also for this podcast, now across generations, not because of changes to the DNA sequence, but through other mechanisms. I think this is the most robust definition that allows you to understand what you're talking about. And then the question is, if this happens, then what are the molecules that actually transmit information across generations? Are they these chemical modifications to the DNA or to the proteins that condense the DNA? Or are there other agents that transmit the information and which molecules can do it? And I actually think that the most interesting players today are RNA molecules. But before I go into that, I just want to say that when we talk about the barriers to epigenetic inheritance or the barriers to inheritance of acquired traits, in addition to the separation of the soma from the germline that we discussed, the other main barrier, it's called epigenetic reprogramming, which is that we acquired our cells. The genetic material in our cells acquires all kinds of changes, these chemical changes, modifications we discussed. But these modifications are largely erased in the transition between generations. So, in the germline, in the sperm and the egg, and also in the early embryo, most of the modifications are removed. So we can start a blank slate based on the genetic instructions. And this is crucial. Otherwise, according to the theory, it's not clear that's actually true, because in some organisms it doesn't really happen. We will not develop according to the species typical genetic instructions. So to preserve this, we erase all these modifications and start anew. And this is in mammals and in humans, this is largely true. Most of the modifications in the sperm and in the egg are removed. So about 90% of them, some remain, which could be interesting. Andrew Huberman: So the idea, if I understand correctly, is that there's some advantage to wiping the slate clean and returning to the original plan. In the context of the IKEA furniture analogy, the instruction book is the one that's issued to everybody or every cell, right? Only certain instructions are used for certain cells, say a skin cell or a neuron or a liver cell or any other cell for that matter, through the course of the lifespan of the organism, those specific instructions are adjusted somewhat. Okay, so maybe like IKEA furniture, sometimes they sent you seven, not eight, of particular screws, or they sent you the proper number, but you put them in the wrong place and it sort of changes the way that the thing works a little bit once that, assuming furniture could reproduce. But here in the analogy of the furniture as the cell or the organ in it mates with another organism that needs to be replicated. And so the idea is to take the instruction, but go through and erase all the pen and pencil marks, erase all those additional little modifications that the owner used or introduced to it, and return to the original instruction, right? Oded Rechavi: Because if you want to bring back the instruction book, you want it to have all the potential to make all the furniture. You don't want it to be restricted to the ones that you made in a particular room. Andrew Huberman: So it's essentially the opposite of acquired traits and characteristics, based on what we say in biology, geek speak, lineage based experience. But what your parents experience. Right. In some ways, we want to eliminate all that and go back to just the genes they provided. Oded Rechavi: Yes, but it's more complicated. It's more complicated than that because we have some very striking examples, even in mammals, where some of the marks are maintained. For example, the classic example is imprinting. Imprinting is a very interesting phenomenon. The way DNA works is that you inherit a copy for every chromosome from your mother and your father, and then you have in every cell of your body, two copies, if you're a human, of every chromosome. So every gene is represented twice. These are called alleles, the different versions of the genes. And the thought is that, in the next generation, the two copies that you inherited are equal. It doesn't matter whether you acquire them from your mother or from your father. There are some situations where it does matter. There is a limited number of genes that are called imprinted genes, where it does matter whether you inherited from your mother or your father. And this is happening through epigenetic inheritance, not because of changes to the DNA sequence, but because of maintenance of these chemical modifications across generations. Andrew Huberman: And as I recall from the beautiful work of Catherine Dulac at Harvard, that, especially in the brain, there is evidence that some cells contain the complete genome from mom or the complete genome from dad. Oded Rechavi: And it can also switch during your life. So her work showed that early on in your life, it's different whether you express the maternal or paternal copy than when you're more mature. Andrew Huberman: So parents and children take note. For those of you that are saying, oh, the child is more like you or more like me, that can change across the lifespan. And if you're thinking about your parental lineage and wondering whether or not you "inherited" some sort of trait from mother or from father, it can be, of course, both. Or it can be just one or just the other, which I think most parents tend to see and describe in their children from time to time. That's just like the father, or that's just like the mother, for instance. Oded Rechavi: Right. But it's important to know that in this situation, the environment played no role. This was just whether it passed to the mother or the father. It's not that something that happened to the mother or the father affected this. So this is slightly different. The question is now, can the environment change the heritable material? So it's very important to understand that there is a difference between nurture and nature. And this is very confusing, and people are confused. It's a little subtle. So, for example, people tell me, I'm growing horses for many years, and I just know that this horse has a particular character. It's very different from the other horsess. And so this is epigenetic inheritance? No, it could be just genetically determined. Yes. This horse inherited a different set of genetic instructions. So it is different. Doesn't have to be about epigenetics. Epigenetic inheritance means that the environment of the parents somehow change the children. And there are these two main barriers that are serious bottlenecks that we have to think about what type of molecule and how they can be breached. So one possibility is that it's really this limited number of chemical modifications that survive, which is about 10% or so. That could be very interesting. Andrew Huberman: Not a small number? Oded Rechavi: Not a small number. But perhaps. Perhaps. Okay, this is one possibility. The other possibility is that there are other mechanisms. The situation now in humans is that it's just really unclear what transmits, if it can transmit, and which molecule does it. We'll talk later about other organisms where it is a lot more clear. But in humans and in mammals in general, there are many examples of environments that change the children. Whether you need to invoke an epigenetic mechanism to explain this phenomena, this is unclear. First of all, because it's hard to separate nature from nurture, and second, because the mechanism is just not understood. So there are classic examples for humans, there were periods of famine, starvation in different places in the world. In the Netherlands, in China, in Russia, where people did huge epidemiological study to study the next generations and saw that the children of women who were starved during pregnancy are different in many ways. They have different birth weight, glucose sensitivity, and also some neurological, higher chances of getting some neurological diseases. And this has been shown in very large studies. Andrew Huberman: Is there ever an instance in which starvation or hardship of some kind, some challenge, sensory challenge or survival based challenge led to adaptive traits? Oded Rechavi: Yes, there are. In different organisms, it could be as a result of a trade off. So there could be a downside as well. But, for example, there are two examples that come into mind. One of them is that if you stress male mice or rats, I don't remember. This is the work of Isabel Mansuy in the ETH in Switzerland. If you stress the males, you can do it in many different ways. I don't remember exactly how they did, but you can separate them from their mothers, you can do social defeat, all kinds of things. Then the next generations are less stressed, they show less anxiety. Andrew Huberman: So the threshold for stress is higher? Oded Rechavi: Yes. However, I think they have memory deficits and other metabolic problems. Andrew Huberman: Which may be a n advantage for dealing with stress. Oded Rechavi: Could be. Andrew Huberman: I don't have any direct evidence of that. But there's some simmering ideas that our ability to anchor our thoughts in the past, present or future seems very adaptive in certain contexts. In other contexts, it can keep us ruminating and not adaptively present to our current challenges. Oded Rechavi: Another example is that of nicotine exposure. This is, I think, the work of Oliver Rando from UMass, if I'm not mistaken. These are not my studies, but they improve the tolerance to exposure to similar drugs in the next generation. The interesting thing here is that it's very non-specific. So you treat them with nicotine, but then in the next generation they are more tolerant to nicotine, but also to others, I think cocaine. Andrew Huberman: That sort of makes sense to me, because obviously nicotine activates the cholinergic system, the dopaminergic system, epinephrine, etc. And you can imagine that there's crossover because other drugs like cocaine, amphetamine, mainly target the catecholamines, the dopamine and norepinephrine. Oded Rechavi: In this particular study, if I remember correctly, they show that this happens, this heritable effect, even if you use an antagonist to block the nicotine receptor. Andrew Huberman: Wow. Oded Rechavi: So it's something more about clearance of xenobiotics and hepatic functions that is transmitted and is very nonspecific. Andrew Huberman: What I love about all the examples you've given today, especially that one, is, and I hope that people, if you're just listening, I'm smiling, because biology is so cryptic sometimes the obvious mechanism is rarely the one that's actually at play. And people always ask, well, why is it like this? And I always say, the one thing I know for sure is that I wasn't consulted at the design phase. And if anyone claims they were, then you definitely want to back away very fast. Oded Rechavi: And there could be so many trade offs. So many trade offs. So, for example, we studied, and also many other people studied effects. These are in worms. We'll go deep into that in a second. But that shows that when you starve them, the next generations live longer. And this, I think, could be a trade off with other things like fertility. So the next generations are more sick and less fertile. And perhaps because of that they live longer. So it's not necessarily a good thing. Andrew Huberman: I don't want to draw you off course, because this is magnificent, what you're doing and splaying out for us here. But do you recall there was a few years ago, it actually ended very tragically. It was an example, I think it was, down in San Diego county, there was a cult of sorts that were interested in living forever. And so the males castrated themselves in the idea that somehow maintaining some pre-pubescent state or reverting to a pseudo pre-pubescent state would somehow extend longevity. The idea that sexual behavior somehow limited lifespan. This has been an idea that's been thrown around in the kind of more wacky longevity communities. They also shaved their heads. They also all wore the same sneakers. But then they also all committed suicide, right, as the Halle-Bopp comet came through town. But that's just, but one example of many cults aimed at sort of that obviously was not life extension, that was life truncation, but aimed at a kind of eternal life or some sort of through caloric restriction. That's right, this cult also was very into the whole idea that through caloric restriction, we can live much longer, which may actually turn out to be true. I think it's still debated, hence all the debate about intermittent fasting, etc. But also it is known that if you overeat, you shorten life. This is clear. It's known that big bodied members of a species live far shorter lives than the smaller members of a great Dane versus a Chihuahua, for instance. So there is some sort of, shard of truths in all of these things. But it seems to me that the real question is, what is the real mechanism and why would something like this exist? Oded Rechavi: Right. Andrew Huberman: And why? Questions are very dangerous in biology. Oded Rechavi: Right, right. But very interesting also, when it comes to metabolic changes and nutrition, there are numerous examples where you either overfeed or starve and get effects in the next generations. Sometimes the effects contrast depending on the way you do this. Again, we don't do any of that in mammals, but people show that starving or overfeeding the mothers or the fathers changes the body weight of the next generation and also the glucose tolerance and also reproductive success. And so the fact that there's an effect that something transmits, this is clear. The question is, how miraculous is it? And whether you need new biology and epigenetics to explain it. What do I mean by that? If you affect the next generation, it doesn't necessarily have to go through the oöcyte or the sperm, and involves the epigenome, you change the metabolism of the animal as it develops, and obviously it will affect it. When you, for example, starve women that are pregnant, as happened during the famous starvation studies, the baby is already in utero, exposed directly to the environment. So it's not even a heritable effect. The baby is itself affected. It's a direct effect, very interesting, important, and has many implications. And it will be separate from the genetics. You'll have to take it into account to understand what's going on. Doesn't require, necessarily, a new biology, a new biology of inheritance. Not only is the embryo affected, the embryo, while in utero, already has germ cells, so it's also the next generation, so is directly exposed. And you don't need any new biology necessarily, to explain it. And it doesn't have to involve genetic epigenetics or epigenetic gender. Andrew Huberman: It's clear to me that in the female fetus, the total number of eggs that she will someday produce and potentially have fertilized by sperm exist. But in males with a 60 day sperm cycle leads me to the question, do fetal males, males as fetuses, living as fetuses in their moms, already start producing sperm, or it's the primordial cells that give rise to sperm. Oded Rechavi: So I'm not an expert, so I don't want to go into the details of exactly when in mammals but yes, exposure of the mother also has an affect, eventually the transmission of genetic information through the sperm's father. And there are also many examples of just stressing the fathers, affecting their sperm and affecting the next generation. There. If you go to the F2 generation, if you go two generations down the road, not to the kids, but to the grandkids, then it is a real epigenetic effect, because you examine something that happens, although the next generation was never exposed to the original challenge. So when we say about epigenetic inheritance through the paternal lineage, through the fathers, we talk about two generations. And when you go through the mother, it's three generations to talk about when you need to invoke some real epigenetic mechanism. And there the evidence becomes much more scarce in mammals. There are examples, more or less convincing. The field is evolving and improving a lot. So, for example, now many people use, the cutting edge is to use IVF, in-vitro fertilization, or transfer of embryos, to make sure that actually it's the heritable information and not the environment, and that it goes through the germline. So this is something that is being done now. There are studies. Andrew Huberman: You're talking about the three parent IVF, where they take the DNA from mom, the sperm from dad, and they take the DNA from mom and put it into a novel cytoplasm? Oded Rechavi: No, not at all. You just take the sperm and transfer it and fertilize an egg. Andrew Huberman: So standard IVF? Oded Rechavi: Yeah, standard IVF. You can do it in many different ways. But this idea that you separate the environment of the mother from the inheritance or the environment of the father, and to control and separate nature from nurture. Andrew Huberman: The environment becomes the culture dish. Oded Rechavi: Yes, so the field is improving. People do experiments that have a higher end, so more replicate and are better controlled. And there are some examples for effects that transfer. And it depends who you ask whether people believe it or not. Many geneticists do not believe in it, and many people do believe it, and it depends on the community. There is strong resistance for many reasons. Some of them are justified, some are less justified and are part of the scientific process and how things work, because it's challenging the dogma. So this is very interesting on its own. If you ask psychologists, many psychologists believe that there's heritable trauma and things like that, population geneticists less. So this really depends, and I think that we are just at a point in time where we don't really know whether it happens and to what extent, and we need bigger studies. Even if you think about normal, just genetic studies, where people a trying to understand the genetic underpinning of complex traits, like anything that involves the brain, pretty much, we now know that you need to study many, many people. So now these big genome wide association studies, big genetic studies, involve hundreds of thousands of people. No one did an experiment like this for epigenetics. It's much more complicated because you need to also take into account the environment. I'm not even sure we know how to design such an experiment. It's very, very challenging. Part of the resistance to the idea is based on theoretical grounds because of these barriers and because of the controversies. On the other hand, people really want to believe it. People really want to believe it because it sort of gives your life meaning if you can change your biology through changing your kids, through changing your biology. So psychologically, I can understand why many people want this to happen. Even Schrodinger, the famous physicist, so he wrote a very important book in '44, so this was before the double helix, and it's called What is Life ? This is actually a book that drove many physicists to establish molecular biology. It's very, very important and he talks about the heritable material. It also talks about evolution. And he said, unfortunately, Lamarckism or inheritance of acquired traits is untenable, it doesn't happen. And he writes, this is very, very sad or unfortunate because unlike Darwinism or natural selection, which is gloomy, it doesn't matter what you do, the next generation will be born based on the instruction in the sperm and the egg, you can't influence it. Of course, you can give your kids money and education, but you can't biologically influence it. Andrew Huberman: One thing I'm fascinated by for a number of reasons, is partner selection. I mean, in some ways we think, oh, we want to find someone who is kind. That does seem to be, by the way, the primary feature, at least in what the data tell us. We had David Buss on the podcast of how women select men, that people are kind. There's also resource potential. There's also beauty or aesthetic attractiveness in males and females, etc. Male, male, female, female, as the case may be. But in terms of reproduction, sperm, egg, male female, obviously. So we're selecting for a number of traits, but presumably subconsciously, we are also selecting for a number of traits related to vigor and in the idea that if we were to have offspring with somebody, that those traits would be selected for. Oded Rechavi: Right. And we actually have work on that in nematodes that I'll be happy to tell you about in a second after we-- Andrew Huberman: --The dating in worms-- -- Oded Rechavi: The dating in worms , where we understand the mechanism, and we'll go into that in a second or in a few minutes after we dive into the worms. But yes, the original calculations of how population genetics work to simplify things and to do the math, so it will be easy, it was random mating. Of course, it doesn't work like that. So it complicates things because we know, and there's research about potential capacity to somehow sense immune compatibility and things like this, which is. I don't know, I'm not an expert on that. Andrew Huberman: Neither am I, b ut my understanding is that, of course, we're familiar with the other traits we select for, like potential nurturing ability. Whether or not someone is reliable predicts something about their nurturing ability. And for offspring, potentially. I mean, you can draw lines between these things without any direct evidence, but they seem so logical, right? That somebody kind might also stick around or be honest and these kinds of things, that it makes sense. But that one would be selecting for certain biological traits like immune function or some other form of robustness that we're not aware of is, I think, a fascinating area of biology. Oded Rechavi: So this is where the work in mammals stands. However, there's also one additional thing to mention, which is that on top of chemical modifications to the DNA and the proteins that condense the DNA, which are called histones, there are also other mechanisms that might transmit information, including transmission between generations of RNA. And there are different types of RNA, not just the RNA that we mentioned before, the messenger RNA, which encodes the information for making proteins, but also other RNAs that regulate gene expression. And this is, and I think that in recent years, also in the mammalian field, RNA as the molecule that has the potential to transmit information between generations, took center stage. So I think this is the cutting edge, a lot more to understand and know. But RNA has a lot of potential for doing that, as we'll explain soon. But we have to go to worms first. Andrew Huberman: I'd like to take just take a brief moment and thank one of our podcast sponsors, which is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that blood work is the only way that you can monitor the markers such as hormone markers, lipids, metabolic factors, et cetera, that impact your immediate and long-term health. One major challenge with blood work, however, is that most of the time it does not come back with any information about what to do in order to move the values for hormones, metabolic factors, lipids, et cetera, into the ranges that you want. With InsideTracker, changing those values becomes very straightforward because it has a personalized dashboard that you can use to address the nutrition-based, behavior-based, supplement-based approaches that you can use in order to move those values into the ranges that are optimal for you, your vitality, and your longevity. InsideTracker now includes a measurement of apolipoprotein B, so-called APOB, in their ultimate plan. APOB is a key marker of cardiovascular health, and therefore there's extreme value to knowing your APOB levels. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Again, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Thank you for that incredible overview of genetics and RNA and epigenetics, and it was essentially a survey of this very interesting and on the face of a complex field, but you've simplified it a great deal for us. In our transition to talking about worms. I would like to plant a flag in the Huberman Lab podcast and say that what we are about to discuss is the first time that anyone on this podcast has discussed so called model organisms. I may have mentioned a fly paper here or there, or a study on honeybees and caffeine and flower preference at one point, but typically that's done in passing, and we quickly rotate to humans. I know that many, if not most, of our listeners are focused on humans and human biology and health, etc., but I cannot emphasize enough the importance of model organisms and the incredible degree to which they've informed us about human health, especially when it comes to very basic functions in cells. I mean, one could argue, okay, and there's been some debate, telomeres in mice, did that really lead to the same sort of data in humans? Okay, there are those cases, certainly, but model organisms are absolutely critical and have been and basically inform most of what we understand about human health. So before we start to go into the description about worms per se, could you just explain to a general audience what a model organism is? Right. They're not modeling. They're not posing for photographs, obviously, what that means and what some of the general model organisms are and why you've selected or elected to work on a particular type of worm to study these fascinating topics that there's zero question also take place in humans at some level. Oded Rechavi: So it's a real pleasure and an honor to represent the model organisms here. I'm really happy just for that. It was worth it, because, as you said, model organisms are extremely important, and we learn so much about biology through them. Model organisms mean that it's an organism that many people work on. So there's a community of people that work on them. People work, study many types of organisms, but not around every organism. There's a huge community of researchers that combine sources to create all the resources, the tools and the understanding that accumulates. There are just a handful of model organisms in the short history of the field of biology, it's not so long. We learned about every aspect of biology through them, including many important diseases, human diseases. And these are E. coli bacteria, phage - which is a virus of bacteria, flies, worms that are called C. elegans, and nematodes. This is what we studied in the lab. Fish which are called zebrafish. Andrew Huberman: Danio rerio, or something, right? Oded Rechavi: Yeah, and of course, there are also model organisms, and mouse, and also plants, important plants. The most studied one is arabidopsis. Andrew Huberman: And perhaps less so nowadays, but non-human primates, macaque monkeys, marmosets, squirrel monkeys, mainly. Oded Rechavi: These, I don't know exactly how the definition is, but emerging model organisms. There are many model organisms that are emerging, and there are communities that are formed, including also around the planaria that we mentioned before, this flatworm that regenerates, this is a great model for studying regenerations. If we could develop new heads, it would be incredible. And we can learn from these organisms. And the reason that we can learn a lot also about humans by studying these animals is that we all evolved from the same ancestor. So we share a lot of our functions with them and also a lot of our genes. C. elegans, and they have, the different model organisms have different advantages that serve us. They sometimes have things that are much more apparent in them that we can study. For example, learning and memory was largely studied in the beginning in a snail, aplysia, where many of the discoveries were made, because it has big neurons that you can easily study and examine. Andrew Huberman: And yes, snails learn. Oded Rechavi: Yes, they learn, even C. elegans, these nematodes that we study, learn, and they are much simpler than another important reason to study them, of course, is can you actually experiment on them? We can't do this to humans, the things that we do to these animals. And we can change their genes, do all kinds of things to them. Andrew Huberman: And sorry to interrupt, but in some cases, I think you're going to tell us, for instance, in C. elegans in particular, the presence of particular cell types is so stereotyped that you can look at several different worms and the community of people that study C. elegans has literally numbered and named each neuron so that two laboratories on opposite sides of the world can publish papers on the same neuron, knowing that it's the same neuron in the two different laboratories, something that is extremely hard to do in any mammalian model, a mouse, or certainly in humans, and has posed huge challenges that give great advantages to studies of things like C. elegans. Oded Rechavi: Yes. So, C. elegans, this is the star now, and this is what we study. These are nematodes, small worms, roundworms that are just 1 mm long, so you can't see them with the naked eye. You have to look under the scope. Andrew Huberman: Where do they live in the natural world? Oded Rechavi: So they used to call them soil nematodes, but this is not really true. They are in many places, but they are mostly in rotten fruits and leaves. And you can find them in the ground as well. But you can also find them, and they are free living, so they're not parasites, but you can sometimes also find them in snails, but the best way to isolate them is from rotten fruits. Andrew Huberman: Okay, I Like the idea that they're not parasites. I'm one of these people that gets a little squeamish about the notion of parasites. Oded Rechavi: Yeah, so they're not parasites. They're really fun to handle because they're so small and easy. You just grow them on plates with agar and E. Coli bacteria, this is what they eat in the lab. You can just pick them with a small pick, wire pick, and move them around and change their genes and do many things to them. But they have many advantages for neuroscience and for studying inheritance. As you mentioned, they always have a certain number of cells in the body. So a silicon nematode always has 959 cells in its body, that's it. Andrew Huberman: Not 960. Not 958. Oded Rechavi: 959, and out of which 302 are neurons, always 302. There's a huge debate now over Twitter on whether it's 302 or 300. I don't want to get into trouble, okay? But people take this very hard. I think it's 302, but let's not get into it because I'll get into trouble. Andrew Huberman: Well, we can equilibrate all things here by, you, say, 302. Granted, you're far more informed in this model organism than I am or ever will be. I'll say 300, and then we're balanced in terms of partisan politics in the C. elegans community. Oded Rechavi: Perfect. And it's always the same. And each neuron has a name, like you said. And not only does every neuron have a name, many of them, we know what they do. So there's a few cells that are sensory neurons that sense particular chemicals. In certain situations, we'll know that a chemical will be sensed just by one neuron. There are other motor neurons and interneurons and all of that. We know how many dopamine neurons there are, and serotonin neurons, and we know them all by their name. Not only that, we know how they are connected to one another. We have a map, a connectome since the 80s, like a subway map that tells us which neuron talks with which other neurons, and it is the same. People thought that it was exactly the same between genetically identical warms. Now we know that there are slight differences, but by and large, it is the same. And we have a map, a roadmap that we can use to study. Andrew Huberman: The so-called connectome. Oded Rechavi: The connectome. Not only that, the worms are transparent, so we can actually see the neurons fire using particular tools, and we can activate genes and silage genes using optogenetics, like was discussed here on the podcast. We can make the worms go forward or backward or lay an egg by shining different waves of light on them. So we have very powerful tools for manipulating the brain. On top of that, we have great understanding of the genetics of the worm, of the genome. The C. elegans is the first animal to have its genome sequenced before humans. Before that, of course, there were bacteria, and we know that. And each worm produces, each mother produces about 250 babies, which are almost genetically identical. And we know where we grow them. The environment is very controlled, so we grow them in the plate with just bacteria, so we can easily separate between nature and nurture. Andrew Huberman: And one thing that I wonder about often is generation time. Even though mice are not humans, mice have certain advantages because they're mammalian species. You can't do all the magnificent things that you can do in C. elegans and mice. But one major issue with mice is that the generation time is somewhat long. You pair two mice, they mate. You get a mouse or litter of mice. 21 days later. It might seem like, okay, that's only 21 days or so. But if you are a graduate student or postdoc, trying to do a project that can extend the time to do experiments out three or four years compared to what you could do in C. elegans. Oded Rechavi: You're absolutely right, t his is one of the major advantages. The generation time in C. elegans is three days. Three days. So you can do hundreds of worm generations in one PhD. This is very important. Not only that, every worm will produce hundreds of progeny that are genetically identical, so you will have great statistics for your experiments. Andrew Huberman: And the worms probably don't mind living on these agar plates munching away on E. coli, where it's the good life. It's questionable whether or not mice, or certainly, listen, I'm a proponent of well-controlled and as long as there's oversight, animal research. It's necessary for the development of treatments of diseases that hinder humans. But it is always a little bit of a kind of a cringe and go kind of thing when you're dealing with mammals that are living so far outside their natural environment. I'd be lying if I didn't say that it gets to you after a while, and if it doesn't get to you, you kind of have to wonder about your own psyche a bit. Oded Rechavi: Right. I also think that this is important, but for me, it's much easier to work on worms. I don't have to feel bad about it. Andrew Huberman: Yeah, they're happy. Oded Rechavi: They're happy. If a worm dies, it's less painful to the human than if other, more sensitive animals do. Andrew Huberman: Yes, I agree. Oded Rechavi: So there are many advantages for studying C. elegans. And in the worm, we now have very obvious and clear cut proof that there is inheritance of acquired traits. So much so that I don't think that anyone pretty much in the epigenetic field argues against it. Andrew Huberman: Well, and in large part thanks to you and the work you've done. So, could you tell us, what was the first experiment that you did on C. elegans that confirmed for you that there is inheritance of acquired traits? Because, of course, the best experiments and experimenters always set out to disprove their hypothesis. And when the hypothesis survives, despite all the control experiments and poking and prodding and attempts to contradict oneself, then it's considered a victory. But it's one that we all have to be very cautious about enjoying because of the tendency to want our hypotheses to be true. So what was the first experiment where you were convinced that inheritance of acquired traits is real? Oded Rechavi: The first experiment I did was in my postdoc, which I did with Oliver Hubbard in University of Columbia. We set out to test whether worms can produce transgenerational, prolonged multi-generational resistance to viruses. Andrew Huberman: Wow. This is a very pertinent topic, which is relevant. Oded Rechavi: These worms don't have dedicated immune cells like we do. They don't have T cells or B cells. They defend themselves from viruses very efficiently using RNA. So, in fact, when we started these experiments, there wasn't any natural virus that was known to infect clients, which is amazing because viruses are very good, as we all experience now, in infecting. And the worms are resistant to viruses because of RNA molecules, short RNA molecules that destroy viruses. And these are called small RNAs. Now, we need to discuss them before I explain my experiment. In 2006, two researchers that were studying C. elegans, Andrew Fire and Craig Mello, got the Nobel Prize for showing that there is a mechanism that regulates genes that happens through small RNAs. What they've shown is that if you inject the worms with RNA molecules, which are double-stranded, they shut off the genes that correspond that match in sequence to this RNA. Andrew Huberman: So it's sort of like taking the specific instructions for the coffee table from your IKEA handbook, and you insert a copy of that into the book, and in doing so, you prevent the expression of. You sort of erase the original page. Oded Rechavi: Perfect explanation. Perfect explanation. And they found that double-strand RNA, RNA that has two strands is what starts the response leading to the production of small RNA molecules, which are the ones that actually find the messenger RNA and lead to its destruction, silence it. So you don't get proteins in the end for that. They got the Nobel Prize after people found that this is conserved in many organisms, including humans, and there are now drugs. This was only in 2006 that the Nobel Prize, the paper was published in 98. There are now drugs that use this mechanism also in humans. Andrew Huberman: And I'll just interject and say that not only is it a recent discovery and an incredibly important one, but Andy Fire and Craig Mello are also really nice people. Yeah, they just happen to be very nice people. And Craig Mello is an excellent, I think he's a kite surfer. The only time I met him in person was at a meeting, and he had a black eye, and I thought, okay, wow, I guess he's also a pugilist or something, but turns out he had done that kite surfing. So scientists actually do things other than go to the laboratory. Nobel Prize winning scientists, that is. Okay, I'll let you continue. Thanks for allowing that. Oded Rechavi: Incredible scientist. And there were also studies in many organisms on the mechanisms of how this happens. It is called RNA interference. RNA interferes in the expression of a gene, in the function of a gene, and it's also called gene silencing, because these RNAs enforce the silencing of genes. Instead of the genes being expressed, they are silenced, and you don't manifest their function. Already in the first paper that they published about this, where they've shown that double-strand RNA is what leads to the silencing of the control. They've shown two very important things. One of them is that if you inject the worms with double-strand RNA, you don't only see the action in the cell that you injected or in the tissue that you injected, but you see it all over the worm's body. It spreads. It wasn't exactly clear what spreads, but it was clear that it spreads. You see the silencing all over the body. This includes also the germ cells. So, if you inject the double-strand RNA just to somatic cells, even to the head, you will also get the effect in the germ cells and in the next generation, in the immediate progeny, the F1 generation, the kids. So this was really clear proof that this is inherited. However, this is just one generation in these original studies. Later they've shown something which will immediately remind you what I told you about with planaria, that you can just take worms and feed them on bacteria that produce this double-strand RNA, and that the double-strand and the silencing would move from the site of ingestion, from the gut where the bacteria are eaten, to the rest of the body and also to the next generation. So before we left, when I mentioned these cannibalistic experiments of McConnell with the planaria, and now you see that it can happen, and this is not controversial at all. This is being done routinely every day by any C. elegans biologist in the world. This has been replicated a million times. Not only that, you can also feed planaria, these other worms with RNA. You can just put it in chopped liver and let them eat it. And again, this will spread throughout the body. Andrew Huberman: Wild. Oded Rechavi: And this is what we do routinely. We always, when we want, we use this technique to see what genes do. If we want to see whether a particular gene is important for a certain behavior or a certain something, the way to study it is to neutralize the gene activity. And we do it by just introducing the worms with double-strand RNA that correspond in sequence, that match in sequence this gene, this will lead to the silencing, this activates the gene's activity. And if then the effect stops, we know this gene is involved in the function. And we never want to just examine one worm, so we feed the mother with double-strand RNA and then we examine all of its children, so we can have the statistics over hundreds of worms or thousands of worms. So this is validated and not controversial at all and totally routine. Andrew Huberman: Is it fair to say that McConnell's experiments of chop-blending up these worms - [LAUGHS] very graphic image - blending up these worms and then feeding them to other worms, planaria, that those experiments can, yes, be explained by double-stranded RNA and through RNA interference? Oded Rechavi: Potentially. It hasn't been done yet. We are working on it in my lab now in collaboration with other labs, but it wasn't published. But yes, this could be the explanation. So Fire and Mello did these experiments, some other people did these experiments. When I started my work, I wanted to see whether, in addition to artificial double-strand RNA, some natural traits can also transmit across generations because of RNA. Because of small RNAs, right? Andrew Huberman: Because injecting siRNA, or short interfering RNAs, that is, or putting worms into an environment with an abundance of inhibitory RNAs as an experiment, is very different from worms experiencing something and then passing on that acquired trait to their offspring. It's a world apart, in my opinion, because one is an extreme manipulation that illustrates an underlying principle, the other is something that, in theory, occurs in the passage of generations, Just naturally . Oded Rechavi: We're going from the less artificial to the more artificial, the advantages, just like with model organisms, that the more artificial it is, the easier it is to, you know exactly what you did just now. Introduce one factor and you can follow the result. So this is always the trade. What I did was, in Oliver's lab, was to see whether part of the magic for the worms' resistance to viruses is their capacity to transmit information in the form of RNA molecules, inhibitory RNA molecules, to the next generations. And it has been shown before in C. elegans that the worms resist viruses using this mechanism, these small RNAs. In fact, this is probably the reason that these small RNAs evolved in the first place, to get rid of viruses and other parasitic genomic elements, and this is a mechanism to fight them. And what I did is a very simple experiment. I took worms and I infected them with a virus. When you do this, this also has been shown in the past. The worms destroy the virus. Okay. We demonstrated this very clearly using a fluorescent virus. So if the virus replicates successfully, the worm just turns green. And if the virus is destroyed, the worm stays black. This is very simple. It's a clear cut off. You don't examine the worm and ask whether it feels good, you just see. Andrew Huberman: This green light binary response. Oded Rechavi: Yes. And so we took worms, we infected them with the fluorescent virus they destroyed. This also has been done in the past. But then what we did is we neutralized the machinery that makes small RNAs in the descendants of the worms, so they cannot make small RNAs from the start on their own, because they just don't have the genes that you need to make these small RNAs. Okay? And then we ask, what will happen? Will we affect these worms with the virus? Will they be green or black? They can't make their own small RNAs, so they can't protect themselves on their own. The only way for them to stay black for them, not having the virus replicate is if they inherit the small RNAs from their parents. And this is exactly what happens. All the worms' progeny, although they don't have the gene that is needed for making the small RNAs, are black. They silence the virus. And this also continues for additional generations. Andrew Huberman: Okay, so the parent worms effectively put something into the genetic instructions of the offspring that would afford them. Let's call it an advantage in this case, but afford them an advantage if they were to be confronted with the same thing that the parents were. Oded Rechavi: Right. And we know exactly what this advantage is. The advantages are small RNAs that match the viral genome and just chop up that virus in the next generation. And we can identify these small RNAs in the inhibitory RNAs in the descendants, although they don't have the machinery to make it, just because they inherited. We can identify them by sequencing, by RNA sequencing, which is like DNA sequencing. You actually get the actual sequence of the RNA molecules, and we can see that they correspond to the virus. And they inherited small RNAs only if their parents were infected with them. Andrew Huberman: So there's specificity there. Oded Rechavi: There's specificity. Andrew Huberman: Yeah, it's not just some general resilience passage. Oded Rechavi: Right. Andrew Huberman: I have to be careful in drawing an analogy that isn't correct, and I want to acknowledge that what I'm about to say with certainty cannot be entirely correct. But the analogy that comes to mind in mammals is this idea that if one generation is stressed, that their offspring may, in some cases, have a higher stress threshold, a resilience to stress. I could imagine why that would be advantageous. Your parents have a hard life. They have offspring, and they want their children to have a higher threshold to stress because stress can inhibit reproduction, etc., and as I always say, at the end of the day and at the end of life, evolution is about the offspring, not about the parents. And every species pretty much seems to want to make more of itself and protect its young one way or another, either through nature or through nurture. This is a nature-based protection of its young. Is it fair to say that in the mammalian experiment with a passage of stress resilience, that it could be RNA-based, that that would perhaps set some new threshold on glucocorticoid production? Here I'm speculating, and I want to highlight that I'm speculating, but I'm speculating with a reason, which is, I think for people that are hearing about this in worms, you've done a beautiful job of splaying out why model organisms are really important, but to think about how this may operate in the passage of human generations, I think is a reasonable thing to entertain. Oded Rechavi: Right, and it is true that also in mammals now, RNAs and small RNAs are a leading candidate for something that could mediate the transmission of stress protection or also of harmful effects that transmit between generations. Perhaps RNA does it. However, in worms, the RNAs have one more trick that we don't know the equivalent of in mammals yet. This is something very crucial that we showed in that particular paper, in the first paper. Andrew Huberman: Which is? Oded Rechavi: So the effect that I described, this transmission of resistance to viruses through these RNAs, doesn't only affect the next generation, it also affects multiple additional generations. Andrew Huberman: So it gets passed? Oded Rechavi: It gets passed. And you have to ask yourself, how doesn't it get diluted? Why isn't it diluted? Because everyone produces 250 babies, so you dilute by 250, and if something is diluted for four generations, so it's 250 times 250 after four generations, it's a dilution of four billions. Completely homeopathic, would never work. It's just there's nothing left. The secret of these worms is that they have a machinery for amplifying the small RNAs in every generation. This is called RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. It's a complex which uses the RNA to find, and once it finds the messenger RNA, just create many, many small RNAs so they don't get diluted and they pass on for additional generations, and this is the trick. We later also identify genes that regulate for how long an effect would last. Otherwise, if in the beginning we ask how doesn't it stop after one generation, now we have to ask, why doesn't it last forever? And it doesn't typically, we see that the responses last not only with the viral resistance, but also with other traits. For a few generations, three to five generations, we found genes that function as a sort of a clock that times the duration of the inheritance. Andrew Huberman: What sorts of genes are those? Oded Rechavi: So we call these genes MoTeC genes. MoTeC. I don't know how is your Hebrew... Andrew Huberman: Not great. Oded Rechavi: ...but MoTeC means sweetheart in Hebrew, but the acronym is Modified Transgenerational Epigenetic kinetics. There are different types of genes like that, and for some of them, if you mutate, if you disrupt their function, now the effect would transmit stably for hundreds of generations. It would never stop because their role is to stop the inheritance. You don't want to carry over something forever, otherwise it will no longer fit the environment of the parents and you'll be prepared for the wrong things. So this is important. What type of genes are they? One gene that we studied, it's called Met-2, it's actually a gene that functions in methylation of the proteins that condense the DNA. But then there are other genes that also affect production of small RNAs. Andrew Huberman: Is there some mechanism that controls the duration of passage in a way that logically links up with the lifespan of the organism? So, for instance, I knew my grandparents, met them. I did not ever meet my great grandparents and I certainly didn't meet my great great grandparents. I could imagine that my great great grandparents or my great grandparents experienced certain things that were passed into their children and perhaps into their children. But it seems reasonable given that humans live somewhere between zero and 100 years, typically what now, 80 years? Is that the typical lifespan? More or less, okay? That if I were going to design the system, and again, I was not consulted at design phase, I would want an adaptive trait to be passed for two generations, because given how long our species lives, and certainly given the way the world looks now, as opposed to the previous century or the turn of the previous century, different stressors, different adaptation, different life environments, and what I would want to pass on to my offspring, I can basically hedge pretty well. I can place a good bet on the next 100 years, maybe the next 200, but I don't have the foggiest clue what the world is going to look like in 300 years. Does what I'm saying make any sense whatsoever? Oded Rechavi: It makes a lot of sense. And really we need to talk about two things in response to this question. First of all, yes, you can imagine that the reason that the worms inherit, typically for three to five generations, is that this is relevant to something that happened in their environment. For example, we also show that when you starve the worms, it affects the next generations again for a few generations. Andrew Huberman: Which in itself is amazing. I just want to highlight that you can imagine the next generation, it's sort of like a genetic version of, "be careful, kids, but I'm going to give you this extra lunch pack in your genome that protects you against the possibility of starvation." But it's also saying, "And, were you to have kids, they have it also." Oded Rechavi: Yeah. So I have to just make a disclaimer that we don't know that necessarily, it's adaptive. It could also be damaged. As I said, when you starve them, the next generations live longer. But this could be a trade off of a trade off for fertility or something. So other labs have also shown, following our work, that if you starve the worms, the next generations are also more resistant to harsh starvation. This is not our work, but this sounds adaptive. Okay, but whenever you're talking about adaptation, you have to see it in the context of evolution. There's also this famous saying, "nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution." And so it's very hard to say without doing the lab evolution experiments, we actually see who wins, the ones that inherit or the ones who don't hit, who takes over. Otherwise, it's hard to talk about whether it's adaptive or not. But when it comes to the duration of the response, yes, it could be programmed to fit something. For example, if you're talking about starvation, worms transition between periods of starvation and periods where they have a lot of food. So let's say they find an apple for a few generations, they will consume the apple, and then they will be starved for a while. Perhaps this is the number of generations that takes them to finish an apple. Or perhaps there are other responses also to higher temperatures. If you grow worms in higher temperatures, the options are different. They change how they mate. What I alluded to before. Andrew Huberman: We're going t o get back to this because it relates to cold exposure, which many listeners are interested in. Oded Rechavi: And perhaps it is somehow correlated with the cycle of the year. But to tell you the truth, I don't know. As I said, we go from the more artificial to the less artificial. If double-strand RNA, just synthetic RNA, is the most artificial, starvation is more natural. But it's not starvation in the real context of the world. In a real apple, it's a plate with or without E. Coli bacteria. But it's not an apple on a tree exposed to the elements, with other worms, with bacteria, with all kinds of complications. And it could be that we will see different durations of heritable effects the more natural we go. It's just much less controllable and hard to do. And again, when we're talking about humans, part of the argument is, why people, why the disbelievers, it's not about fate, but the critics say that this wouldn't happen in humans. If they say the worms' generation time is just three days, the chances that the parents' environment will match the children's environment is very high because there's not a lot of time for the environment to change. Plus they can't go very far, they're small. There are many examples of epigenetic inheritance in plants. This is a big field where there is very established proof for inheritance of acquired traits. For epigenetic inheritance, be more careful. Epigenetic inheritance of acquired traits is a more loaded term, but in plants it also happens. And there you also say these are sessile organisms. They can't run away. So the environment is more constant. Andrew Huberman: Ideas, maybe just a quick example that I've heard before, tell me if I'm wrong. I very well may be. For instance, a particular species of plant that grows a straight, maybe slightly bent stalk might be exposed to some environment where in order to capture enough sunlight and other nutrients might need to grow in a corkscrew form. The corkscrew form can be inherited for several generations. Oded Rechavi: This is an example that I don't know, but perhaps it-- -- Andrew Huberman: something like that. Trust me, the one thing we know about podcasting and YouTube is someone will tell us in the comments, and please do, we invite that. Oded Rechavi: Right, but there's a long history of epigenetic inheritance studies in plants, with excellent studies, well controlled, showing that it happens also there. So this is very clear when it comes to humans, you could say, maybe my kids will go to live in a different continent, and they will be on the computer every day and everything will be different, so it makes less sense to prepare them for the same hardships that I experience. However, in my opinion, this argument comes up a lot. It's not the best argument, because it depends on the scale of how you look at things we experience. We meet, for example, I'm not saying that this is inherited, but in humans, but we experience the same pathogens and the same viruses all the time. So perhaps it is worth preparing for that. Andrew Huberman: Right. Oded Rechavi: Again, I'm not saying that it happens, but it depends on the scale. Andrew Huberman: Well, what you're describing makes perfect sense. And I do want to acknowledge these critics, whoever they may be. I do have the advantage that I don't work in this exact field. And so I'm happy to stand toe to toe with those critics now and say that, at least in terms of inheritance of reactions or adaptive or maladaptive traits, to stress or to reward. You talked about nicotine before, a passage of response to drugs of different kinds. Not being specific to nicotine. It was sort of a more general passage of some sort of information related to reactions to chemicals present in nicotine, but other drugs. I have long been irritated and a little bit tickled by the fact that people say, oh, we have this system for stress. That was really designed to keep us safe from lions and saber-toothed tigers. Sure, but the hallmark of the stress system is that it generalizes. I mean, if I get a troubling text message or if I suddenly see a dark figure in the hallway when I go to the bathroom at night that I don't recognize, both of those have the same generic response, which is the deployment of adrenaline in both brain and body, changes in the optics of the eyes, quickening of the heart rate. Stress is, by design, generic. And so one could imagine that a passage of some sort of stress resilience or a maladaptive passage to stress would be also somewhat generic, and that's actually advantageous overall. Same thing with the reward system. We essentially have one or two chemical systems of reward. I mean, there's the opioid system and there's a cannabinoid system, but in large part, anticipation and reward is governed by the dopamine circuits. And anticipation and reward of an ice cream cone for a kid is the same neural circuitry that's going to be repurposed when they get to reproductive age, and they are anticipating creating children with their mate. And assuming they want to do that, the dopaminergic system is going to be engaged. So ice cream, sex, stress to weather, stress to famine. The biology of these more modal systems, especially in the nervous system, are, again, I have to be careful with the words, by design, are certainly generic, and so I don't see the need for immense specificity. I mean, it's not like we're, well, COVID just happened. So could you imagine that there's the passage of a COVID-19 specific resilience? No, I think what would probably be passed along would be some sort of, if it does occur, would be some sort of resilience to viruses more generally, and that would be advantageous. Oded Rechavi: Right. So I agree. And this opens a question of what is the bandwidth of inheritance? How specific can it be? Does it make sense for it to be specific? And in the case of C. elegans, the response can be very specific through this inheritance of RNAs, which are just sequence specific, they downregulate, they control one particular gene. In other cases, it could be a very general response. And it's very interesting to think about it when we talk about inheritance of memories, which is the most interesting thing we could imagine, can brain activity of some sort transmit, at least in these worms? I said no. I said this disclaimer multiple times in memories, we don't know. Time will tell in worms. We know a lot. So, can worms transmit brain activity? Do they have the specificity to do it? Okay, before I'll say that, I'll just say that we, over the years, learned a lot about the mechanisms that shuttle the RNAs between generations. We know about genes that are needed just for that, about worms, that would be perfectly okay, but just don't have the capacity to transfer the RNAs to the next generations. We know about genes that will make the responses longer or shorter. We know about genes that prevent the transfer of RNA between different tissues, about genes that make certain small RNAs. So we know a lot about that. And then the question arises, we can finally ask, can memory transfer between generations? I think that, first of all, we need to define memory for that. And the broadest definition would be any change in your behavior because of what happened in the past or in your response because of what happened in the past or because of your history. The more interesting part, of course, is to talk about memories that are encoded in the brain. And the reason is that the brain is capable of holding much more specific and elaborate memories. I think that any tissues that transmit, transfer to transmit RNA to the next generation and affect the next generation is interesting. The gut, muscles, everything. But the brain can synthesize information about the environment and about internal state and can also think ahead. And the most provocative thing you can say is that you could plan somehow the fate of your nerve generation using your brain after taking many things into the code. Andrew Huberman: This is without talking to them. Oded Rechavi: Right. Without talking. Andrew Huberman: Right. So again, we go back to this instruction manual. It's like writing something into the instruction manual based on your own experience. Oded Rechavi: Right, and can it happen and what is the bandwidth? Can we transfer specific things? And then I have to agree with you that I would imagine that what can transfer, and I could be wrong, is a general something, sensitivity. You can make the analogy to being inflamed or not, hypersensitive to pathogens, hyper vigilant, something like this. But it can also be something very specific. Now, we have to understand that the brain uses a different language than the language of inheritance. The brain, the way we normally think about the brain is that it keeps information in synapses, in the connections between different neurons. When you learn something, you make some connections stronger and another connection weaker, and you wire the nervous system in a different way. The information in the brain is synaptic, and it is in the connection. On the other hand, heritable information of any sort has to go through a bottleneck of one cell. The fertilized egg, because we all start from just one cell, so it cannot be in the connections, because this cell doesn't have any connections with other cells. It's there alone. So heritable information has to be molecular. It has to be inside this one cell. So the question is, can you or do you translate the information, this 3D structure information of synapses and the connection between brains in the architecture of the brain, can you somehow translate it to heritable information to a molecular form? Andrew Huberman: It's an incredibly important and deep question. It brings to mind something that was once told to me, which as soon as I heard it was obvious, but was very important in formulating my understanding of biology, which is that a map is just the transformation of one set of points into another set of points, right? So a map of the world, essentially, is just, you take what's been drawn out in terms of the architecture and the coastlines, etc., and divisions between states, and you transfer that to an electronic map or a piece of paper. It seems so obvious. It's sort of a duh, why are we talking about this? But just to make sure that people understand what you're really talking about is, let's say, the memory, and I have a very distinct memory for my childhood phone number. Phone number doesn't exist anymore, and I won't give it out because then some other person might get repeated calls. But in any case, I remember it. It's totally useless information, but it lives in my neocortex or my hippocampus or somewhere as a series of connections between neurons at the locations as you call synapses. Would my grandchildren know that phone number? There's no reason. Oded Rechavi: Absolutely no. Andrew Huberman: Right. Would my children know that unless there was some adaptive reason or some other reason for them to know, and this passage of acquired traits? And what you're saying is, in order for that to happen, there has to be a transformation of the neural circuit, literally the wiring of neuron ABCD, that relates and carries the information of that number into the kind of nucleotide sequences that are contained in DNA or patterns of methylation or RNA, more likely. So it's a transformation of one set of points in physical space to a translation of points in genetic space. Does that make sense? Oded Rechavi: Right. And then we have many problems. First of all, we don't know of a mechanism to translate between the two different languages, the language of the brain and the language of inheritance. We are not familiar with a mechanism like that. Second, the next generation, if it's not a worm, if it's a mammal would have a different brain even if it was genetically identical to the parent. The wiring of the brain and the particular neuronal circuits will be different. This is true for twins. It will always be true because it depends, because it's partly random and it depends on the environment, even if you have the same genetic infections. So let's say you somehow had a mechanism, a miracle mechanism, to take the 3D Information and translate it to the magic, to the language of inheritance. You would then in the next generation have to translate it again to the brain, although it is different. This sounds very unlikely. I'm playing a trick on you now. Andrew Huberman: Okay, I'm easy to trick. [LAUGHS] Oded Rechavi: But if this is how it happened or if this was required, it could never happen, in my opinion, which means, and I still think that there are certain memories that cannot transfer transgeneration and these complex and things that you learn about the environment that are arbitrary. None of our listeners' kids will remember this conversation. No way. This is impossible. Andrew Huberman: Unless they're listening with them [LAUGHS] . There are some families or parents that tell me they listen with their kids. Oded Rechavi: But it cannot transmit because it's random and these are connections that are arbitrary. So this seems to be a limitation on what can transfer. On the other hand, perhaps more general things could pass, these types of things. I doubt they could pass. However, you can nevertheless imagine that some things that are very specific, some memories that are very, very specific could nevertheless transmit from the brain after learning to the next generation. I'll give you an example. You can teach worms, even though they have just 302 neurons, you can teach them simple things about the world. For example, you can take an odor that the worms like. The worms have thousands of odorant receptors and they can recognize many, many molecules. They can smell them so they can find food or avoid enemies. You can take an odor that the worms like and pair it to something bad, like starvation. And then the worms will learn to dislike this odor. We don't know that this learning involves necessarily changing the strength of synapses. It's a possibility, but it doesn't have to be the case. It could be that just the receptor for this particular odor is being removed and this is how they live now. They won't have the receptor. They won't smell. They won't like the odor. This is a possibility. This type of thing, you can perhaps, not that anyone has shown it convincingly, transmit to the next generation because all it would take is an RNA that will control this particular receptor. So this is possible. People have shown things like that not in C. elegans, but people have shown things like this in mammals. They said that you learn a certain thing, and then just in the next generation, thus a particular receptor would be methylated or would change, and this would transmit the response. And on the one hand, it could be true. On the other hand, you need to understand, they'll need to prove, and this wasn't done convincingly enough yet, how exactly does the information transfer from the brain to the germ cells, and then in the next generation, from the germ cells back to the brain to where the receptor needs to operate? And this is a challenge. This is the current state of the field, that this is something that needs to be proven. What we did in C. elegans is we showed that the brain can communicate with the next generations using small RNAs, and that this can change behavior. And it doesn't require any translating between any language. It is very simple. What we've shown is that if you take a worm and you change the production of small RNAs just in its brain, in the next generations, their behavior will be different, even though you don't mess with their brains. This is a paper that we published in 2019 in Cell. We show that you just manipulate the production of endogenous natural RNAs in the worm's brain that are always made, but you change their amount, and this changes the capacity of the worms in the next generation to find food, to find not only in one generation, but three generations down the road. And the way that it works is that perturbing the production of these small RNAs in the brain affects, in the end, the expression of a gene in the germline. One gene, it is called SAGE-2, we don't know how it works, but we can do all kinds of controls where we manipulate activity of the gene and see that this also affects behavior. And this gene works in the germ cells. The information needs to go from the brain to the germ cells. It doesn't need to go back from the germ cells to the brain to affect behavior. And this depends, we know that this is a true epigenetic effect because it goes on for multiple generations, and also because it requires the machinery that transfers RNAs between generations. If you don't have the protein that physically carries the RNA between generations it doesn't happen. Andrew Huberman: So it has to be RNA. Oded Rechavi: It has to be RNA. We can also find the RNAs in the next generation that change. We sequence the actual RNAs that change in the next generation. Andrew Huberman: You mentioned that you don't know what SAGE, this gene SAGE does, but is it reasonable to assume that it does something in the context of the nervous system or, that's unclear as well? Oded Rechavi: It is possible. It is possible, but we have reasons to believe or experiments to show, although there could be alternative explanations, that it functions through the germline. Now, you may ask, how can you affect behavior just by changing the germ cells? Right? Andrew Huberman: Well, it would have to change the germ cells in very specific ways, because, as people probably recall, the germline, germ cells are where the inheritable information is contained. But you can imagine it, for instance, adjusting the gain or sensitivity, rather, on some sort of sensory foraging system. Oded Rechavi: Right. The interesting thing is it, again, can be quite unspecific. So it sounds weird that you change germ cells and it changes behavior, sperm and egg, but if you think about it, it's trivial. If you castrate a dog, it behaves differently, right? Andrew Huberman: Sadly, yeah, I did that to my dog and I ended up putting him on testosterone therapy later and it brought him back. Just as an aside. Oded Rechavi: Yes. This is because the germ cells affect the soma, including the brain, in many ways by secreting certain chemicals, and also because the other cells develop from the germ cells. So some information could be transmitted over development, or the course of development could be altered because of changes that occur in the germ cells. For example, in mammals, one of the explanations for how heritable information transmits is that it just affects something very early on in development. I told you that the secret to worms' inheritance is that they have the capacity to amplify these small RNAs all the time. This is what keeps it going and prevents the dilution. In mammals, we don't know of such an amplification mechanism. So you ask, how can a little bit of RNA or something without amplifying affect the entire organism? And it could be that you just perturb something in the very beginning when you just have a few cells or even in the placenta that develops in pregnancy, and this later throws everything off. And because of that, you have many problems in metabolism and so on. And this is called, it's an idea of the developmental origin of health and disease. Many of the functions occur early on in development. Andrew Huberman: So you've raised a number of incredibly fascinating aspects to this. I do have a question about one particular aspect, and feel free to pass on this for a future episode if it's going to take us too far off track. But something you said, it really captured my attention, although I was listening to all of it, which is that the germ cells so in the case of males, it's going to be sperm, and in the case of females, it's going to be eggs. Something perhaps not coincidental about those cells and the environment that they live in is that, yes, they contain the genetic information of past offspring. Of course, you explain how that works. But also those cells live in a region that is rich with hormones that can be secreted and in fact, are secreted, and through so called endocrine signaling, communicate with other cells, not just at the level of receptors on their surface, but also can enter the genomes of those cells and modify those cells. In other words, it seems to me that the microenvironment of the germ cells, the testes and the ovaries are rich with information, not just for the passage to next generations, but also for all the, as you said, all the somatic cells of the body. They're telling the somatic cells of the body what to do and what to become. And the best example I can think about this would be puberty, right? I mean, I would argue that one of the greatest rates of aging and transitions we go through in life is from puberty. I mean, a child becomes a very different person after puberty. They look at the world differently, they think about it differently. It's not just about the growth of the hair and the jaw and the Adam's apple and breasts and so on. It's a transformation of the somatic cells from the same microenvironment that the DNA containing cells reside. Oded Rechavi: Right. So once you think about it like this, it becomes obvious that just by affecting the germ cells, you can affect the rest of the body. And in C. elegans, there are experiments that show it very clearly. So, for example, if you just take worms and prevent sperm production, it changes their capacity to smell. These are experiments done by others, which is obviously a brain function. Andrew Huberman: And in a castrated dog, you're not just eliminating the possibility of transfer of DNA information to subsequent generations, you're also-- Oded Rechavi: --Limiting their personality. Andrew Huberman: Without question, my bulldog Costello changed after castration, and it was a wonderful dog, but at some point developed some health issues. The introduction of a small amount of testosterone every other day changed him fundamentally, in that case, for the better, back to a version of himself that I had only observed earlier, but also a different version of the same dog. And no, he wasn't humping everything, maybe the occasional knee? [LAUGHS] Particular people, whose names I won't mention. But it was absolutely clear that the hormone was not just taking a system and amplifying it. It was actually modifying the system. So, anyway, I just wanted to highlight that and then now, thank you for indulging me, if you will, let's continue down this path that we were going on, because I want to make sure that we absolutely get to this issue of transmission of information about sex, choice of offspring. Oded Rechavi: So the worms are hermaphrodites, which means that they make both sperm and an egg, but they are also males, which are much more rare, and they can choose to mate with the males or not. When they mate with a male, it's a huge decision because it's very costly energetically, and they also risk predation and all kinds of troubles. The males hurt them and reduce their lifespan when they mate with them. Andrew Huberman: People are going to draw all sorts of analogies here, but it's inevitable. But, hey, here we go. Oded Rechavi: And most importantly for evolution, when you mate with another animal, you dilute your genome in half, because the worms can just self fertilize and transmit the exact same genome to the next generation. But when they mate, they dilute it in half. So this is a big price to pay. On the other hand, when you mate, you diversify your genome. So maybe some combination of genes will be good. Andrew Huberman: And we know that in humans. I mean, it's kind of interesting that the brain circuits that are associated with aversion and with approach are fairly hardwired for a number of things, like a puddle of vomit, almost everybody kind of cringes. Plate of cookies. If you like cookies, you move towards it. But there's one particular word in the English and presumably Israeli language that ought to evoke disgust, and that's incest, because incest is actually not just disgusting as a practice, but it's dangerous genetically, right? Because of inbreeding, it creates a deleterious mutation. Oded Rechavi: Right, so there are studies on how people in Israeli kibbutz, for example, where they all grow together, the children live together. It used to be like that, don't date each other. This is the classic thing. I talked to some of whom the kibbuti told me that's not true, but yes, there are studies like this that say, but it makes sense. Andrew Huberman: And in some countries, Scandinavian countries, or in Lapland and Iceland, where populations are small, they keep exquisite records of lineage in order to avoid inbreeding. Oded Rechavi: Right? So you're absolutely right. But the worms, the safe choice for them is to self mate. And if they mate with a male, they take a risk, but they diversify. Okay, what we found is that if you take the hermaphrodites, we can call it the female for just one second and you stress it with high temperatures, then the next generations of worms, for three generations, mate much more with males. And they do it because the female starts secreting a pheromone that attracts the males. Andrew Huberman: It's a very cryptic mechanism. It's not that she somehow changes and then goes seeking males. It draws males. Oded Rechavi: It draws males. And we know how it works. We think we know how it works. What happens is that the stress, the high temperatures, compromise the production of sperm in the hermaphrodites. So the hermaphrodites don't, they make sperm enough to make next generations, but the sperm, because of defective small RNA, inherited. Because the RNAs are not inherited, okay? The sperm is not made optimally, so they make less sperm. And when they don't make a lot of sperm, they feel that they don't self-fertilize correctly. So they call the males by secreting the pheromones so that it would provide its own sperm and they can continue to make babies. And we know this also from experiment. You just take hermaphrodites and you kill its sperm, it starts secreting pheromone and the males come. Andrew Huberman: It's a need-based system. Oded Rechavi: Exactly. Andrew Huberman: Incredible. And I hope people can appreciate as they're hearing this, that none of this we assume, I don't know how to speak worm. None of this, we assume, is a conscious decision in these animals, much like human mating behavior, which to us always seems so conscious, but is being governed by both conscious and subconscious decision making. None of this is an active decision to secrete the hormone to draw in more males. It's simply a biasing of probabilities. The hormone is now secreted in greater quantities or greater frequency. The males therefore approach more. So it's just increasing the probability of interactions. Is that right? Oded Rechavi: Right. What happens naturally, normally, if you don't stress the ancestors, is that the worms start secreting the pheromone only when they are old. This is also people will-- Andrew Huberman: --When they're running out of their own fertility. Oded Rechavi: Exactly. Because they only make the sperm at a particular time and then they run out of self sperm. They can't self-fertilize. So they have to call the males if they want to continue to mate. Andrew Huberman: Well, this is sort of the plastic surgery approach. Okay, I'll take the heat for that one. But it's true, I think as certain people age to a certain point and they feel that their fertility is waning. If they want offspring, they need to take any number of different approaches. Here we're talking about a female, but we could also do the reverse. Right. Sperm donor. Oded Rechavi: Right. Andrew Huberman: But if they want to attract a lifelong mate or co-parent with somebody, oftentimes they will do things to adjust their attractiveness in any number of different ways. Psychological attractiveness or physical attractiveness. I'm not afraid to bring this up because I think that the parallels are very important, because I do think that every species and individuals within a species, of course, decides whether or not they want to reproduce or not, but has an inherent understanding, conscious or subconscious, about where they reside in the arc of their lifespan. I do believe that not just based on experience. Some people are very attuned to the passage of time being very fast, others very slow. I think that knowing how long your parents and their parents lived makes a big difference. I have friends whose fathers in particular died fairly young. And all these guys basically got married and had kids really young. Oded Rechavi: Right. So here, luckily for me, I don't have to get into the psychology of the worms. The explanation is just like an instinct. When they run out of sperm, they start secreting the pheromone and attract the males. There are studies also in Newman's about older fathers, that children of older fathers have a higher chance of becoming autistic. There are studies-- Andrew Huberman: --40 and up, basically. Oded Rechavi: However, in this case, it's not clear that this is something in epigenetics, could be just because of DNA damage, because it accumulates. Andrew Huberman: And actually nowadays, we have an episode on fertility coming up, both male and female fertility, and there are actually DNA fragmentation kits for at home. DNA fragmentation kits or sperm analysis. You send the sperm back in, you don't do the DNA. People pipetting semen at home would be an odd picture, let's not go there. But there are clinics that do this for a nominal charge. But I did want to ask about autism and human disease in particular. Another thing that you hear sometimes, and here I want to acknowledge, autism is on a spectrum. Some people get upset if you call it a disorder. There are some adaptive autistic traits, etc. But one thing that often comes up is this idea that two people who are more of the kind of engineering hard science, if you will, of phenotype mate and have children. Higher probability of the offspring being on the spectrum, some people would argue, but that's already selecting for people that might have already been partially on the spectrum. So maybe it's a gene copy issue. I'm not asking you to comment on autism in particular, but when you hear things like that, that the children of older fathers born from older fathers tend to have a higher probability of autism. At the level of intuition, does that strike you as an epigenetic phenomenon, as a nurture mishmash or the possibility that it's RNA passage or anything? Does anything sort of trigger the whiskers, your spidey sense? Oded Rechavi: So in that case, I would go with the most parsimonious explanation, which is it's just less fidelity, less DNA maintenance and some damage that passes on. It doesn't have to be an epigenetic thing. Andrew Huberman: But the sperm are generated once every 60 days, so the damage must be at the level of the germ cells not having the proper machinery. Oded Rechavi: Right. Andrew Huberman: Mitochondria or something like that. Oded Rechavi: Or the DNA repair machinery. The DNA repair machinery could be defective or could work less well in older people, leading to the constant production of germ cells with more mutation. This is a possibility. Andrew Huberman: Do we know exactly what the DNA repair machinery is? Oded Rechavi: Yes, there are many types of DNA repair. There's one that use other copies of the DNA to correct. There are ones that just recognize all kinds of lesions on the DNA and remove it. It's a very elaborate and complicated system. Andrew Huberman: And is it a system that is now tractable, that can be modified through pharmacology or through anything like that? Oded Rechavi: So I don't know about drugs that correct that, improve it. Maybe they exist and I'm not aware, but it's very well understood and many people are studying this direction. Andrew Huberman: Yeah. One thing that came across in the exploration of the fertility work is that what I'm about to describe is not legal in the US, it is illegal, but is legal in the UK and in other countries, is this notion of three parent IVF, where it does seem that some of the eggs that persist in older females, even if fertilized, don't produce healthy embryos. They have chromosomal abnormalities, replications, and deletions that are problematic for the development of the embryo, such as trisomy 21 aka down syndrome, in part or in large part because of deficits in the mitochondrial genome. So what they now do is they take the, because the mitochondrial genome resides mainly in the cytoplasm, they'll take an egg from the mother, the sperm from the father, but they'll take the nucleus from the mother and put that into a cytoplasm of a younger woman whose mitochondrial DNA is healthy, then use the sperm to fertilize that egg. And that's why it's called three parent IVF, then implant that into the mother. And this has been done several times in cases of mitochondrial damage or mutations in the mother, it works. The question is whether or not those offspring will grow up to be healthy. So this, of course, is not just a pure divergence. It raises a bigger question that I have for you, which is in terms of the work in either C. elegans or in other model organisms, but in particular in C. elegans. Where do you see this going next? And if you would indulge us, I would love for you to tell us a little bit about the admittedly unpublished work that you're doing on temperature exposure and environments. I mean, how malleable is this system? Because to me, it just seems incredibly malleable. And yet a lot of it's still cloaked off to us. There's still a ton to learn. Oded Rechavi: So, assuming that we will discover similar things in humans, which we don't know that this is the case, but let's say we find it, I think there are many things you can do before you change it. For example, you could also change a parent inheritance by having the parent exercise, for example. Some things like this have been done. For example, there are experiments in rodents where they show that overfeeding the rodents creates problems for the next generations, for the children. However, if you let the rodent exercise, then it corrects the aberrant inheritance. So this is one possibility. And you can also manipulate it at the source. You can change, if it's RNAs, let's say you could, in the future, perhaps, if we understand how it works, actually change the composition of the heritable RNAs. Andrew Huberman: By eating RNAs, just like the worms RNA sandwich. Oded Rechavi: No. So the RNA sandwich will be difficult because it's not. I don't know. But if you do IVF, if you do any vitro fertilization, you can perhaps change the composition of the RNAs in the stuff that you introduce. But way before that, what you could do, perhaps even in the not so far future, is use this for diagnostics, DNA based diagnostics for every couple that wants to have a kid. In Israel, this is done for most couples. You can look at the DNA and look for genetic disease, but no one is looking at the RNA at the moment. If we understand how it works better, we'll have another level, a whole new world to look at. And perhaps there will be some RNAs that correlate with disease that will say, okay, the beauty is that this, unlike DNA, it's plastic. So with DNA, this is your DNA, perhaps we can choose another embryo. But here you could say, perhaps again in the future. This is science fiction, it doesn't happen now, but if we understand this and it's true, we can say, maybe you should run on the treadmill a little bit. This will change the profile of your RNAs, and then we will use it for IVF. This seems more, because it correlates with healthy profiles of RNAs. This is a level that no one looks at now and holds great potential. Again, with a disclaimer that we don't know how it works in humans at all yet. But, of course, this is why it's so interesting. Andrew Huberman: Yeah, it's super interesting, incredibly promising. So, along the lines of things that one can do in the short term and your experiments on C. elegans, I'd love for you to share with us what you're observing about cold exposure and how that impacts subsequent generations of C. elegans. And if you would indulge us with the story of this discovery, like some of the earlier stories you told us, it is a surprising and fascinating one. Oded Rechavi: I'll gladly tell you about it. This is not a story about transgenerational inheritance. It's a story about memory within one generation. Andrew Huberman: Excuse me. Oded Rechavi: Within one generation. Okay, and as you said, the story of how it happens is it's totally by accident. It's a funny story. And I'm bringing this up because I know Dana Lanchev, who's a huge fan of your podcast, will really be happy, that this is her work and this is unpublished work. We didn't even finish it, so we're working on it. Andrew Huberman: Okay, well, when it's published, we will feature the paper, Because I love this story. Oded Rechavi: Great. What happened is that we talked about transgenerational memories, and I said that in worms, there are very long transgenerational memories. If a generation time for C. elegans is three days, some memories last for many generations. So way beyond the lifespan of the worm. The lifespan of the worm is three weeks. You have a new generation every three days, but every worm lives for three weeks. But there's a lot of research that shows that unlike heritable memory, which can be very long, the memory that the worms acquired during their lifetime Is very short lived. So if you teach something after 2 hours, it forgets. So, for example, you can teach the worm, you can take an odor that it likes and pair it with starvation, and then it would dislike the odor. And then there's a simple test. You just put it in a plate. You put the odor in one side and a control order in the other side, and you see whether it prefers this odor or not, and it stops preferring it. Okay. There is 30 years or more of research or 40 years of research on this showing that the worms forget after two hours. The reason I went to study C. elegans is that I wanted to understand memory because of such a simple nervous system. Maybe I have the potential to actually understand how it works, but this is slightly disappointing because they forget after 2 hours. So what is it exactly? Okay, my idea was, and I tried to convince students to do it for ten years, is to take the worms, teach them this assocIation to dislike the odor that they innately like, and then just put the worms in -80 and freeze them, freeze them completely, thaw them and see whether they still remember after they are thawed. Andrew Huberman: The Han Solo experiment. Oded Rechavi: And I didn't w ant to do it because of cryopreservation or something like this. I wanted to do it because as you know better than me, many theories about memory say that you need electrical activity to maintain the memory. You need to reverberate it in the brain. Andrew Huberman: During dreams or replay of the thing or whatever. Oded Rechavi: And if the memories will nevertheless be kept even though the worms were frozen in -80 it would mean that it was kept in the absence of electricity because there's no electricity in -80 degrees. This was the idea. I asked many students, no one wanted to do it because it's not so easy and also a little crazy. Andrew Huberman: Well, and when the PI, the principal investigator or lab has a pet experiment, no one wants to do that experiment. [LAUGHS] Oded Rechavi: That is universally true. And then Dana agreed to do it. Dana Lanchev I was very happy only later to find out that she ignored me completely and did a different experiment. The experiment that Dana did instead is to just take the worms, teach them the association and place them on ice. She wanted to see how the kinetics of memory and forgetting change in low temperature. Because maybe whatever memory is, the breakdown of the memory is affected by the temperature. A very simple idea, we know, different experiment. A different experiment, but a cool experiment, very cool. And what she found is that when you place the worms on ice after you teach them, they just don't forget even ten times longer than control worms at that point, after 24 hours, if normal worms forget after 2 hours, after 24 hours, the worms will become sick. So normally we do shorter experiments, but for 2 hours, the worms don't forget. This is cool, but it was only the beginning because the boring explanation is just what I just said, that everything slows down in low temperatures. So the breakdown of memory again, we don't know what it is, but whatever it is happens slower in low temperatures. But this is not the case. It's not merely the physical. It's the response. It's the changing of the internal state of the worms which affects the memory kinetics. How do we know this? There's been beautiful work over the last year on cold tolerance in C. elegans nematodes. If you take the worms and you place them on ice like she did, but longer, for 48 hours, they all die. However, if you take the worms, acclimate them to lower temperatures for a few hours, 5 hours is a minimum, and then place them on ice, they all survive. They become cold tolerant. And people who study this show that this involves changes in lipid metabolism and many things. So Dana took the worms, acclimated them to slightly lower temperatures, made them cold resistant, and then taught them the association and placed them on ice. And now they forgot immediately, which means that when they change their internal state to become cold tolerant, they no longer extend memories on ice, which means it's not only the temperature, because the temperature was in any way low. Now they know the memory. We took this as a starting point to understand which genes change when the worms are becoming cold tolerant on and off ice. And we found genes that when you mutate them, the worms just remember longer, always, even when they're off ice, because these are the genes that normally change when they are surprised on the ice. And these genes are expressed just in one pair of neurons, just two out of the 302. Andrew Huberman: Notice he said 302, not 300. Oded Rechavi: And we can manipulate the activities of these genes in these neurons to extend memory. And then the punchline of everything that happened is that we found out that this neuron, where these genes function, this one pair of neurons, is the only neuron in C. elegans which is sensitive to lithium. And lithium is a drug that has being given to bipolar disorder patients for decades. Although it's not entirely clear how it works, it's very, very interesting. It is also interesting, there's an episode, of course, in your podcast about this. You know more about this than me, a lot. But it's also interesting because it's just an atom created in the Big Bang, yet it works on our brains in such a fundamental way. And we wanted to see whether it works also on the worms, because this neuron was tied to this memory extension phenotype that we found. So Dana grew the worms on lithium, removed them from lithium, taught them the association, and found out that they remember a lot longer than control worms. Not only that, if you first make the worms cold tolerant and then lithium doesn't work on them, lithium switches this forgetfulness mechanism on and off. Andrew Huberman: Amazing. Oded Rechavi: And it's all connected to cold tolerance. Andrew Huberman: Amazing and amazing for a number of reasons. And so, at risk of being long winded in my response, I just wanted to highlight something that I think will be of relevance to most people, which is when, at some point, we did a few episodes on memory. And I highlighted a review that was written by the great James McGaugh, one of the great mammalian memory researchers who's worked a lot on humans and mice. And I was shocked, pun intended, and amused to learn that in medieval times, if people wanted children to remember lessons, they could be religious lessons or school doctrine or whatever it was, mathematics, they would take children, teach them, and then throw them into cold water to introduce a memory instilling event. And we now know that the memory instilling event is the release of adrenaline in the body, which makes perfect sense if you think about traumatic events. But this whole general mechanism also applies to the learning of other types of information. And so, if I understand correctly about the role of lithium and the role of cold in the experiments that you just described, there's some general state switch, some internal state switch that says, what happened in the minutes or hours preceding this was important. It acts as sort of like a highlighter pen in the Book of Experiences. And I'm absolutely curious to know whether or not this is an RNA dependent mechanism in some way. So, is this literally like the highlighter in the IKEA instruction book? Oded Rechavi: This we don't know. This we don't know, and as I said, this is not even a finished work. It's not peer reviewed. It's just the state that I told you about. But it's very exciting for me to go into this new field, and once it's out, I'll be happy to talk more about it and think about the implications and the connection to other things and more about the mechanisms. Yeah. Andrew Huberman: Well, thank you for sharing it with us. Despite the fact that it's not finished, people now know that it's also not finished. And I love a good cliffhanger. So we await the full conclusion and interpretation of these results. Today, you've taken us on an amazing journey through the genome. RNA, short interfering RNAs, a ton of history of prior experiments, some of which ended tragically, many of which, unfortunately, did not. They were true triumphs, and in particular, the work in your laboratory, which is just incredible. And also this introduction of model organisms. And I only mentioned a short handful of the things that you've taught us about today. So, first, I want to extend thanks for the incredible teaching. I also want to say thank you for something equally important, which is that absolutely came through, but is what initially brought me to explore you and your work more, although I had certainly heard of you, which is that your spirit and kind of approach to biology is an extremely unique and intoxicating one. Oded Rechavi: Thank you. Andrew Huberman: Even I venture to call it seductive. I do believe that whether or not it's music or poetry or science or mathematics, that the spirit behind something dictates the amount of intelligence and precision with which that thing is carried out. And it absolutely comes through. So if I'm making you feel on the spot about this, I've succeeded. Oded Rechavi: Thank you. Thank you very much. Andrew Huberman: But I know that the listeners can feel it. It's a felt thing. So thank you. There are many scientists out there, fewer with this phenotype and even fewer that I think that can communicate with such articulate precision. So thank you so much. Oded Rechavi: Thank you. Andrew Huberman: It's been a real pleasure. Oded Rechavi: Pleasure was all mine. Thanks a lot. Andrew Huberman: Great. Well, we'll do it again, and we'll learn about all the incredible things you're doing trying to transform science, as it were, at the level of publishing, at the level of social media, because there's a whole other discussion there. Meanwhile, we will, of course, point people in the direction of you and to learn more about your work. And I look forward to hearing the conclusion of Dana's studies. Oded Rechavi: Thanks a lot. It's been a real pleasure. Andrew Huberman: Thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. Oded Rechavi about genetics, inheritance, the epigenome and transgenerational passage of traits. If you're learning from and or enjoying the podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific, zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple. You can leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us or comments or suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover or guests you'd like me to include on the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. Not so much on today's episode, but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep, improving focus, and for hormone support. The Huberman Lab podcast is proud to partner with Momentous Supplements. We've done that for several reasons. First of all, Momentous Supplements are the very highest quality. Also, they tend to focus on single ingredient formulations, which makes it very straightforward to build the most cost effective and biologically effective supplement regimen for you. We've also partnered with Momentous because we realize that many listeners of this podcast reside outside of the United States, and fortunately, Momentous ships internationally. If you'd like to learn more about the supplements discussed on the Huberman Lab Podcast, you can go to livemomentous, spelled O-U-S. So that's livemomentus.com/huberman. If you're not already following us on social media, please feel free to do so. We are Huberman Lab on Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And at all those places I cover information, some of which overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from content on the Huberman Lab podcast. So again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media channels. The Huberman Lab podcast also has a so-called Neural Network Newsletter . This is a zero cost monthly newsletter that consists of podcast summaries and so called toolkits. And those toolkits range from things like a toolkit for sleep, for focus, for controlling dopamine, deliberate cold exposure, for increasing focus, and much, much more. If you want to sign up for that newsletter, you can go to hubermanlab.com. Go to the menu, scroll down to newsletter. You simply provide your email, and I assure you we do not share your email with anybody. And again, it's a completely zero cost newsletter. Find it at hubermanlab.com. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Oded Rechavi. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [CLOSING THEME MUSIC]

========================================

--- Video 221 ---
Video ID: S8nPJU9xkNw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S8nPJU9xkNw
Title: AMA #4: Maintain Motivation, Improve REM Sleep, Set Goals, Manage Anxiety & More
Published: 2023-02-24 13:00:16 UTC
Description:
Welcome to a preview of the fourth Ask Me Anything (AMA) episode, part of the Huberman Lab Premium subscription.

The Huberman Lab Premium subscription was launched for two main reasons. First, it was launched in order to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel — which will continue to come out every Monday at zero-cost. Second, it was launched as a means to raise funds for important scientific research. A significant portion of proceeds from the Huberman Lab Premium subscription will fund human research (not animal models) selected by Dr. Huberman, with a dollar-for-dollar match from the Tiny Foundation.

Subscribe to Huberman Lab Premium at https://hubermanlab.com/premium

#HubermanLab #Science #AMA

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction
00:01:27 How to achieve consistent state of motivation? 
00:20:54 Huberman Lab Premium

In the full AMA episode, we discuss:
- Are there neurological benefits from different types of body work? 
- Are goals necessary for the growth mindset and how to set the best short and long-term goals for creativity? 
- Is anxiety useful? Can it be controlled?

Articles
Dopaminergic stimulation enhances confidence and accuracy in seeing rapidly presented words: https://bit.ly/3Znz3Zn

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an ask me anything or AMA episode, which is part of our premium subscriber content. Our premium channel was launched in order to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which still comes out once a week every Monday and, of course, is zero cost to consumer. The premium channel is also designed to support exciting research being done at major universities like Stanford and elsewhere, research that's done on humans that should lead to protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance in the near future. If you'd like to check out the premium channel subscription model, you can go to hubermanlab.com/premium, and there you can subscribe for $10 a month or $100 a year. We also have a lifetime subscriber option. For those of you that are already Huberman Lab podcast premium subscribers and you're watching and/or hearing this, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium podcast feed. And for those of you that are not already Huberman Lab premium podcast subscribers, you will be able to hear the first 15 minutes or so of this episode, and hopefully, that will allow you to discern whether or not you would like to become a premium subscriber. Without further ado, let's get to answering your questions. And as always, I will strive to be as accurate as possible, as thorough as possible, and yet, as concise as possible. Our first question is about motivation, in particular, how to maintain motivation over long periods of time. This was the question asked by Martin Zokov. He wrote, "I alternate between periods of two different states that vary from a few weeks to a couple of months. I have extremely high motivation in one state, where I can do multiple things-- side projects, making music, as well as my main things, or really low-motivational states, where I can barely do anything, and I only look for short term entertainment." I'm guessing, short-term entertainment comes in the form of video games, social media, and just doing generally unproductive things, as we all do from time to time. He goes on to write, "What would be the best set of protocols to normalize those extremes into a more stable and consistent state?" Well, first off, this is an excellent question. I say that because it's a question that I hear a lot, and I think that many people are interested in knowing how motivated they ought to feel. And I think a lot of people also feel a lot less motivated than they would like. Now, here the question was, specifically, about how to not go from these extremes of days or weeks of high motivation to days or weeks of low motivation. But before we do that, we need to take a step back and acknowledge that, just as with anxiety, or happiness, or sadness, we as human beings don't have an objective window into how other people experience motivation. In fact, most of the time, we don't even realize how we experience motivation. We just know whether or not we feel a high barrier or a low barrier to leaning into work and getting things done. In fact, I have a good friend who did many years in the special operations community, and then went on to the finance community, and then now works in health and wellness community. He has a great mental image for all of us to adopt. It's certainly one that I've adopted, which is-- for anything in our life, we can either be back on our heels, flat footed, or forward center of mass. Back in our heels, meaning really struggling; flat footed, meaning we're doing OK; or forward center of mass, meaning that we feel as if we're really tackling things and that we are in control of our environment or at least to some degree. So I place that imagery in your mind because I'll return to it a little bit later in the question when we get into some of the underlying circuitry and tools. In the meantime, I want to remind everybody what the basis of motivation is. There are many neurochemicals and neural circuits involved in what we call motivation, but a central theme of the neuroscience of motivation is that the neural modulator dopamine is involved. Now, dopamine does other things besides control motivation. In fact, it controls light adaptation in the retina, that is your eye. It controls a number of different things in terms of movement. It controls all sorts of things, but it is strongly related to the motivation pathways. How do we know that? Well, there are experiments on animals and humans, which show that even in the absence of dopamine, or in the presence of very low dopamine, I should say, people and animals can still experience pleasure. However, when dopamine levels are too low, people's ability to pursue pleasure, or their willingness to pursue pleasure, in particular, their willingness to undergo effort to pursue pleasure or any goal of any kind, not just pleasure, any goal of any kind, is strongly regulated by the levels of dopamine. So if dopamine levels are too low, people simply will not put in the effort to obtain or reach a goal. If dopamine levels are adequately high, they will put in that effort. And if dopamine levels go too high, you actually see something that is pathologic, which is that people consider every goal a reasonable goal. This is often seen in the manic phase of a manic bipolar person. So for instance, somebody with manic bipolar who is in a manic episode, dopamine levels are very, very high, and they will think every idea is a great idea. And they will have tons of energy to do that, so much so so that they're not sleeping. So obviously, that's not what we want. What we want, and what the question asker, Martin, is asking about, is how to keep dopamine levels in a range that allow us to lean into effort but that we don't expend our ability to stay motivated. And we can really trace that back to a biochemical/neural circuit statement, which is-- we really want to control our output of dopamine and the baseline levels of dopamine from which that output is taken. In other words, we want to think about dopamine as a reservoir or residing in a reservoir. That reservoir can be depleted, so it's exhaustible, it's depletable, but it's renewable as well. And one of the best analogies that I've ever heard was by a previous guest on the Huberman Lab podcast, Dr. Kyle Gillett, who's a medical doctor, obesity specialist, expert in hormones. We did an episode on optimizing hormones in males with Dr. Kyle Gillett. You can find that at hubermanlab.com or anywhere you can find podcasts. Dr. Gillett offered an analogy of the baseline levels of dopamine as a wave pool, and I really like this. So if you think about this pool full of dopamine-- and here we're just talking about the dopamine that resides in the circuits of the brain that control motivation. But that pool of dopamine you could imagine is just sitting there not doing much of anything while you're asleep. In fact, while you're sleeping, you're replenishing those dopamine levels. I'll tell you another tool in a moment to replenish those dopamine levels. But if you were to pursue a goal, really, really go forward-center of mass for many, many hours or many, many days, in some cases, and pursue a goal or multiple goals and you're really driven to do a ton, what you're effectively doing is generating waves in that wave pool. And if those waves are too big, well, then the waves can't keep repeating themselves. So think about the wave as the motivation and the depth of the pool is the reservoir of dopamine. And if those waves are too big, too much excitement, too much motivation, too much center of mass for a given period of time, then the water in this wave pool sloshes out of the wave pool lowering the reservoir. And then there are really three ways that you can replenish that reservoir, and you want to maintain or replenish that reservoir if it's been depleted. How do you do that? Well, first of all, quality sleep. So when I say quality, I mean where you're getting enough slow wave sleep and rapid I move in sleep. So for some people, six hours, for some people, eight hours. Some people might even need a little bit more or a little bit less. We have episodes-- the Perfect Your Sleep episode, the Master Your Sleep episode. We have a toolkit for sleep. All available at zero cost at hubermanlab.com, links et cetera. So check those out for getting your sleep right. But sleep is really when you replenish that reservoir of dopamine. So you cannot ignore sleep. I'll come back to this in a moment. The second science supported tool that's really been shown to replenish dopamine, in particular, dopamine within the pathways that regulate motivation, is a practice I've talked about before on the podcast called non-sleep deep rest, sometimes called yoga nidra, although, yoga nidra is a little bit different. There are two studies out of Denmark that have explored yoga nidra in the context of dopamine. The first one simply involved having people do a yoga nidra practice. Again, this doesn't involve any movement, but it involves people, potentially you, doing anywhere from 30 to 60 minutes, although there are now data showing that as short as 10 minutes of a non-sleep deep rest, a.k.a. yoga nidra protocol, leads to dramatic, really dramatic increases in striatal dopamine reserves. So it essentially is replenishing the dopamine reserve pool. This is why I'm such a fan of using NSDR, a.k.a. yoga nidra, at least once a day and especially under times when you're engaging in a lot of high output. And when I say, especially at times when you're engaging in a lot of high output, this is a mistake many people make. They push, push, push, push, push. They're in pursuit of a goal. Then they hit that point where they're exhausted. Then they start doing all the dopamine reserve pool replenishing tools such as yoga nidra or NSDR. The real key is to always tap off that or refill that reservoir once a day before it's completely depleted. Now, this gets into some of the biochemistry of dopamine and the relevant circuits, but it takes a lot longer to restore the dopamine reservoir-- think of it still as a wave pool, but that reservoir from a place of complete depletion then it does of partial depletion. So there's an asymmetry in the way this is done. So it's not as if you drink a glass of water. You fill the glass of water at a certain rate and it fills up to a certain level, and the rate is constant. Think about it as once the level of dopamine in your reserve is depleted past a certain point, it takes a lot more effort, much more sleep, much more NSDR, things of that sort to replenish that reservoir. Now, oftentimes what people will do when they start feeling less motivation is they will start relying on things like Adderall, Ritalin, some cases illegal substances that can increase dopamine. You know what those are. Please don't ever lean in to those. They are extremely dangerous. They really are because of their ability to potently release dopamine. And guess what, deplete that reservoir even further. We've talked about some supplements on the podcast that can replenish dopamine, L-tyrosine in particular. Mucuna pruriens is actually 99% l-DOPA, the precursor to dopamine. I don't necessarily recommend Mucuna pruriens. It tends to make people very dopaminergic-- drive, drive, drive, drive, motivated, and then crash. Again, depleting that pool. L-tyrosine is a little bit milder. But I really encourage people to lean first on the behavioral tools such as an NSDR. And by the way, there's a NSDR script, totally zero cost, that you can find by putting my name and NSDR into YouTube. That one works quite well if you are looking for a short NSDR. There are some other NSDRs. You can simply look on the internet or YouTube and just put NSDR and you'll find NSDR. Or if you prefer to do the more classic yoga nidra type approach, there are a lot of different yoga nidra options to choose from on YouTube. Many people think NSDR or yoga nidra are simply meditation with a body scan. That's not true. Meditation is a focus exercise. Most meditations are focus exercise. NSDR restores energy through the dopamine system, and newer data are starting to show that it can actually recover lost sleep, so if you're not sleeping enough. But to return to NSDR, a.k.a. yoga nidra, as a practice, yes, it's been shown in laboratory studies, in humans, by the way, to restore dopamine levels. There's another study, lesser known, from that same group that was published in 2011, which is entitled Dopaminergic stimulation enhances confidence and accuracy in seeing rapidly presented words. This was a cognitive task. They explored yoga nedra, a.k.a. NSDR, in the context of increasing striatal dopamine. They already knew that it did that, so that's great. They confirmed that result. But what they also found is that doing NSDR could restore confidence in cognitive ability and performance in these cognitive tasks. So this is a really powerful, zero cost tool for re-upping or replenishing that dopamine reserve. So this is something to do every day, especially when you're not feeling depleted. So the question, again, was about how to make sure that you don't go through these cycles of extreme motivation and then lesser motivation. Well, get your sleep right. I always say, 80% or more of the nights of your life, hopefully the nights that it's not good, are for good reasons that you're enjoying yourself. But hey, life happens, so 100% of the time it's just not reasonable to expect of yourself. Do NSDR once a day for either 10 minutes. If you have the time to do 20-30 minutes or an hour, you will see even more positive effects. It has been shown in these research studies to replenish dopamine, levels of confidence, cognitive ability, et cetera, and sense of motivation. And I said there were three tools, and the third tool that really can allow you to keep the dopamine, a.k.a. motivation circuitry, tuned up properly is to really start paying attention to peaks in dopamine and be very careful about layering in too many things that can stimulate the dopamine system. I talked about this quite a bit in the episode that we did on ADHD and building and maintaining focus. There are many things out there nowadays that will deplete the dopamine system. For instance-- and by the way, none of what I'm about to list is necessarily bad. I actually used some of these things. For instance, caffeine will increase dopamine receptors that will allow whatever dopamine is available to be more potent. OK, so caffeine is great for some people, less good for people with anxiety. Don't drink it too late in the day because it will interfere with your sleep, and so on and so forth. But many people will combine caffeine with music that they particularly like. Music's great. Music can stimulate dopamine release, we know this. It can enhance motivation, especially if is the kind of music that really puts you in the groove for the particular type of work you're going to do. For me, I like to listen to either loud fast music or Glenn Gould classical piano, so one or the other. I know what's right for me for a given time. You'll know what's right for you for a given time and your preferences. But what will happen is people will start consuming caffeine at higher and higher levels. Again, caffeine isn't necessarily bad, but they'll start doing that. And they'll start layering it in, or stacking, very potent music, potent for them, plus things like L-tyrosine. Again, none of these things are terrible on their own. In fact, they can be very beneficial. Sometimes they'll start taking Mucuna pruriens. Sometimes they'll start relying on things like Adderall, Ritalin. And pretty soon what's happening is they're getting these big waves in that dopamine wave pool, big peaks. And within a few days or maybe even within a few hours, they're depleted and they're at that low. And then, as Dr. Anna Lembke, who is a guest on the podcast, talked about in terms of addiction but also in her wonderful book Dopamine Nation, what happens is after those big peaks in dopamine, the reservoir, the baseline in dopamine, drops below its initial level. So it's as if the reservoir got deeper, and it's emptier, and it takes much, much longer to fill. So to be quite specific, what I'm recommending is get your sleep right. Ideally, every night of your life, but for as many nights of your life as possible. That's clearly replenishing dopamine and sense of motivation. Do all the things associated with that-- morning, sunlight, lack of artificial light at certain hours of the night, et cetera. All of that's in the Toolkit for Sleep and other episodes I mentioned before. Have a practice that is research supported to replenish dopamine, and incorporate that practice any time of day. Again, NSDR can be done morning, afternoon, or evening, or middle of the night if you wake up and you need to get back to sleep, it can be very beneficial for that. But do it as a consistent practice so that dopamine reservoir remains tapped off. And as a third point, please be wary of, or at least aware of, these peaks in dopamine and the fact that layering in a lot of things that stimulate dopamine, well, that can be wonderful for your wedding, birth of a new child, going to a sports event with a bunch of friends, celebrating a big anniversary. Yes, please do celebrate and enjoy the wonderful events of life, but please also understand and expect there will be a lull, a sort of postpartum low, maybe not full blown depression, that follows that unless you incorporate some tools and practices to replenish that dopamine. Does that mean you should never combine caffeine, L-tyrosine, music, and a workout, and time with friends? No, absolutely not. But don't expect to do that, and then go do an intense bout of work, and then get up the next morning and do it all over again for more than a few days before you find yourself pretty depleted. So rather than give you a specific schedule of do seven days of this and four days of this, what I encourage you to do is, for at least five days a week-- maybe give yourself some time off on the weekends, maybe not. But for at least five days a week, get into a consistent routine that is, I should say, neurobiologically consistent as well with how the dopamine, a.k.a. circuits that control motivation, work. And I assure you that you will find yourself in a more regular groove of focus, and attention, and alertness, and motivation when you need to. And provided you're doing all the things I described, and hopefully paying attention to other things like nutrition and social connection too, of course, you'll find a much more even pattern of motivation over time. One last thing before I conclude the answer to this question. When I was in graduate school, I got some wonderful advice from an excellent neurologist. His name is Robert Knight. He used to be at University of California, Berkeley. I think he's retired now but is still active in the scientific community. And I asked him what he was doing that weekend. I don't know why this came up. And he said, oh, I'm going fishing. I like mindless recreation. I said, that's great. You know, fishing is fun. I'm not particularly into fishing myself, but I've done it a few times and I enjoy it. And he said, the most important thing for a science or medicine career or any demanding career? I said, what? I was all ears, super hungry to get in the mix and do research and publish papers. And he said, figure out how many hours a day you can do real work consistently. That means five days a week, for some people six or seven, but five days a week I think for most people is going to be a bit healthier overall for your social life and family, et cetera. And he said, figure that out, and know that that number is what you should apply over, and over, and over again, but update that number about every four or five years. And I said, OK, so does that mean that over time I'm working more and more or less and less? And he said, ah, here's the deal-- as you get better at your profession, you will find that you can do more potent work, more directed work, in a shorter amount of time, but that does not mean that you can continue to expand the amount of time that you're doing focused work. In fact, the opposite. So this follows a sort of general principle that's also present in resistance training, weightlifting, right? The analogy there is that people always imagine that as you get better and better at resistance training that you should do more and more volume, just keep adding volume. And there's some evidence to support that. More volume for hypertrophy as opposed to less, et cetera. We've done episodes on this. However, there's a different school of thought that works exceedingly well, and it runs in the exact opposite direction, which is as you get better at controlling muscular contractions-- or let's say for in an endurance sport, as you get better at regulating your stride, and breathing, and all those things, you actually can do more "adaptation" stimulating damage during a given training session. So you want to train less not more over time because beginners don't actually have the ability to get much done in a lot of time or a short period of time, whereas, experts can come in there and really nail it. So I think that advice that Robert Knight was really key, and it's something that I've followed throughout my career. So at one period of my life, I won't mention the hours that I worked in graduate school, they were pretty insane to be honest. I had family members get a little concerned. I actually lived in the laboratory even as a junior professor. I don't suggest people do that by the way, but I enjoyed it at the time. And the key thing is that you figure out what you can do consistently and still maintain mental health and physical health. That's key as well. And do that, and then, every couple of years or so, update that, typically, by reducing the total amount of time that you're doing that high-potency work. I think that, combined with the other tools that I described before for generating ongoing dopaminergic circuits, keeping that reservoir full, ought to give you consistent motivation. Again, it's an art, and a practice, and a science, so don't expect to get it perfect the first time around. But I wish you all luck, and I'm certain that these tools work. Thank you for joining for the beginning of this ask me anything episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future episodes of these ask me anything sessions, plus to receive transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast standard channel and premium tools not released anywhere else, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, it's really twofold. First of all, it's to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which, of course, will still be continued to be released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab podcast. And to fund research. In particular, research done on human beings, so not animal models but on human beings, which I think we all agree as a species that we are most interested in. And we are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance. And those protocols will be distributed through all channels. Not just the premium channel but through all channels-- Huberman Lab podcast and other media channels. So the idea here is to give you information to your burning questions in depth and allow you the opportunity to support the kind of research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place. Now, and especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the tiny foundation has generously offered to do dollar-for-dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium channel. So this is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel to further support research for science and science related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab premium channel, again, there's a cost of $10 per month, or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMA's. You can ask questions and get answers to your questions, and you'll, of course, get answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will also be some premium content such as transcripts of the AMA's and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman lab podcast episodes not found elsewhere. And again, you'll be supporting research for mental health, physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 222 ---
Video ID: q37ARYnRDGc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q37ARYnRDGc
Title: Dr. Andy Galpin: Optimal Nutrition & Supplementation for Fitness | Huberman Lab Guest Series
Published: 2023-02-22 13:00:37 UTC
Description:
In this episode 6 of a 6-part series on fitness, exercise and performance with Andy Galpin, PhD, professor of kinesiology at California State University, Fullerton, he explains optimal nutrition, hydration and supplementation to achieve your fitness goals. We cover macronutrient guidelines, when to eat relative to training and training fasted versus fed. Dr. Galpin describes proper hydration for before and during exercise, how dehydration and/or low electrolyte concentrations impede physical and mental performance. He discusses what supplements work best for fitness and performance, how to decide which to take, if any, and when to take them. He also shares high-impact, lower-cost supplements and nutrition recommendations to benefit performance, recovery, and sleep. This episode also includes an audience Q&A. Overall, it is an in-depth but clear discussion of nutrition strategies and supplements that can help anyone improve their level of fitness physical and mental performance. 

#HubermanLab #Nutrition #Science

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Levels: https://levels.link/huberman 
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-hu.berman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Andy Galpin
Academic Profile: http://hhd.fullerton.edu/knes/facultystaff/AndyGalpin.php
Website: https://www.andygalpin.com 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/drandygalpin
Instagram: https://instagram.com/drandygalpin
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCe3R2e3zYxWwIhMKV36Qhkw

Articles
Meta-Analysis Examining the Importance of Creatine Ingestion Strategies on Lean Tissue Mass and Strength in Older Adults: https://bit.ly/3Ev36pU

Other Resources
Examine: https://examine.com 
Absolute Rest: https://www.absoluterest.com 
Reveri: https://www.reveri.com 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Nutrition & Supplementation
00:05:16 Creatine Supplementation, Muscle & Cognitive Function, Loading Phase
00:16:51 Momentous, Levels, LMNT
00:20:31 Dehydration, Overhydration, Night Urination
00:35:37 Tool: Hydration, Caffeine & Electrolytes
00:41:22 Tool: Sweating, Salt & Performance
00:48:57 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:49:49 Galpin Equation for Hydration & Exercise, Focus
00:55:28 Tool: 5 Steps to Optimize Hydration, Sipping Water, W.U.T. Status, Salt
01:10:58 Electrolytes, Carbohydrates & Exercise
01:15:44 InsideTracker
01:16:47 Training Fasted versus Fed, Caffeine, Carbohydrate Timing
01:25:13 Caffeine & Endurance
01:31:20 Citrulline, Beet Root Juice & Performance; Alpha-GPC & Focus, Nootropics
01:35:43 Rhodiola, Cortisol & Fatigue
01:39:55 Tool: Supplement Formulations
01:47:31 Supplements, Dependency & Root Cause; Foundational Behaviors
01:57:44 Acute vs. Chronic Effects, Supplements & Gut Microbiome 
02:02:33 Tool: Sleep Environment, Absolute Rest
02:11:03 Tools: Sleep & Disturbances, Inositol
02:20:03 Tool: “Fitness Fatigue” Model, Taper, Anti-Inflammatory Supplements
02:26:33 Exercise Recovery: Curcumin, Omega 3s, Glutamine, Nutrition, Vitamins
02:39:27 Intermittent Fasting, Training & Keto Diets; GABA
02:43:39 Carbohydrate Loading; Amino Acid Supplements; “Anabolic Window”
02:47:23 Garlic; Tart Cherry Extract; Examine.com
02:51:50 Fitness Testing, Training Programs; Exercise Recovery
03:04:13 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
[Music] welcome to the hubman lab guest Series where I and an expert guest discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine today's episode marks the sixth and final of the sixth episode series on fitness exercise and performance and today's discussion is all about nutrition and supplementation to maximize your fitness exercise and performance goals Dr Andy Galpin I'm super excited to discuss today's topic which is nutrition and supplementation for performance and recovery and I'm particularly excited about this conversation because I've been interested in supplementation and nutrition for performance really since my teens but also because in recent years we've witnessed a massive transformation in the general public in terms of their view of supplementation and nutrition first of all more people are thinking about nutrition what is good nutrition what is not a very barbed wire topic as you know but there are some truths in there that we'll discuss but also supplementation you know whereas 105 years ago I think most people um would either be really into supplements that was a small percentage of people but the majority of people uh were either told or were thinking oh you know vitamins you you mostly excrete them they're just expensive urine nowadays it seems that many people including many of my colleagues and Physicians all the way down to sports performance experts are taking and making recommendations about certain supplements and so the way that I like to think about supplements is that they aren't necessarily just supplements which makes it sound like they are augmenting what should already be there but you're not quite getting enough of but indeed a lot of these things we call supplements are very potent compounds that can transform our ability to perform in the short term to recover from exercise and that can really shape brain chemistry hormone patterns acutely and when taking long term term so I'm very excited about today's topic and to be able to try and sort through this let's call it a cloud hopefully not a storm but this cloud of supplements that are out there because indeed many of them are excellent and can provide us a lot some of them are terrible and then some just don't do anything and therefore are terrible because uh either they have side effects or because they're very expensive and they don't do anything and then of course within the realm of nutrition there's an equal amount of of confusion but that's why I'm talking to you because you're going to put Clarity and structure and definition on these incredibly important topics you you absolutely nailed it there one of the major reasons supplements can work is because you can consume nutrients in extremely high concentrations such that you would not get in nature through food having said that you really do want to focus on the basics sleep nutrition hydration and I'm going to get into very specific detail later with some of those things that said there are plenty of situations in circumstances when supplementation can do exactly what you said also though because you are taking them in such high concentrations they can also be unproductive they can be destructive or they can be counterproductive so in case if you're taking a couple of supplements over here it may actually be counteracting the benefits of some of the other supplements over there so in the ideal situation we would be able to work like snipers here so we would be able to run full biological testing so extensive blood work and saliva and urine and stool and have an in-depth analysis of your gut microbiome and your stress patterns and your time of day and your cortisol curve and like all the things that we do in our high performance folks with that then we can get extremely high Precision supplementation and and quite honestly our philosophy is we only give individuals exactly what they need so even some of the standard uh generally safe and effective supplements we don't really necessarily use them if there's no specific need we've talked about the consequences of this with things like antioxidants but even simple stuff like stimulants and other tools that are effective for Recovery we don't use them unless we have a reason that said that's not the reality for a lot of people they're not going to be able to do something like that or somebody who can help them in that so there are a handful of supplements that I would consider to be in my my 8020 rule which is sort of like the 20% of supplements that are going to give you 80% of the benefit for the lowest cost and so what I can actually do is just sort of start there even though this like burns my skin and my soul a little bit I absolutely hate this I am the context guy I'm the it depends it's high Precision guy but let's be real um there are a number of supplements that are fairly effective and fairly cheap for a wide range of outcomes uh so this is for general public this is for people who want to do the three buckets right you want to look a certain way so supplements that could enhance muscle growth and fat loss uh non hormonal based supplements of course supplements that can improve energ or physical performance again from everything from you know squatting more to feeling better in your yoga class to having more energy throughout the day to our third major bucket that we've been talking about throughout this entire series which are longevity so we can cover those first if you'd like to start there yes absolutely let's start there often times when we think of supplements we immediately jump to High Sport performance type of things or vigorous workouts or or muscle building though that doesn't necessarily have to be the case uh take for example creatine and I've spoken about this at length and with gu Darren kandow who's done a tremendous amount of research I was just up at his lab recently in Canada and he has covered extensively in fact I I think I put up a post perhaps I could draw this up um where he laid out all the Myriad of benefits of creatine this is taken in the you know typically 3 to five grams per day of dose of creatin monohydrate which has the most research behind it um seems to be extremely low side effects in almost anyone and the benefits include in course things like uh muscle performance and strength and things like that and if you go back to our discussion and our episode on metabolism and and endurance uh we talked about the phosphocreatine system so you can figure out kind of what this is going to do in terms of effect that said there's excellent information and data coming out and on on the benefits of bone mineral density in creatine U there's a ton of work looking at a host of cognitive factors um from memory executive function uh to effects potentially on even things like depression mood to alzheimer's Parkinson's uh all forms of of neurogenerative disease u in fact it's it's pretty obvious the brain loves creatine as a fuel and so not only we sort of discussed in the episode as being the fuel for skeletal muscle contraction but the brain needs to do that as well the asites around the brain need to be able to provide energy Etc so it's very clear that metabolism in the brain is reduced with things like TBI and potentially concussions so um now to be extremely clear creatine does not prevent any of those diseases it does not treat any of them and the data are mixed but it more and more are coming uh some show a little bit of benefit some show you know maybe none but I'm not aware of any research in those areas that show it has any downside for the most part side effects are extremely minimal if not null and then potentially some benefit depending on the specific study so we could put up a if you'd like a couple of links directly to those meta analyses and folks can go through those things one by one so um I only say that to again maybe expand our understanding or thinking about what these types of supplements can do it's not just about growing muscle or um you know high performance it's everything to again there's an association with recovery uh so is fantastic for recovery from muscle for muscle damage uh helps and can potentially Aid in fat loss and a whole host of things so you can actually also even look at websites like examin I have you know no affiliation with them whatsoever but if you want to just type in something like monohydrate you can see a whole list and you're going to see thousands of studies of the potential benefits of creatine so that is is always number one on my list I'm relieved to hear that creatine sits at the top of your supplementation list because uh well first of all I started taking it when I was in college at that time I was taking it in this kind of loading mode where you take it in um you know anywhere from uh 15 to 25 gram per day often causing some gastric distress often combining with fruit juice to try and shuttle it into the muscles and then a so-called maintenance phase of reducing to 10 or 15 grams per day um nowadays I just take about five grams or so although later I know you're going to tell me why I should probably be taking more than five grams per day given my body weight so I know we'll get into some of those specifics a little bit later but in addition to experiencing Direct effects on uh muscle size and strength which I did I don't know how it contributed to my cognitive function or if it does now because there's really no way to tease that out with with standard um uh at home tests like a scale uh but it is very clear to me based on the literature uh that you described and some of which we've covered on other episodes of the podcast that the phosphocreatine system is vitally important for forbrain function right the forbrain of course being the the uh portion of brain U broadly speaking the portion of brain just behind your forehead that is uh responsible for planning action setting rules in context so um even as simple as if you're going downfield in a game of soccer or basketball and you're on offense and then uh you make an attempt on goal or basket and then it switches and you go back now you're on defense that being on defense is very different than being on offense and that goal excuse me that that rule switching is a prefrontal cortical function as is every context dependent way of thinking or or acting and so anything that can favor function of the forbrain I think is good for uh humans in general it suppresses anxiety allows us to interpret what's going on for us and so I'm very um relieved and gratified to hear that creatine sits at the top of the list also as I'm sure you'll point out again later creatine is for the most part a relatively affordable supplement for most people so here we're not talking about something that's really esoteric or that you have to you know fly to um some remote location to get an infusion of right um but although I apologize to all you CU I know the price has skyrocketed recently really yeah why is that uh I think it's a well nobody knows but it's quote unquote a supply and and uh demand issue if you will so uh those prices have gone up there's also of course been shipping problems in the world and things so uh every time I I talk about creatin right now people just flame me for like oh my God it's so expensive now I'm like I know I'm sorry but honestly it's only so expensive because you're used to it being so cheap so when you when you counter the fact that we like right yeah like relative to the other stuff you're probably taking relative to any other number of purchases um for the it still lands very high on my Roi List my you know my 8020 because of that it's um it can be taken any time of the day it doesn't have to be in magical combination you talked about coing esting with carbohydrates that can enhance uh how quickly you can get into the system in fact it's it's going to work on the exact same me mechanisms we'll probably or potentially talk about hydration um but these things are shuttled so anytime you bring in carbohydrate that's going to be shipped into tissue as quickly as it can uh creatin goes along for the ride and then it brings water for the ride that's how you enhance hydration that's why it's important to have carbohydrates when you're trying to hydrate um so you're just going to take it in there and that's also why you get quote unquote cell swelling um which is a good thing like you're it's just enhancing hydration we actually use it a ton in our post weigh-in protocols so individuals that have to cut water weight is a great thing to throw back in there it's going to help you rehydrate it's also why when you take 30 grams of it it can pull a bunch of fluid in the intestines and and there you go with your little bit of GI distress so um yeah there's a lot of fun things you can talk about there um I just had to flag that because every time I've been talking about it recently and I say it's Jeep people are killing me for it so I apologize I don't know how to make it any cheaper but it's still fairly fairly affordable yeah I would say relatively inexpensive compared to a lot of supplements out there and when thinking about the return on investment is U it's quite good yeah like actually sorry sorry to cut you but I was just also thinking um there's been a number of studies on uh sleep deprivation as well with that can help so obviously sleep deprivation will generally reduce cognitive function and creatine can amarate some of that drop so if you think about it in that context I had a crummy night of sleep well and if that enables you to perform a little bit better in your job then you would make up the dollar or so whatever you paid for that day's supply of creatine so um it is something kind of on that note it's not going to work as an acute response so it's not something you're like I feel terrible let me throw some creatine Down the Hatch I'll feel better that that's not going to work it's going to take several weeks to have a noticeable effect it needs to be stored in tissue uh it needs to be built up before you can actually do much of anything so it is unlike some of the other things like stimulants or caffeine that have an acute you know response right now uh and so if you're going to take it you probably need to consume it consistently if you can't do that then really there's no point in doing it uh and the loading phase you mentioned distance were here is something you can do again if you need to enhance the storage of it really quickly so say for example we've done this in some military cases where it's like you get back to base and you you've only got a week and you got to go back out we may actually have to uh do a little bit of a loading phase then but if that's not the case um the loading phase is unnecessary it's not really harmful other than maybe G stress and maybe waste but you're going to have three or four weeks it's going to reach full saturation plenty of time to to be there in that if you're in that three to seven grams per day range I'm glad you mentioned the slow accumulating positive effects of creatine as compared to so-called acute effects because the way that I think of Health promoting and performance enhancing protocols like viewing morning sunlight or um endurance exercise for that matter or creatine or sleep for instance is that while they can have effects in the immediate term you might feel a little bit or in the case of a good night's sleep a lot better it's really the cumulative effect of raising your Baseline level of functioning you know there's uh another way to think about it is um these supplements or behaviors um and quality nutrition when done consistently over time time and that doesn't mean 100% of the time but you know probably 80% of the time sure lead to a sort of uh buoyancy in your system that allows you to be more resilient under conditions uh where conditions aren't perfect right and if conditions are made perfect or close to perfect and you already have that buoyancy that's when you really start to see the ultra high performance effects um that are so much fun but they have to be established through consistent supplementation consistent nutritional intakes so today I know we're going to distinguish between uh normally they're called chronic and acute effects but that makes it sound like chronic illness the moment people hear chronic well they might think of other things but but in the context of Health they typically think of you know chronic illness and we're not talking about that what we're talking about is slow modulatory effects in the body a lot of things in the body take time to build up but once they've built up they uh they clearly can benefit us um and then other things as you mentioned you know a stimulant for instance has a very acute effect that is going to occur with you know Peak within 30 minutes and wear off within you know 4 hours or so can also have some chronic effects but typically it's a short-lived effect so we just want to frame up the the language that we'll be using and I'm really excited to dive into this topic and I think creatine is a beautiful example of a supplement that has positive chronic mental and physical benefits down the road I can come back and talk a little bit more about creatine and we can cover some other information regarding best practices for getting the most out of it as well as we'll certainly dive into some of the common side effects or at least a thought of side effects while we're here though I also could throw in a few other of these high impact lowcost generally safe um things that are my 802 rule if you will so the way I actually kind of think about it is you want one from each of three categories uh and these categories are fuel stimulant and fatigue blockers so creatine is actually in the fuel it's not not a stimulant as we talked about The Chronic effect there so we've already knocked that one off another one from the fatigue blocker is going to be anything like beta alanine or sodium bicarbonate and then from the stimulate use of course we have anything like a beetroot juice to a caffeine or uh something of the equivalent so we can come back again and talk about all those in more detail a little bit later before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is also separate from Dr Andy galpin's teaching and research RS at Cal State Fullerton it is however part of our desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme we'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is momentus momentus makes supplements of the absolute highest quality the hubman Lab podcast is proud to be partnering with momentus for several important reasons first of all as I mentioned their supplements are of extremely high quality second of all their supplements are generally in single ingredient formulations if you're going to develop a supplementation protocol you're going to want to focus mainly on using single ingredient formulations with single ingredient formulations you can devise the most logical and effective and costeffective supplementation regimen for your goals in addition momenta supplement ship internationally and this is of course important because we realize that many of the hubman Lab podcast listeners reside outside the United States if you'd like to try the various supplements mentioned on the hubman Lab podcast in particular supplements for Hormone Health for Sleep optimization for focus as well as a number of other things including exercise recovery you can go to live momentus spelled o us so that's liv.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by levels levels is a program that lets you see how different foods and activities affect your health by giving you real-time feedback on your blood glucose using a continuous glucose monitor many people are aware that their blood sugar that is their blood glucose level is critical for everything from Fat Loss to muscle gain to healthy cognition and indeed AG of the brain and body most people do not know however how different foods and different activities including exercise or different temperatured environments impact their blood glucose levels and yet blood glucose is exquisitely sensitive to all of those things I first started using levels about a year ago as a way to understand how different foods exercise and timing of food relative to exercise and quality of sleep at night impact my blood glucose levels and I've learned a tremendous amount from using levels it's taught me when best to eat what best to eat when best to exercise how best to exercise and how to modulate my entire schedule from work to exercise and even my sleep so if you're interested in learning more about levels and trying a continuous glucose monitor yourself go to levels. link huberman that's levels. link huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by element element is an electrolyte drink that contains the exact ratios of the electrolyte sodium magnesium and potassium to optimize cellular functioning for mental and physical physical performance most people realize that hydration is key we need to ingest enough fluids in order to feel our best and perform our best but what most people do not realize is that the proper functioning of our cells and nerve cells neurons in particular requires that sodium magnesium and potassium be present in the correct ratios now of course people with prehypertension and hypertension need to be careful about their sodium intake but what a lot of people don't realize is that if you drink caffeine if you exercise and in particular if you're falling a very Clean Diet that is not a lot of processed foods which of course is a good thing chances are you're not getting enough sodium potassium and magnesium to optimize mental and physical performance element contains a science spack ratio of 1,000 milligrams that's 1 gram of sodium 200 Mig of potassium and 60 Mig of magnesium and no sugar if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element that's LM nt.com huberman to get a free element sample pack with your purchase again that's drink element lmnt / huberman to claim a free sample pack to start off I want to ask you about something that as soon as I say it some people might roll their eyes or wonder why are we even talking about that now but that I have to believe is among the more fundamental if not foundational aspects of nutrition and supplementation for performance and that's hydration right I mean I think we hear hydration it's like okay we have to drink 68 glasses of water every day our urine should be relatively clear if it's too dark yellow we're not doing a good job of hydrating enough yeah how much of that is true um is alkaline water worthwhile for changing the alkalinity of my body I learned when I was in college and graduate school that the alkalinity of the different tissues in your body is very well controlled in order to keep you alive and that you don't want it to shift too much or you can enter pretty horrible states of seizure vomiting and even death so tell me about hydration and woven into that if you would educate me on electrolytes and hydration because I think most often when people ingest electrolytes sure they could be ingesting salt tablets probably getting some electrolytes by the way electrolytes sodium magnesium potassium through their food I think most people think about drinking electrolytes so water and electrolytes I think is a vitally important topic to kick this off with sure we can jump right into your alkaline water um while there's perhaps much to say about this uh we can maybe revisit this in another seven part series all on its own uh I would just say it this way there's probably a few things you should do before worrying about the alkalinity of your water and I'll I'll just leave it at that meaning the alkaline of the water is sort of irrelevant not that you won't go that far it's just it's probably remember we sort of started off talking about 8020 M um well this would be in my like 991 in terms terms of like if we're really at the level of worrying about the pH of their your drinking fluid uh we have optimized so many other things uh that then we can talk about it but until we have nailed months and years of work on other things this is just not going to make much of an impact great then perhaps you could tell us about what volume of water we should be drinking when we should be drinking that water relative to training and just generally and um yeah and anything else related to water and electrolytes that can improve mental Performance Physical performance and offset any you know ill effects I like the fact that you mentioned physical and mental performance because it's clear in both cases we hear that we need to drink more water and I can give you some numbers and I will in a second what we also need to recognize is there's this is hormesis we talked about hormesis a few episodes ago and this is the case right whether we talked about food or hydration or I think I gave you the example of cyanide naturally occurring in your food hot water is same way so if you are under hydrated or dehydrated then there is a clear negative effect on your body and as I increase the level or improve the level of hydration things get better whether this are physical performance or whether this is mental performance in fact we know that a body weight reduction of as low as 2% via dehydration so imagine you're doing a about of exercise and you're sweating and you lose 2% of your body weight that alone is enough to reduce accuracy in performance so the classic study we talk about here was in basketball players so shooting accuracy so free throw shooting I think is specifically what they looked at um significant reduction in performance with as little as 2% dehydration that that level you also see a significant increase in perception of difficulty of exercise and so only right at 2% again when I say 2% I mean percent body weight lost right that's what that means you start getting the 3 four 5% dehydration you start having a significant reduction in blood volume and that's incredibly important for endurance um your blood becomes viscous it gets hard to pump through um and you're going to start having all kinds of issues so being dehydrated is again not only going to reduce performance but because of the mental aspect which we just walked through and neuromuscular issue you're going to lose accuracy you're going to lose total endurance performance and you're going to lose speed and power so we have the Triad there no matter what you're interested in it's going to be harmed by being dehydrated that also is happening then if you're starting your program dehydrated so um if you're already 1% or so DEH hydrated maybe you're like a little under hydrated and you lose a little bit of sweat you've already hit that 2% and so we're starting to see reductions um in performance there the same happens on the other side of that hormetic curve so if you are optimally hydrated in some large window but you start going past that we can start running into equal problems remember there is a there is a need for an optimal concentration of sodium and potassium and chloride between your cell inside your cell and outside your cell these are electrolytes this is what we call osmolality and osmol ity is is really think of it like concentration and osmosis if you remember those terms so if we are trying to create a muscle contraction that requires an electrical gradient and so sodium and potassium specifically in magnesium calcium are positively charged and chloride is negatively charged and we need to have a certain amount inside the cell and outside the cell so that the positives and the negatives are balanced appropriately um so that when we move one we change the voltage and we have in the case of a muscle contraction okay I just skimmed through a whole lot of of physiology there to say if you then go mess with fluid only and you say if I were to give you a bis of you know 3 l of pure water right now you're going to dilute your blood and so there's not going to be as many chemical uh there won't be as many electrical signals in there because you've taken the same amount of sodium potassium Etc and put it in a larger volume of pure water so that gradient is now changed that becomes a significant problem for contraction um I mean quite literally it can kill you this is what we call hyponatremia so nmia spelled na hypo being low hyponatremia if you actually go to the Periodic Chart na is what we Ed for sodium so hyper because the word is nrii actually so that what that literally means is low sodium and you didn't get that from sweating out all your sodium you actually get hyponatremia from drinking in too much water so it's not that the total amount of sodium gets low it's the fact that the concentration gets low from excessive fluid intake so in the Extremes in fact if you look at the the literature you'll see um anywhere between like 2 to 15% of people who finish endurance races are are into hyponatremia now that varies wildly if you're doing Iron Man and Kona versus like you know the marathon in Denver in in October right it's it's going to be totally different depending on weather conditions but these are all important um so while like death happens that is sort of extreme if you back up just a little bit you start seeing the same types of performance sacrements in fact the symptoms can be identical brain fog confusion performance uh irritation a GI distress and you think man these are symptoms of dehydration so then you drink more water and you're just exacerbating the problem and I can actually um give you one little example of this we had an executive actually female CEO uh I'll say she's probably when her was in her early 40s and so she came to us and she thought man for sure she has some sort of gut problem going on because we hear a lot about kind of like gut health and how it affects everything and so she's just like I have brain fog and I've done all these things and I got blood work done and everything's fine like nothing's going on I think I must have some sort of gut thinger going on whatever and it's okay and we just started going through her stuff and uh she was I think about 170 lbs plus or minus and she was consuming like 250 to 60 ounces of water a day that's a lot of water that's a ton of water and we were like holy what are you doing this for and she just like I that's sort of like my thing it was but she didn't realize it was more of like a nervous tick than it was anything else right she just like sip sip sip sip sip water I'm like man how often do you go pee she's like yeah like every you know 30 minutes or something I'm like fantastic sleep problems focus and so she's smashing caffeine she was at like 8 cups of coffee a day which is also going to add to to excretion of sodium totally right so it's like okay we don't really need to come in and run a sleep study on you we're just going to lower your water and she was like what we dropped her down to like 180 so basically an ounce per pound of body weight which is still high cuz she did train 180 ounces correct yeah she does work out so she needed to replenish some stuff and we'll cover these numbers in a second instantaneously I mean like two days in she's like oh my God I haven't slept six or eight hours in years and then after that it was like basically tears coming back to us right my focus my brain fog is gone CU she's in a very high pressure job um it's like everything's coming back like now she was down to three or so cups of coffee a day blah blah blah like the whole thing digestion improved all of it she was s like her only problem after all the analyses was she was just drinking way way too much water and adding more salt to her would not have solved the problem because she would have just had simply way too much fluid n system she was having all kinds of ADH problems and aldosterone like the whole thing and that that rolls into cortisol the whole like system gets goes into chaos so um it is important that you pay attention to hydration um even though as you sort of mentioned people tend to just kind of like roll their eyes around it because if you're in the middle it's fine but if you're anywhere past not even the extreme extremes but just that first standard deviation away um you're going to have problems and you might be thinking adrenal fatigue you might be thinking your Testo like you're going to think all these things and you simply just haven't actually dialed in your hydration yeah um I think people sometimes roll their eyes at the discussion of hydration because it just doesn't sound very sexy it's not like doesn't sound like a neurotransmitter or a hormone it sound like testosterone or estrogen or DHEA or um dopamine but it actually is all of those things it sits at a level beneath all of those but not beneath on a hierarchy beneath in in terms of a foundation it's actually the without proper electrolyte balance and hydration none of the cells of the body can function and then I think people also hear that oh you know we are 70% water and somehow like that statistic Alone um or that fact alone doesn't seem to uh stimulate any kind of action will take away it's like great you know uh like gravity also you know keeps us you know from jumping as high as we like you know what do I do and so I think um it's it's important that people understand that every cellular process in the body critically relies on having enough sodium magnesium pottassium around and the the way that it's concentrated in fluid water is really the way that you allow every cell in your body to function as well as it possibly could and respond to all the sorts of kind of quote unquote High Performance Tools that we're talking about the other thing I've observed many times over is that if people are ingesting too much water and also drinking a lot of caffeine and their electrolytes are low they get shaky and they actually can have anxiety like symptoms when people come into my lab to do studies on anxiety and fear we ask a few questions and um those questions include how much water they've had that day also a sort of bizarre fact um but one that I think is worth mentioning is that when the bladder is full it stimulates a sort of anxiety if you ever had to urinate very badly and you're in the car or you can't urinate and then you get the door like that's talk about anxiety um and that's because there's a direct neural pathway from the bladder that registers the mechanos sensors how much stretch there is on the bladder that sends a signal to the brain stem alertness areas broadly speaking Locus culus and others um that wake us up these are the when we're awake it makes us more awake and when we're asleep this is what wakes us up to urinate in the middle of the night yeah that's actually why you can use uh night urination as a a pretty good diagnostic of sleep disorders so if because of vasopressin right exactly what you're talking about uh if you're having sleep disorder issues and you're staying awake and uh vas op pressant gets taken off right an APN goes straight to the kidneys your kidneys are supposed to be dormant basically at night you're not supposed to be filtering a lot of and producing a lot of urine at night um if that's happening and and say you you have any number of apne kicking on or anything going on vasal press keeps going keeps sending signal kidneys start filtering so if you're waking up and peeing multiple times a night that's called nocta that is a very very very good sign that either one of two things happen you one you have some sort of sleep disorder or two you're drinking outrageous amounts of water and so that's actually a bit of a backwards cycle in now right because you're drinking way too much water you're waking up and peeing all night that's actually ruining your sleep and so we have seen this a number of times with our sleep company as we go in and it's just like you don't need any of this crap you just need to be properly hydrated alternatively if your hydration is sound and you're still waking up more than one time a night to pee on average then you almost well I shouldn't say like that but there's a potential that you have some sort of sleep disort or sleep condition going in so the rule of thumb on that is so we're here once or night once a night or so of urination is fine um if it is routinely or consistently more than two uh you need to make some adjustments start with hydration it's the simplest way right getting a full sleep study done just figure out hydration we we've had this happen a number of times where people want to get more health conscious and they just get they hear things like this and they're like I got to get on my water and then they just start train wrecking their sleep and they're waking it up so if you're w up multiple times and you're urinating and it is a large amount of urine for you and it is clear that's probably not sleep apne induc nocta that's probably excessive hydration if you're waking up a bunch of times and it's fairly small amounts of urine then it's probably not the fluid issue it's probably the fact that the basal pressent is kicking your kidneys into gear so that's not a perfect criteria but it's just like a quick little tool you can sort of use um that's actually one of the reasons why we measure almost always uh your body weight at night as well as in the morning so that that's like the combat sport in the UFC fighters boxers we call that your float so how much you floated overnight I like to know that number because I want to know as well your first morning void so when you wake up then you went to bed at 200 lb you woke up the next morning at 195 it's like oh you floated five pounds did you pee last night yeah yeah three times interesting another case you woke up you went to bed at 200 lb you wake up at should have a certain amount of fluid that you're just respirating out as you're breathing throughout your nose throughout night ideally uh guaranteed you're going to wake up what was your urine like oh yeah a little bit pretty dark like shocker you're dehydrated so you can kind of look at numbers like that a general float is something like a pound to two pounds for the 170 plus pound person as you scale up that number can go up a little bit you can kind of use these to triage a little bit about what's going on um with this kind of combination everything is everything right so it's like it's not just about one system so you're going to pay attention you can also look well I don't know if you want to jump into it we can but there's a whole bunch of ways I I can teach you to diagnose hydration and then maybe we can start there and then we can talk about hydration numbers yes I'd love to talk about diagnostics for hydration overhydration dehydration to start off would you be willing to give us some numbers how much water should we be drinking the classic rule here and you're making me do what I hate right I want to give all the caveats first but I'll go straight to your number half an ounce per pound of body body weight is a rough rule so if you weigh again 200 lb that would mean you drink 100 ounces of water a day most water bottles are like 12 to 20 ounces something like that so you know you end up drinking six of those or so a day kind of like plus or minus which is not that unreasonable um this does depend on a number of factors which I could go over but that is a a rough starting place the only other thing to add to that is that does not account for exercise induced water loss Ora or anything like that so that's assuming just like basil daily needs if you are exercising or sweating at all for any reasons or work related so um folks that work outside or in the Heat or a human environment this these numbers all change and you can slide this scale up but you generally want to drink about 125% of the fluids you've lost during that physical activity back and how much do you lose per hour of exercise it that number range is between 1 to 5 lbs depending on the person it can even be higher with some of our athletes like I can think of a number of NFL players right now it's not uncommon for those guys to do eight or nine pounds even not even like crazy circumstances if it's August and we're in Jacksonville it's not wild for us those guys to go 9 10 pounds but what about the typical person who goes to a air conditioned gym or goes out for a run on a day that is somewhere between let's say 55 degrees fenit and 85 degrees F you're probably looking at like a pound got it it's not extremely high if you are are totally soaked might be like a pound and a half to two lbs if you're like come back and like your pits are a little sweaty and there's a little bit of water kind of on your neckline or it's probably like a more like a pound or so so in that case you might drink back a pound and a half of water okay so just to review these numbers to make sure that I'm on the correct page here a half an ounce of fluid per pound of body weight is a a sort of a foundation for hydration and then you want to replace 125% of the fluid lost during exercise and exercise varies where exercises done varies whether or not people are wearing uniforms or helmets is going to impact how much fluid they lose Etc in a very hot environment that the amount of fluid lost can be anywhere from you know 1 to five maybe even 10 pounds easy per hour of hard hard exertion for most exercise done in conditions of 55 de fhe to 7 to excuse me 85 de fhe done with some degree of effort one might lose a pound or or 2 pounds of water super easy way to find out all you have to do is weigh yourself naked go do your workout come back in dry off weigh yourself naked that'll tell you exactly what you lost so if you win in you were 160 PBS you come back out you weigh you're 158 you lost two pounds drink Back 2 half pounds of water you're good so that is uh honestly it's like fairly gold standard for identifying you can actually buy a whole bunch of technology for this and they are using the exact same equation which is your body weight when you were there now if you do that though you do need to account for any fluid you drank during the workout sure because that then offsets it simple but I think important question we're talking about a half an ounce of fluid per pound of body weight does that include things like coffee tea soda pre-workout drinks mid-workout drinks uh mate Macho whatever the you know there's a yerba mate there's a there a million things out there um or just water any fluid for the most part is going to count and is it true that fluids that contain caffeine generally cause us to secrete sodium yeah okay so do you recommend including electrolyte powder or a small pinch of sodium or any number of other supplement type electrolytes that can replace that sodium magnesium and potassium a couple things we have to pay attention to to accurately answer that question what you also sort of asked about you may have not realized is does caffeine actually enhance dehydration uh which is not really what you asked but it's it probably a lot of people thought that as well so caffeine can but coffee doesn't necessarily do that because remember you're coing esting that with fluid and so we used to say that all the time how coffee dehydrates you it doesn't it might make your urine yellow it certainly gives off an a odor in your urine but in general coffee will not do that because your if you were to now be taking caffeine pills alone now there there is a bit of a diuretic effect there and so you're going to ur it how much maybe not enough for you to be really concerned with especially when you balance that against the ergogenic effects and benefits of caffeine it's not something we are concerned about second part of your question do you need to then offset the loss of sodium I'm not super concerned about the amount of sodium lost to caffeine I am more concerned about simply the amount of sodium being correct because of the bigger circumstances like how much is actually in your system and how much you lost in the training session so it's not the caffeine that I care about that much relative to you know if you lost three grams of sodium because of the training and you added another few milligrams because of the caffeine I don't really care or or didn't I'm glad you brought up the difference between a substance like caffeine and the vehicle it's contained in like coffee this is all really important and it also raises a question about individual differences in sweating ability and I call it sweating ability because uh I have a good friend I've known for ages really um actually work with him in my laboratory uh as well and he's one of these people that the moment he starts any physical activity it's like a flood warning right he just soaks through clothing it's just the sweating adaptation is is exceedingly robust in him other people less so so is it true that sweating in our ability to dump heat through it by loss of water is something that um we tend to vary on and that also that we can build up that capacity I know a number of people are probably thinking ew gross why would I want to sweat more but there's actually a huge advantage to be able to dump body heat during exertion because body heat in some ways sets the cap for performance in lot many many ways including mental performance our ability to stay alert often is enhanced by it being cold and of course we all want to warm up properly but um in terms of loss of fluid through sweating is there a way to easily bin ourselves into kind of a a low sweater medium sweater um heavy sweater that sounds like an article of clothing but in any case you know what I'm you know man another a lot to say here we should wish we had a whole series on this um listen if we have to go 17 hours we can do it just everybody hydrate well I think we've shown the listeners uh that is a real threat that's a very real threat podcasting to failure you don't have to do every set in the gym to failure but here we are attempting a podcast failure in it in all seriousness um what what is the role of sweating ability and is this something that any of us should care about or train for or pay attention to or is this just kind of getting into the Arcane number one you can train your ability to sweat this is important for heat acclamation and why that matters when you sweat that actually is not what regulates your temperature what you want to have happen is the fluid to hit your skin and that to be evaporated that's the actual mechanism so in fact um if you stop sweating and like you can guarantee within a short amount of time you're going to be done moving oh very interesting I hope people heard that and really are are highlighting that in their mind that sweating is a process of bringing fluid from your body onto the surface of your skin and then the heat dumping aspect of sweating is the evaporation of that off off your body which brings to mind all sorts of ideas about how to dress during exercise Etc but what you said is that if you are not sweating enough you are limiting your output capacity so it's not just about having fluid to sweat y it's also about being able to sweat and being uh Dressed appropriately to allow that sweat to move uh to evaporate off your body yep and heat acclamation training is as simple as it sounds so just practice it more so uh if you're going into a process where you either need to be in a hot environment or you need to improve your sweat rate you just need to practice sweating and your body will get best to that practice the sauna practice a Jacuzzi just get in those things and you will uh improve your ability to do that now there is a huge genetic component um I have one individual actually a UFC fighter I've been working with and I don't mind mentioning his name he'll give me full permission Scott Holzman uh many many years um he's actually um fighting right now actually today he'll be going he is like he he is like you described like buckets and buckets and buckets of fluids come off this guy when he's tying his shoes like he just goes right like and know we've we've improved that I actually sweat too much we worked on that a lot early in his career and we we got some improvements down to get him to hold on to to fluids better that being said I've worked with other individuals in his weight category and it's the opposite right so we can have them literally do the exact same training session together and Scott will dump six pounds and and other folks at his size will dump two two and a half so there's a genetic component that is just there and you don't need to worry about it there um so can you identify if you are a heavy salt sweater or not well you have a whole bunch of routes for this number one is you can use the old free um cost free test of just looking at your clothing and if you're seeing that white residue all over it so youve You' all have the friend who probably wears that same B baseball hat that they've had for eight years if it is covered in the white junk all over the place um that's a sign of a higher salt sweater if the opposite happens and it's like you can pull their clothing back and there's just nothing there and they maybe a little bit of a lower salt sweater um you can also use any number of hydration tests I know that there is some coming out in the market very very soon that can give you theoretically real time um measurements just like a CGM would be although I haven't seen any data on if those are accurate or not I haven't used one yet but there are number that are out super cheap you know 10 15 20 bucks all the way up to a couple hundred dollars you can buy these patches put them on you and get a reasonably close estimate um and again if those things are five or 10 or 20% off I don't know have to see independent data come out first but even if they are you're not worried about the specific milligrams right whether you sweat out you know 1,250 milligrams in a workout or if it's 1340 it doesn't really matter you're trying to look for big big numbers right are you losing 500 milligrams using three and a half grams where you're at so those things will get you in a ballpark to do exactly what you decide am I high medium or low um and there's a lot of them that that I've used in the past so that that's another way to go about it um then what you want to do is probably match your electrolyte intake to something close to what you sweat that's the ideal scenario um you can get a lot of information about hydration from blood um you can look at like acute markers of dehydration like hemoglobin hematocrit uh if your like if your hemoglobin is like 15 plus it's funny we've talked about this in a few episodes before but I see that and I'm like man that dude's super fit that's like a 15 uh for hemogo would be pretty high 14 or so would be pretty good for a female that's also the exact same thing as a sign of acute dehydration um so hematocrit same thing if you're north of 50% you're probably dehydrated so you can get a lot there are also though a lot of biomarkers that can tell you more about chronic dehydration so you can run through those things as well so a good blood chemistry test can tell you a lot and you can actually get some insights in your sodium and potassium albumin is another fantastic way to to measure longer term hydration status another one of these amazing globulins that we've sort of talked a lot about so you can do all those things you can also simply measure the body weight pre-imposed and use a sweat patch or not and use the the Freer version of your clothing test and get a rough idea of where you're getting it from so those are good places to start um I want to go back though and make sure I wasn't over terrifying the audience too much on a s piece if you're performing a type of training or exercise or sport in which you're not losing more than 2% of your body weight you don't need to be overly concerned about hydrating in the sport and so we can actually get into to um some equations for how much water to drink during training right now but if you if you're again losing less than that it's not critical you can have some fluids like makes you feel better but you're not going to be experiencing tremendous amounts of performance sacraments if you're you know again out playing a baseball game and it's 50 degrees out you're fine um you can drink some water but that's not going to be compromising performance or recovery so we can actually then if you'd like I can go through the three-step system for optimizing hydration but um those are I I want to make sure I planted that flag so people aren't just terrified that they got to be guzzling down water if they're you know going to their physical therapist for some stretching that's probably not super important I'd like to take a brief break and acknowledge our sponsor athletic greens athletic greens is a vitamin mineral probiotic and adaptogen drink designed to help you meet all of your foundational nutritional needs I've been taking athletic greens daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they are sponsor of this podcast the reason I started taking athletic greens and the reason I still take athletic greens once or twice a day is that it helps me meet all of my foundational nutritional needs that is it covers my vitamins my minerals and the probiotics are especially important to me athletic greens also contains adaptogens which are critical for recovering from stress from exercise from work or just general life if you'd like to try athletic greens you can go to athletic greens.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again if you'd like to try athletic greens go to athletic greens.com huberman to claim the special offer I would love for you to tell us what I refer to as the Galpin equation understanding of course that you did not name the Galpin equation listen folks scientists can have things named after them but in general it's not uh reflective of healthy psychology if they name things after themselves correct sometimes yes neuro anatomists used to do that but in any case Dr Andy Galpin did not name the Galpin equation after himself I named it after him and the Galpin equation for how much fluid to ingest during exercise is you want to take your body weight in pounds and divide that by 30 and you want to consume that number which would be in ounces about every 15 to 20 minutes so in the example of you being 200 pound you would take 200 divided 30 which is let's just call that number seven to be close which means you would consume about 7 ounces of water every 15 or 20 minutes or so okay now as a little bit of a point while I also did not name it I also didn't do the research it's important to point out that other scientist figured these things out I just read their papers and made that derivation of their equation to make it a little bit easier for those folks who do not work on the metric system okay a couple of things first of all I'm not 200 lb but it doesn't matter how much I weigh because the point is that the listener correct should take their body weight in pounds divided by 30 and just that number of ounces in fluid every 15 minutes and then for those out there outside the US that are accustomed to thinking in milliliters and liters not ounces and kilograms not pounds what is the Galpin equation in the metric system this would be 2 milliliters per kilogram which again if you were uh let's say 200 lb that's going to be something roughly like we'll call it 90 kilos and so if you did 2 Millers per kilo you'd be something like 180 milliliters of fluid again every 15 or 20 minutes great and how should people ingest that fluid and of course I would imagine it's through their mouth um I would hope I hope there are other orices that that it might suffice but let's not go there they're drinking that water consistently or is it every 15 minutes they Slug it back does it matter okay yeah that's very good a handful of things in general when you talk hydration the slower and steady you can go the better in fact the reason this this 2 Millers per kilogram uh number came out is because a number of Trials were run when they looked at that every 15 minutes just one bolus of it you know um in different derivations and it is pretty clear that the slower Pace one could do it the better so whether you're doing it every 10 minutes or 15 or 20 minutes the reason we actually give that Gap is because you have to be also offset a little bit of Gus stress in fact like kind of the the four golden rules of recovery if you will um we use sort of three Rs you need to rebuild rehydrate and replenish what that really means is you need to have a continuous glucose stream you need to have a continuous amino acid stream you need to hydrate and you need to do all one two and three without disturbing your gut too much and so in this particular case um it was sort of found that we can hit that level in general and be just fine for most people so I mean a little bit of context the example we gave there in both cases it's something like 6 to 7 ounces for 15 or 20 minutes if you think about that there's 16 ounces in a pound and most water bottles like if you go buy a water bottle at a store here it's they generally come in like 16 ounce bottles is so six or seven ounces is really like a third of a water bottle maybe every 15 or 20 or so minutes so it's not some egregious amount of water that you have to slime down now that is influenced heavily by how hydrated you started the session with so how hydrated you came in external factors like heat humidity temperature things like that but that gives you a rough idea um that again and these are numbers that you would need to consume to optimize performance at the end of that then is when you would look to see how much I lost like we talked about earlier and then add back that 125% taking into account how much fluid you ingested so if you're 200 lb and you drank a total of say a pound of water during the training and you started off at 200 and you finished at 198 you actually lost three pounds not two PBS because you lost three you drank one during it so your final net number is two so now you don't you really need to drink back 125% of that remaining 2 lbs 2 and a half PB something like that um these numbers especially that 125 are they're just rough guidelines some actually papers suggest it's all the way up to 150% um so it's just like an idea don't measure out whether you need 5.5 ounces or 6.2 ounces like it just sort of gives you an idea of of where to start all right a few sips every 15 or 20 minutes is close enough I've actually started using uh the Galpin equation to determine how much fluid I need for mental work given the now robust data that are out there on the relationship between hydration and mental work it's um been very effective for me and again there are peer-reviewed studies that that support the idea that hydration is important for uh proper mental Clarity and energy and focus and that even being slightly dehydrated can disrupt that but if one is drinking so much water that they're frequently going to the restroom and can't comfortably uh focus on the work they're doing that's also an issue so so um that's very helpful what are the three most critical features of hydration and then I'd like to move on to um some of the more particulars about supplementation and nutrition three parts start hydrated maintain hydration throughout part three is hydrate post to fix it okay we gave you the half ounce per pound of body weight equation so you start the training hydrated we gave you the you know 2 milliliters per kilogram SL body weight divided by 30 to stay hydrated and we gave you the 125% um but I can actually just give you sort of I'm giving you another list here I'm sorry but it is my five-step cheater guide for optimizing hydration for performance all right step number one drink a lot of water first thing in the morning this gets everything kickstarted get you going it also saves you from having to drink a bunch of water at night which is then going to compromise your sleep what's a lot depending on how big you are the general thing I'll tell people is like one of the very first things you you do throughout your day you wake up go to the bathroom as you're consuming your sunlight consume water this is maybe chugging a full glass it's honestly what I do it's not the best route but I'll just get that going 16 o 16 ounces or so is great it's fine if you're larger um you know I'm I'm 165 to 70 lb depending on what's going on maybe a little higher sometimes if you're 225 lbs maybe that number is 30 o right so you just sort of scale up and down and the only reason I say a lot is it just depends on on what you're doing and I also should clarify I don't really literally mean chug just like Zips because the faster you drink water the faster it's going to expand blood volume the faster it expands blood volume the faster you get rid of it um I don't think a lot of people will know that yeah this is maybe this is clarifying this is also we sort of talked about earlier if you drink too much water you'll dilute the system well if you have a diluted system your body's first reaction is to rid of water to bring total blood volume down right remember if you were to go to a doctor and they looked at your total blood volume and they're like man you're at 5 and a half liters you're going to be like holy crap you're going to be put on a diuretic because you don't want to have a heart attack and have blood pressure I I wonder if people are drinking a 16 oun glass of water or other fluid all at once before going to sleep and that's why they're waking up in the middle of the night totally given what you just said probably a better um protocol would be to sip on a glass of water in the final hour or 2 hours before sleep you generally the number we say is 3 hours in the 3 hours preceding sleep you want to basically fluid intake to sipping as needed I think that's I'm going to start that tonight yeah because I wake up generally once per night to use the bathroom and I do drink some fluids before I go to sleep mostly because I'm pretty thirsty at that time yeah um but I'm going to start sipping that water in the uh three hours heading into sleep yeah so you can actually pay attention to is um to go back this is actually I love doing this stuff but if you're waking up at night and you have a very dry mouth m not for me all right because it can be one of two things you might actually be dehydrated and so then the mistake people make is they like man my mouth is so dry I keep getting up to drink water at night that makes you then pee too much what that also indicates is probably your mouth breathing so a lot of ways to fix people waking up and urinating too much at night is to tape your mouth and or use a a dilator over your nose and then what happens is you don't feel like you have a dry mouth so you don't get up to consume any extra water throughout the night so that actually reduces your your fluid intake so you don't have the problem of actually now having too much fluid to do it and so it's another reasons why mouth taping can really really help um I if you are having those issues U and or snoring those are not benign that's a really like you really should get some work on those um something you're you're not sleeping very well is the way I'll say it it's doesn't doesn't necessarily mean something life-threatening but it's not a good thing so um you're going to run kind of your triaging things back and forth so if you're like I'm waking up to pee a lot by my m isn't thirsty okay great then you may actually have just a water consumption issue if it is my mouth is dry but I'm actually waking up and I'm having these large urinations then you're not actually dehydrated you're just breathing through your mouth if you're waking up and your mouth is dry and there's not a lot of pee there then you actually might actually legitimately be under hydrated so a little bit of a game you can play there well that's super informative I think that um the point alone that gulping a bunch of water all at once is going to cause you to need to excrete that water soon after um is a really important point also for people that are going to I don't know give a talk or um you don't want to have to get up to use the restum you have to sit through a long meeting um clearly I'm violating all these rules up until right now I've been you know not I I sort of Follow The Seagull approach to uh to consuming fluids just in um enormous volumes I'm going to start sipping um fluids instead um what are some of the other rules of hydration so you're going to wake up you're going to start your day and start hydrated so you know you're you're consuming a larger percentage of your water earlier in the day then you get all the performance enhancing effects of water and you don't have to worry about it compromising your sleep so that's step number one also now you're going to start your session closer to hydration all right great number two eat mostly real Whole Foods why interesting what you may or not have thought about is a huge determinant of your hydration status is your food choices uh if you look at different foods uh for example most fruit um watermelon watermelon is like 95 plus% water right fantastic Source also by the way since we're here it is not extremely high in carbohydrate it's not extremely high in sugar it is by percentage but since it is almost exclusively water you're eating uh it is not something that is extremely dangerous in terms of sugar um I there alone probably all the things we've talked about in the six six episodes uh that comment right there will probably blow the internet to pieces and I'll probably get hate mail for life for it but from people throwing water throwing watermelons yeah oh my gosh well I don't think the point is that sugar is necessarily bad I think the point is that for most people they're ingesting too much sugar most people yeah um and it it's interesting often times the people who are justifying the ingestion of sugar are exactly the kind of people that should not ingest so much sugar so there's a little bit of a user the point here is if you're eating whole real food this is like now we're kind of splitting hairs about those things so so morning hydration cons real yeah now important Point here if you compare it to other Foods um like actually meat is is a very high percentage of fluid depending on how well or long you've cooked it you will reduce remember you said earlier over 70% water right so if you're eating meat you're getting actually a big chunk of water as you cook it of course you lose some of that but meat can be like I wouldn't call it a hydrating food item but it is not as low as something like a biscuit which can be actually like 10% water that's why it's like dry and dense which doesn't mean it's bad for you but there if you're eating highly processed foods almost by association that means they've been dehydrated or Pally right so you're just getting less total fluid intake in addition they have also been highly salted in general right so now we're in this position where we're under hydrated and highly salted bad spot if you now switch over to mostly again just mostly whole real foodish whatever that means to you then your hydration is going to Skyrocket you're going to have a lot so you're eating a ton of food in fact it should be a large percentage of the fluid intake you have actually should be coming from your food and you shouldn't have to be smashing water bottles after water bottle all day in that case though you do need to add salt back so we do see this a lot with people who try to make a transition from maybe a suboptimal Nutritional Lifestyle and they they give up a little bit of the processed food and they come over and they start having problems because they're not actually consuming enough salt so add that back easy way to do that you can use electrolytes and we could talk about those numbers if you want if you just salt your food that you're making you know to taste that's going to get most people in a in a pretty good spot so start hydrated consume hydrating Foods step number two step number three you want to preh hydrate if you know you're going to do a workout session and it's going to be hot and long or one of those things um you want to look for that half a pound uh per body weight of ounces so that's the number we're looking for to start our hydration session we do that we're pretty much taken care of and then like I said adjust depending on lifestyle humidity and and other factors like that um you can use what is called the what system W I think Bob Ki who's done a ton of research in this area if you want to read more look up his research um it is simply weight urine and thirst so in other words check your body weight look at your urine color and engage your thirst and actually you can use those three things and those uh can significantly predict actual hydration status independent of actually measuring osmol or or anything like that so those three metrics alone are a prettyy good indicator of where you're at so you're going to have that normal amount of water plus or minus if you miss that number for whatever reason you get distracted the number we typically tell people is like something like 400 to 500 milliliters of water uh in the hour preceding the training all right so that's like 13 to 20 ounces so like you know you're going to go out at 3:00 it's 2:00 and you realize oh man I have not dranking much water today um you don't need to go smash tons and tons and tons just look for something like that you know call it a bottle of water if you will um if that's not enough if you're in a really tough spot you can do more like uh five to eight ounces 15 or 20 minutes before exercise you want to be really careful about drinking a bunch of water like in the seconds before exercise because you're just going to feel a whole bunch of water bouncing up and down in your stomach and nobody likes that so 1 to 300 milliliters 15 or so 20 minutes before that assumes you're in this like 185 pound range is again if you're talking people of much larger size you may need to increase those values accordingly if you do all that then you use the Galpin equation for your intra workout hydration and you're in a pretty good spot um what you want to consume in that is what I call Sweat what I mean by that is you don't actually want to necessarily consume water only during a workout you want to consume something that is isoosmotic to your blood so something that is the same concentration that you lost in your sweat so if you've done a sweat test you would then drink a fluid that is of the same osmolality um the short version of that some in the neighborhood of 200 to 400 milligram of sodium most electrolytes uh products are going to be something like that now I know element is is 1,000 milligrams it's a lot higher but most products now that you're going to find are 250 to 400 milligrams and they're typically in the like two to maybe up to 3 to one sodium to potassium range right coconut water is actually cool it's it's like basically the opposite like a cup of coconut water I think has something like 200 milligrams of sodium but like 600 milligrams of pottassium so um like total spoiler alert but well we use coconut water a lot of hydration just add a little pinch of salt because that'll bring the sodium way back up yeah one note about sodium um obviously people who have prehypertension or hypertension want to be careful with their sodium intake um anytime I've suggested that people might consider ingesting more sodium you know sort of it's like it's like putting a Target on your on your back and yet the data are pretty good showing that if people are not getting enough sodium their mental Clarity their focus their uh mental stamina their physical stamina really suffers and then people argue well most of us are getting too much salt that often is true for people that are eating a lot of processed foods and not training and not training but for many uh people who are already sort of healthc conscious who are training they're largely consuming or I should say they're consuming largely nonprocessed or minimally processed C foods and especially for folks who are not ingesting many carbohydrates and are consuming caffeine totally you know a lot of people don't know that carbohydrates hold water um and that makes it sound bad it's not necessarily that you know you're going to get subcutaneous swelling of your body it's Rec it's it's bringing water into your system and it holds water so when you drop carbohydrate starches in particular you urinate a lot more and when you drink caffeine you also urinate a lot more as as you pointed out earlier so you start combining a few things like slightly lower carbohydrate or low carbohydrate eating really quote unquote clean you're not getting a lot of salt in your food and drinking caffeine and then exercising and then pretty soon those numbers that come along with um you know a gram of sodium in your electrolyte drink are not all that outrageous and what you find is people feel much much better when they're getting enough sodium and of course I should um say that there's no reason why someone has to ingest a a supplement like element or something there are plenty of other ways to bring sodium into your system you use a pinch of pink salt or Himalayan salt or sea salt or even just table salt in water or just making sure that you're salting your food enough and I think that there too salt appetite and salt taste is a pretty good guide if you taste something and it feel it tastes really salty to you that's an indication that either it's really salty or your salt stores are kind of tapped off you're okay whereas if you're craving salt and you and you're thinking gosh I really want to put salt on this already salty thing not necessarily but often times that means that you are salt deficient so salt appetite is a pretty hardwired set of neural circuits and hormones and I think uh we would all be wise to learn to tap into the our kind of intuition about salt intake but of course also to measure your blood pressure Etc yeah of course if you think you have some sort of contraindication there that work with a medical specialist without without question um those situations you laid out though were very real a lot of people are living like that and so it's important for those folks to understand if you are going through symptoms fatigue um lack of focus cognitive function performance isn't there then hey like you may be UND salted and again actually a good amount of blood chemistry work can unravel that a lot and it can sort of tell you if you're running out of whack there are number of folks who are extremely sensitive to sodium in terms of health risk and that that is a real thing again work with your um individual folks on that I don't work with anyone for disease treatment or management at all I've said that probably for times I'll say it six more times um I only take people who are healthy and try to make them perform at their best possible level so it's actually funny to mention that because I was going to give people my recommendation for sodium intake in general throughout the day and then I decided I'm not going to say that because all it's going to do is make all the rest of the people who aren't coming to come after me for the watermelon comment come after me for that so I'll by the end of today's episode the goal is that there everyone's coming after you but also that everyone has learned something of value you've already um given us uh tremendous uh insights and actionable information information on Creatine and hydration and along those lines i' I'd love for you to tell us about some of the things that we can do with supplementation in order to enhance training by taking certain things before we train and I also have the question of how long before training should we start thinking about supplying nutrients and supplements for the training session I'm not sure I actually finished my five or maybe I wasn't clear enough about the last one so I just want to tie that that bow and then we'll go next one yeah no it was probably my fault so that uh in addition to the Galpin equation in terms of amount I Amic recommended a you know roughly 3 to one sodium to potassium recommendation and I gave you some rough numbers for things to like that I actually in all honesty use probably six to 10 different electrolyte companies depending on the situation some of them are really good in the case again like element that's nice about that is there's no carbohydrate however the downside is there's no carbohydrate so some sometimes I want carbohydrates in the training because as you mentioned there's significant evidence going back actually several decades on the benefit of carbohydrate during exercise so if you're in a situation uh where you're trying to again maximize actual exercise performance you especially if it is either long duration so more than two hours or extremely high intensity and this has to be well north of 100% of your V2 Max in that situation as we talked about in the endurance episode you can actually start having a decrement in performance because of a drop of muscle glycogen uh G glycogen can start coming down if that's the case augmenting with the carbohydrates during the training that is going to enhance performance it's going to do what we call spare the liver and it's going to keep my second rule of my four which is maintain glucose ingestion it's going to keep that going in general what you're going to find is the number is like a 5 to 9% glucose concentration in your fluid which turns out to be like exactly the number that most sports drinks have as well as I think that's pretty much exactly what coconut water is the downside of sports drinks since we're here is they actually tend to be undersalted and so that they don't provide enough of them if you look at the numbers they're going to say something like 60 to 100 gram of carbohydrate per hour is the Target and now if you're using the sort of gallin equation and you're splitting that up into 15 uh minute intervals it's something again like 20 or so grams of carbs per 15 to 20 minutes if you're doing again an hourong plus training valow so admittedly 100 grams uh is a bit much for some folks depending on your size so I would recommend starting in that uh 60 gram or so range again per hour total is what you want to get to and only in the situation in which muscle glycogen depletion is becoming a limiting factor to Performance so the other benefit of that is as you mentioned that actually drives water into the cell and so you're going to be in that nice sweet lot of you're actually keeping glucose going which is going to enhance performance and you're helping hydration at the same time so the other little part that's important to pay attention to here is the type of carbohydrate matters um so you can use actually a whole combination of things called resistant starches which I will use for a long bouts of exercise but in the middle of the workout you're going to want to focus on glucose and fructose mostly glucose typically at least a two or 3 to1 ratio of glucose to fructose and the reason is those actually get into tissue through separate Transporters and so what happens is once the glucose Transporters get full you can't bring anything else in however since fructose comes in a separate route you can maximize total carbohydrate intake by using two different unique forms there there's a lot of ways you can do this um but this is where the momentus fuel product is is like specifically has that exactly in it so it's fantastic um you can use food no problem you can use a combination of things like honey and and different easily uh absorbable and usable and things you can actually like maybe put in a drink um to get away with so there's lots of routes for it but you want to look in that that sort of combination uh of 5 to 9% roughly glucose for there so you do need to train your gut so do not do anything and there's a generally A good rule do not do anything in your competition that you've never done in practice so try these food items try these amounts the carbohydrate numbers try the sodium numbers try the total amount of water start low you can always increase what you don't want to do is have to run out during the middle of your spin class and Sprint to the bathroom and hope nobody's in your way uh which uh in the lab we've seen we'll just say accidents like that occur more than once so um just be careful of your stomach I'd like to take a brief break to acknowledge our sponsor insid tracker inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health and well-being can only be analyzed from a quality blood test one issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there however is that you get information back about various levels of lipids and hormones and metabolic factors Etc but you don't know what to do with that information inside tracker makes knowing what to do with all that information exceedingly easy they have a personalized platform that lets you see what your specific number numers are of course but then also what sorts of Behavioral dos and don'ts what sorts of nutritional changes what sorts of supplementation would allow you to bring those levels into the ranges that are optimal for you if you'd like to try insid tracker you can visit insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off any of insid tracker's plans again that's insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off I realized I jumped the gun a little bit asking you about supplementation for before during and after a workout um because what I neglected to ask about was training in the fasted State this is something that we talked about in an earlier episode but I think it's worth highlighting now um Sometimes the best way to supplement if you will a workout or pre-workout is ingesting nothing I I'm one of these people I actually prefer to do my weight training somewhere between 7 and 8: a.m. each morning sometimes a little earlier sometimes a little bit later I drink fluid water and I do ingest caffeine prior to those uh training days um on days when I don't train I do as I often recommend uh people do delay my caffeine intake 90 to 120 minutes after waking but in any event it's water and caffeine yate or coffee or some sort of stimulant for weight training workouts and generally not for cardiovascular training workouts although sometimes yes so I'm training fasted that said I'm ingesting carbohydrate the night before to make sure that my I have glycogen stores that are topped off and uh so it's fasted but with that caveat what are your thoughts on training fasted and what I just described is fasted overnight but some people are training in the afternoon and they may opt to not eat anything in the you know two to four hours prior to training or maybe even longer I personally find that caffeine hits my system a lot better when I'm fasted better meaning it just seems to have more of a potent effect there are some reasons for that um and of course we dissuade people from ingesting Caff too late in the day cuz you'll disrupt sleep so I'm not saying fast for 3 hours then drink caffeine but who knows maybe that's in your protocol the simple version of this question is what are your thoughts on training fasted and if people are going to train fasted how should they modulate their fluid intake if at all what happens with exercise in the endurance and Metabolism episode we walk through in the fact that no matter what you're using for fuel carbohydrates or fat or even um other potential sources the end product of all of those is ATP CO2 and water right so you're trying to make ATP that is the fuel for exercise now ATP is a Denine triphosphate so one two three phosphates on top of an adenosine well what you may have not put together is if you hydrolyze ATP and you break off one of those phosphates you now have ADP if you do it again you have a a Denine monophosphite if you do it one more time now you just have adenosine and if you have then therefore run through a lot of exercise burned a lot of energy you have increase the amount of adenosine that's floating around now if you have a high concentration of adenosine what's that going to make you want to do that's going to bind to certain receptors and we know when those receptors get bound to you fall asleep Bingo caffeine will competitively bind to those receptors therefore that's why caffeine stops you from feeling like you want to go to sleep right so we have a very clear relationship between exercise fuel in fact if you look at the literature there's a pretty clear relationship between the more caloric expenditure in different sports and the higher amount of hours needed for sleep so there is a nice tie between how hard you're exercising how much energy you're burning how much you need to sleep stimulant which brings us all the way back to your question of fueling so do I need a fuel prior to my exercise bout if you're going to be limited in your exercise bout by Fuel then fueling is necessary one way or the other if it is a type of training that is not then it's not going to matter and so the examples we gave uh if you're doing if you're going to go do a 30- second bout of maximal exertion and you're going to do it one time you don't need to worry about fueling at all or eating within your workout CU it's only 30 seconds yeah you get 30 seconds you don't need to worry about hydration post exercise you don't need to worry about recovery total energy expenditure was nothing uh if you're going to go um you know you're going to go practice you're going to go to the driving range and practice your golf swing you don't need to worry about it the total amount of energy expenditure is just not high in fact in that case you might want to keep it somewhat low because you want to keep blood glucose fairly even and you don't want to bring it in the system you certainly wouldn't want to use stimulants right because you may get over exerted inside in all of these things we probably should have started off our conversation with this in terms of macronutrients the total amount throughout the day is more important generally than the timing of them which is why you can do things like have a bunch of carbohydrate at night not eat the next morning and lift and be just fine it doesn't matter that you didn't have them in a few hours before your muscle glycogen is topped off your liver is glycogen is topped off you're absolutely fine you have plenty of fuel even if you to wait a few more hours in fact even if you were to do conditioning you're probably fine I have plenty of athletes that prefer to do many of their training sessions faster the morning for personal reasons not because it enhances performance but if it doesn't enhance or uh harm it then and it's a personal preference thing fine if you're going to go do a session though where you're going to be really concerned with muscle glycogen depletion and again you can go back that episode to learn of different types uh when those thresholds hits and what you worry about it then feeling would be important you would either need to have something before the session or consume it during the session so one of the other things we' like to say here is recovery starts during the previous workout right so if you're working out right now and you optimize nutrition right now even if you don't necessarily need it for the current workout if you can get ahead on recovery then you're going to be fine the next day and the differentiation here between carbohydrate and protein is important so the total amount of protein you ingest throughout the day is probably a bigger determinant for things like muscle growth than the timing so the post exorcize anabolic window it doesn't necessarily matter carbohydrate is different the timing of that does matter it needs to be around and available so you can maximize both hydration and muscle glycogen resynthesis which is restoring the muscle glycogen you burn during exercise um I also work with athletes that train multiple times a day so in those particular cases recovery window is half what you normally have so if you're in a situation where you have two or three days before you work out again you don't need to worry about getting carbohydrate in before during or after Because by the time you go to train again you will have restored your muscle glycogen levels easily however if you're training every day or twice in a day then the timing of carbohydrate really starts to matter and in that case I see no reason to not ingest those nutrients either before during or after you don't need need to necessarily do it but you can the general rule of thumb I give is something like this um if you're doing something where you're trying to really work hard whether this is hypertrophy training or a lot of endurance energy expenditure is going to be high potential muscle damage is high and or energy utilization is high what you want to look for is a number something in the area of like half a gram of carbohydrate per pound of body weight so you weigh 200 pound you want to make sure that either premid or post or total you bring in 100 grams of carbohydrate it's just a very rough number to start protein is about half of that so it's about a quarter of your body weight right so those numbers would be if you're 200 pounds make sure you have 100 grams of carbs and 50 grams of protein and again it doesn't necessarily have to be before or during or after and you'll be in a good spot all you need to do then is Alter well what I do I should say is Alter the amount of carbohydrate based on energy expenditure so a lower energy an easier workout instead of having 100 grams of carbs I might tack that down to 75 or even 50 and be one to one carb protein ratio if it was even harder more sun hotter outside more fluid loss I might go from 100 grams of carbs up to 150 or 200 and get closer to like a 3 to1 or 4 to1 carbohydrate to protein ratio so those are the numbers that I generally go by well as I take a sip of My Double Espresso Americano here I'd love for you to tell us about stimulants sure there's no shortage of these in most of our lives and of course you can cover the health benefits of it later you maybe you have an episode yes we have an episode on caffeine and it does have certain health benefits although one has to use caffeine correctly in order to drive those yeah so there's caffeine is the easy one to start with and we won't blor the point here uh the evidence is strong it has an erogenic effect uh you can take it at whatever dosage is reasonable for you and of course there is uh a bit of a learning curve there such that obviously the more you take it the more you need to take even though there's actually some recent evidence showing even folks who are uh acclimated to it will still see an ergogenic benefit even though if they don't feel a big boost of it so typically that takes 30 to 45 minutes or so but it's highly dependent upon the person so some people can smell coffee and immediately feel better and that's probably working actually through a different mechanism um of anticipation but you can take it there the half life of it is you know 4 to 6 hours or something like that it can totally depends on the person so don't let ruin your sleep but if you take it prior to Performance it has a a noticeable effect on particularly endurance maximum strength maybe less well quite clearly less so um in fact the data are mixed there on whether it actually does anything for Peak strength although I think most people would uh re would suggest that you know you're going to take it prior to trying to truly lift as as high as trying to you know lift a one repetition Max or similar but most of the the documented effects are on the the endurance-based SE activities yes so my read of the literature uh in terms of performance-enhancing effects of caffeine are that one to three milligrams I want to make sure that people hear the units correctly before people Blitz themselves out with that caffeine one to three milligrams per kilogram of body weight about 30 minutes prior to exercise has a definite performance- enhancing effect it also has a definite mental performance-enhancing effect especially when people who are regular caffeine users have abstained from caffeine for anywhere from 2 to 15 days and and that's an extremely rare circumstance but even if they have not it appears that 1 to 3 milligrams per kilogram of body weight of caffeine taken about again it's not super precise as far as I uh can see uh about 30 minutes before the event starts um can really enhance reaction time and power output and uh as well as as you mentioned endurance when I was researching the caffeine episode one interesting caveat that um I discovered was that if people are not caffeine adapted they are not regular users of caffeine the sudden introduction of caffeine can really degrade performance mostly because people don't know how to operate at that high level of autonomic arousal have you ever observed that yeah 100% in fact there's actually data going up as high as 10 milligrams per kilogram of body weight wow which is in fact once you cross the five m milligram per kilogram threshold you will start seeing performance decrements so there's absolutely such a thing of ruining your performance with too much caffeine so most people listening to this if you're thinking wow they said caffeine I'm all in and then you just stopped listening and now you you know go for your quad espresso shot before every time you go to workout you probably passing that threshold if you think about those numbers 1 to 3 milligram per kilogram body weight if you weigh 100 kilog that's 220 lb that'd be something like 2 to 500 milligrams of caffeine which is like a pretty high amount um but you know a coffee is going to get you close and espresso is going to get you somewhat in that ballpark depending on source and stuff um so you don't really need to go and blister your brain with caffeine in fact if you do it's quite common and in fact likely that you'll actually make performance worse right yeah the amount of caffeine in different coffees and sodas Etc of course varies one thing that ought to know is that the smallest of commercially available um coffees at the most popular commercial vendors um generally contain anywhere from 250 to 350 milligrams of caffeine what that means is that the so-called medium and the large contain as much as 500 milligrams or one gram of caffeine so for you morning um large coffee at a commercial vendor um uh drinkers if you're wondering why you get an A headache if you're 30 minutes late on that caffeine or um if you can't access that caffeine at all or even if you're drinking C coffee excuse me from another source you're finding like oh it's really not doing it for me it's because the amount of caffeine in the now commercially sold uh coffees is exceedingly high it's about two or three times higher than the standard lookup tables that you'll see on the internet so I'm not saying that to demonize caffeine we can pretty quickly adapt to form of tolerance to caffeine um some people never really can get over the Jitters other people um are just fine with even a th000 milligrams of caffeine but only because they've been drinking a lot of caffeine consistently anyway it's also wildly inconsistent from location to location uh The Brew type the functionality so yeah that that stuff can be very hard to figure out what what's happening there's only one way really to uh objectively measure caffeine and that's use caffeine tablets and they work pretty well actually uh someone I know um who's prominent in the podcast space uses 100 to 200 milligrams of caffeine in tablet form combined with tea so they've now conditioned themselves to think that herbal tea actually has this caffeinating effect but um tablet form caffeine while I'm not recommending it to to uh outright it is going to give you the best sense of how much caffeine you can tolerate and how much is performance enhancing or is performance degrading there's actually another line of supplementation we can go down here which is not technically a stimulant but it's something I use to help performance when you don't want caffeine and so this think specifically if you're one of those folks who have to exercise at night and you want a little bit of boost for your training but you don't want to have caffeine because it messes up your sleep and this is when you can turn to the whole like citrine Arginine nitric oxide sort of route and uh we'll skip the explanation there but effectively what happens is nitric oxide is this wonderful compound that causes vasil dilation and of course that's going to Aid then in transporting nutrients in and out of the cell um so it has an erogenic effect the you have a number of ways you can go about this um some of them have more pros and cons than others and and there are more and more data coming out specifically on citrine more recently if you look though in my opinion the most consistent evidence for the most consistent effect is in the supplement of beetroot or beetroot juice or extract or something like that so you can find those supplements and they tend to uh again they're pretty effective at enhancing performance specifically anything moderate to longer duration endurance performance and they are not a stimulant so they won't ruin your sleep that much now one um note of caution uh for those of you that are interested in citrine or or beetroot because they are in the Arginine pathway if you're somebody who has um a predisposition to cold sorce um oral cold sorce that is or other forms of cold sores that um because activation of the Arginine pathway can exacerbate some of the neural related aspects of of cold sores and that's because the viruses that cause those cold sores actually live on neurons then you want to be very cautious with citrine especially high dose citrine I can really amplify that the cold sore response what about non-stimulant yet um focus enhancing supplements things like Alpha GPC um for example I routinely use 300 to 600 milligrams of alpha GPC prior to hard physical training typically weight training but occasionally I'll take 300 milligrams of alpha GPC prior to a mental work bout um less often these days because I kind of reserve it for physical training uh and I don't tend to use it every day maybe once every you know third or fourth workout combined with caffeine so that combination is pretty uh pretty potent I find and so technically because it's a coleric Agonist it's not a stimulant in the traditional sense but it has a um focusing and an alertness promoting aspect to it what are your thoughts on those sorts of compounds there's not much human perform exercise performance data on those there are certainly cognitive functioning tests on those so you're not going to find a lot of information no though there isn't none we actually will use many of these substances you could globally call them neut tropic which is you know any substance that specifically will enhance brain function is a rough way to think about it will use them prior to more challenging bouts of training um this is something that we'll pull out say on sparring day only um or the most important training session or a session when you're trying to work on Pitch command or when you're trying to enhance uh work on your shot and as a basketball player or you're really trying to improve a certain swing as a golfer or something like that but we do not use them every day we do not use them with every person so yeah we will use those um they are not stimulants but they can be performance enhancing and another kind of way to think about this is if you're in the case of caloric restriction so whether you're trying to lose weight or we're actually trying to control weight for you know weight purposes in terms of a sports where you have to be in a certain weight class or something like that what we may not be able to give you food in fact we may not be able to give you stimulants because of the sleep thing or because we're already like maxed on on stimulant um now we can go this route and so at least like mentally you're a little bit there and you're more likely to be alert and focused and you can train harder despite the fact we didn't actually change fuel now that's a little bit of a short game in terms of that's not your permanent solution you eventually need to bring calories up or you know whatever other train you're training or whatever you're going to do but it can work in a nice short pinch I'm very interested to learn from you about fatigue reducers and I'm hoping that Roda Rosa will come up in the conversation yeah great let's just start right there then there's actually a lot of research on this despite most people not having heard of it uh I think I mentioned in a previous episode I've used it a lot over many many years um you have to be a little bit careful of it there's well first of all no we we should have said this at the onset there no supplement is a Panacea right nothing's going to work for everything in rodea is no no different it can have a number of effects if you look across the literature you're going to find generally somewhere between a small benefit to little benefit um but not often is it detrimental with a few exceptions I know of a handful of papers that would be two specifically where it may actually reduce muscular endurance okay fine if you think about what's happening is one of the benefits that has been seen so far with riola is it is helpful at managing cortisol but cortisol suppression is not a necessarily a good thing we talked about how if you do an acute B of stress cortisol will go go way up and that is a sign of of acute stress however a sign of longterm excessive stress is cortisol suppression and so this is a thing to be really careful of is if you're feeling down or lethargic or tired and you think your adrenals are messed up and then you start taking cortisol modulators you could be making the problem worse because now your cortisol is actually suppressed and now you're taking these things to blunt it or keep it low and and you're you continue to feel lethargic and and lack of desire and libbido and focus and and sort of all these things so cortisol is not a bad thing um we want this to be going up and down uh in the amounts that we want so if we're we're thinking about like for example waking up um you would want generally something like a 50% reduction in the first hour in terms of cortisol concentrations however if you're extremely suppressed already um going down is is only going to be a problem so riola is is has a a good evidence-base to support it for that um you'll see actually a number of of studies that have looked at it in a whole host of areas um for benefits so something good to do um the difficult part with riola to be quite honest is getting it from a high quality brand and Source it's difficult to get as a single source which is a very very important thing to do with supplements is try to get them sourced alone riola typically comes in combination with any other herbals or other stuff you adrenal support and etc etc um also then getting them then third party certified which for most folks is not necessary but for any athletes that need to go through drug testing systems you should not take any supplement at all that does not have some sort of third party certification so those are the challenges that being said if you've ever ran into into somebody who's taken riola and they're like it didn't do anything for me it that's possible that's you know nothing works for everyone it also could be just very poor quality sourcing um so if you look at uh the there have been a number of papers on um its perception of fatigue and You' sort of mentioned that you felt pretty immediate effects I've taken it a few times yeah I'm fairly sensitive to supplements but I've started taking uh Rola before workouts and found that I could push much harder much longer through the workout normally I would or typically before taking it um that is in sessions where I did not take it I would be able to work out very hard for 20 minutes or so the next 10 minutes I could get some work output and then the remaining uh period of time it was kind of a tapering off now granted these are very intense training sessions these are not the endurance training sessions these are the weight training sessions that one one time per week per body part type sessions uh what I've noticed is I can complete the entire 60 minutes with with minimal fatigue now I mean obviously I hit fatigues within sets and of course you know I you remain human despite taking it but um I found to be very useful and I've been using it whenever I use Alpha GPC prior prior to workouts yeah and I've been impressed by by it overall I do want to highlight something that you said because I think it's so so vitally important which is that using single ingredient formulations for most things is critical to figuring out what works for you what doesn't what dosages you need being able to take things uh two on one off um two days on one day off for instance being able to um increase dosage in the morning and then com maybe reduce the dosage and combin with something else in the afternoon single ingredient formulations are pretty much the only way to do that there's perhaps only one supplement that I take at all and that's athletic greens as they've been a regular podcast sponsor for a long time that is a cocktail of many many things and those are all adaptogens as well as some probiotics and vitamins and things like that so I'm not opposed to Blends where the Blends include a lot of nutrients that are synergistic but for all pill capsule uh based supplements where I'm looking for a very targeted effect and it's not just about sub uh foundational nutrition I really believe strongly that single ingredient formulations are the way that you can build a rational approach to supplementation and also make adjustments if something isn't making you feel better and also make adjustments if something's really working for you so for instance some people might take Alpha GPC 300 milligrams and not feel anything go up to 600 milligrams not feel anything maybe just feel kind of eh they don't like it other people like myself took 300 milligrams of alpha GPC the first time I was like wow this really puts me in the zone but I want to be really careful how often I use it I did mention I go to 600 milligram occasionally but that really puts me on the outer threshold of kind of overall levels of focus and amped up such that if I drink too much caffeine it can tilt me over the edge so I encourage people to become scientists of themselves and the only way to do that is to try and limit the number of variables and the final point is that I think that single ingredient formulations are by far the best in terms of changing things over time you know this could be um uh women during their menstrual cycle might find that during certain phases of the cycle they're more sensitive to certain things than not others um and for men and women it may be that you know certain times of year even and uh certain supplements might go better closer to sleep some earlier in the day and on and on and on there's just no real way in my opinion to have a supplementation protocol that involves lots and lots of Blends one or two Blends okay but lots of Blends I think that's um I actually think that's potentially dangerous territory yeah I mean just take Roda as good example I know a new meta analyses came out just in the last few months looking at it and they found in general you see again a slight to moderate Improvement in everything from uh Power output to fatigue resistant antioxidant effects um to endurance performance so it's like okay great maybe there's a little bit here now let's say you went to do it and the only way you could access riola is in combination with that and um some Lion's man and you know some other of these adapted dens and was like well wait a minute I just wanted to take this to get a better workout but now it also came with this stimulant or this cortisol suppressor or cortisol activator well now all of a sudden you can't take it at night or you can't take it in the morning because you're already you already had coffee your your options are just way limited so I think the biggest part of all that is you if something doesn't feel good you have absolutely no idea you don't know if it was Rola you don't know if it was the BSW that's in there you don't know if it was any of the other things that were smashed in there or it could be something as simple as the um the the citric acid they use like some other combination of thing and now here you are thinking that some supplement that actually works for you doesn't and you throw that out of your repertoire uh for the rest of your life which is you know not the biggest crime but it's not needed and you're not really going to know so yeah I fully stamped you can look back at my course lectures for the last decade and you will see like stamped number one on the supplement sections is make sure you're taking single ingredient supplements at all costs the last part about that too is you're more likely to ensure the amount that is on the label is correct so if you're taking riola and it says you know it's 100 milligrams in there and if that's the only thing that's in there you're you're more likely than not to actually get something close now they're never perfect but it will be close if it's in a combination of 20 other things you actually don't have any idea if that's in there um in fact there have been many papers on um melatonin and vitamin d and a number of other supplements in which when you actually just pull them off the shelf these are these are standard studies where they will go on buy say like 20 to 25 different supplements in the case of melatonin and we'll actually measure the amount of melatonin actually in them and and despite the fact that the label says 5 milligrams they can be up to a 500 to a thousandfold actual concentration in that supplement and then you wonder why some people react great to melatonin some people that absolutely destroys you and this is also why like we'll we'll actually we'll see this constantly well people will have like 5 100 times the upper limit of melatonin the morning after when the halflife is supposed to be more like 90 minutes it should be totally gone but we're seeing extremely high I'm not even talking like double I'm talking 10 20 30X the upper limit range for melatonin the next morning and then it's like well what are you taking he's like I got this melatonin at X store or X website and you're like holy cow um so I'm I'm not opposed to melatonin theoretically um but you have to be careful with that one in particular so any supplement has that to be true so you want to buy them from as many places as you can that are high quality and if they are third party tested even if you're not a performance athlete I want to stress this even if you're not a performance athlete third-party certified and test of supplements are you're less likely to just just get wildly high concentrations or low concentrations of active ingredients and so relative to other ones who you might get for cheaper but you could be totally wrecking Yourself by getting you know 50 Mill grams of melatonin every night and not realizing it so then of course the next morning you drown yourself in caffeine and then you can see what death cycle you're in now yeah um people can look for third party certification on the packaging and um some websites will allow you to zoom in on the bottle beforehand it's largely listed on on certain um vendor websites a brief point about supplement cost and blends and I promise this will be a brief Point different ingredients meaning different types of supplements have widely varying costs in order to you know create to to get them to manufacture them so often times what you'll find is that blends will um include the least amount of the most expensive uh ingredient right um not always the case there are some there certain exceptions to this and I mentioned some Blends that I like a few minutes ago that are for foundational nutrition adaptogens and probiotics athletic greens of course just being one of several examples out there but when it comes to say a sleep Blend or a pre-workout blend there are some decent products out there but a lot of them tend to put in more of the least expensive ingredients and less of the ones that you're actively seeking and so those tend to be uh caffeine tends to be kind of a buffer against the other things meaning if you pre-workout putting caffeine in there isn't necessarily a bad thing but if it has five other things in there often times what manufacturers will cheat on is the actual amount of the things that are costing um so again single ingredient formulations for 80% of your supplements I think is really um the way to go and the other thing I know is going to come up as we're talking about all these supplements is this issue of dependency I often get this question and when I solicit for questions uh on social media in anticipation of this episode number of people said okay so if you take a sleep formulation do I need to take it every night if I don't take it will I have an incredibly hard time sleeping if I take a pre-workout every time I train will uh will I need it um it's a great question um some people will take supplement holidays as they may be called um for a couple of days each week back to back some people take them straight through I myself take a a sleep cocktail we've described this it's magnesium theanine and things this is not one ingredient these are multiple ingredients in fact precisely because some people who have sleep walking and Vivid dream issues can't take theine before bed in any case I've had times when I either forgot my supplements that's rare or I just didn't have what I needed or just simply took a break for a night and it was not a problem um but in terms of pre-workout I do think that people become dependent on being in that really ramped up state but I don't think we view all this as like true dependency kind of like addiction totally right I mean I Define addiction as a progressive narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure so you know I I suppose people could get addicted to pre-workout but it seems a little unlikely more likely there would be a dependency such that if you didn't have your pre-work out you might feel like oh you're not motivated to train so what are your thoughts on um taking little holidays from supplements and varying the frequency of supplement intake in particular as it relates to stimulants and fatigue reducers the end goal anytime I coach somebody is to get them into a physiological state in which they require no or close to no supplementation that's the target we should really be in a position to where our lifestyle our sunlight exposure exposure our Stress Management our physical activity our sleep and our hydration and our whole food nutrition provide us almost everything we need now look again there are some foundational items that we can give people um we put together a little bundle actually for this that of basic things that you can go look at but that's the goal right so the target is to be let your physiology run the guy your physiology is way smarter than we are even if I take a bunch of biomarkers from you your physiology still knows better than those few markers can tell me so that's always where we're ending up I actually personally don't like people being in a position that they have to take a supplement for anything so I don't like it if you have to take a supplement to have a good night of sleep I don't like it if you have to have a supplement to train we will use any of these stimulants very very carefully uh with any of the athletes we work with and certainly for the non-athletes because at least the athletes we have an end date we have a fight scheduled we have a season we have a game you're going to pitch whatever when you don't have that it's sort of like you're in this endless cycle of oh you're just going to do that all day every day we don't really need to be in that spot so what I the way that I describe My Philosophy is I will use those short-term tactics to symptom manage if I have to so if somebody comes to me and they're like you're feeling awful and we've got to get through the hump okay great maybe we'll give you something for Sleep immediately to get you sleeping that allows us to then come back and work on the causal problem right so this is what is why are you having a hard time sleeping anyways if you have to take a a nine cocktail supplement to sleep then all we're doing is is blinding the reason why are you in that position to begin with right so we see this all the time whether it is sleep problems whether it is cortisol or testosterone the question is why is that low now we may give you something again to manage it immediately but the task uh the mystery I'm going to try to unveil is why why is it there to begin with this could be something like this is natural for you and your lack of energy is something else or could be actually it is not a natural level for you but something is suppressing it any number of uh you've got some infection going on there's some allergic reaction to something in your environment there's a you know mold um Mercury like that one comes up a lot you'll see Mercury and folks and that's causing a lot of problems um or any number of heavy metals or toxins any host of thing psychological distress bad daily habit you don't ever see the sun like you don't ever sweat you don't ever drink we've talked about so many things so I'm always is going to hunt for that and I hate using this phrase it's highly maligned for a good reason but root cause all right so we're trying to find that is like are we making sure that we're not causing this problem and I'm not going to want to give you a supplement to cover up something if we're not even trying to solve the problem of what's being there that being said am I that concerned about people taking a multivitamin just all throughout no not really am I concerned about people taking creatine no like go ahead um those ones are generally pretty fine to to just take but anything else I want a reason I really don't like giving people anything in a super physiological concentration or a superfood concentration right so again an amount you wouldn't find in a normal food dosage unless we have really a specific reason some of these things are more problematic others are less problematic so when I to answer the question of dependency you have a combination of actual physiological dependency caffeine like that actually creates a physi iCal dependency versus a uh emotional or psychological dependency or just a I like drinking this like that's my habit that's my routine there's a fancy scientific phrase for that but it doesn't matter so yeah we want to get off that and like again my personal philosophy is I don't want you dependent upon anything I want to create extremely resilient people and I want to create physiological resilience we actually have a fancy little algorithm we use to to measure that in people and so we can actually calculate that number and the goal of us is to push that number higher so that we don't have to have anything um so many situations pop up in your real life that you're not going to have your supplement or you're not going to have your routine or you're not going to have your journal or whatever but also for the long term I don't want to create a situation in which this is a short-term success that you have to now do that the rest of your life no let's just get out of the way let's fix the problem if if there is something symptom management that's real while we're actually searching for better foundational habits um the last thing I want to say about this is if you're only covering symptom you're really missing signal right which is if you're constantly tired throughout the day and all you're doing is giving yourself a number of Alpha gpcs and caffein Etc even though there's good literature are you really just using that to allow your poor sleep hygiene to happen if you took those away I bet you you would actually start addressing your sleep if that's the Cause right or I your your stress or your poor hydration like you would go hunting for the problem and so like you want to walk a fine here of going like hey look is an athletic greens supplement that big a deal no probably not but wait a minute am I actually now covering up the pain point that is maybe needed it's a signal to actually get my ass in gear to go make one of these changes um whatever it needs to be so I know I got like a little bit meta on you and a little bit philosophical but that's honestly how I approach it yeah I think it's really important a friend of mine who's a physician has a great saying um which is better living Through Chemistry still requires Better Living um boy that's that's golden that's so good you know and it pertains also to things like anti-depressants and ADHD drugs and things of that sort most all of those things were developed as tools to allow people to move from a maladaptive State maladaptive is hard to Define but think about in any domain of life you can either be back on your heels flat footed or forward Center of mass um and there are times when people are so compromised neurochemically that they need to use pharmacology in order to get into a flat-footed position yeah you know they're really back on their heels flat footed or forward Center Mass but the idea was always that those things were developed as things to allow people to engage in the sorts of behaviors that can produce the same sorts of neurochemical shifts and if people are thinking well what sorts of behaviors can induce these neurochemical shifts I'll just zoom out myself for a moment here and say I am a big proponent I believe you are as well F May in doing behavioral tools first when possible really establishing good habits the dos and don'ts which we've talked a lot about in this series and in this episode then excellent nutrition which involves dos and don'ts volume food Choice timing all the factors and then also supplementation and also there sometimes a case for prescription drugs certainly and often brain machine interface or body machine interface measuring stuff using devices but the the foundation of behavior and good nutrition are really truly foundational and it's hard in anything to skip steps but supplements and prescription drugs are one place where people often skip steps and then they they don't actually learn how to cultivate the best uh behavioral practices including the don'ts as you mentioned and then just one more point along these lines you know you talked about taking anything for energy is really uh disruptive to the system and it is because especially caffeine while it has its uses and even health benefits it's really borrowing it it's against the adenosine system with interest and so because caffeine acts as an adenosine antagonist effectively while caffeine is present in those receptors you don't feel as sleepy you have more energy you're reaction time goes down memories enhance Focus performance of all kinds yes but then when that caffeine is dislodged from the receptor then the adenosine can act even more potently at those receptors so it's sort of like being able to borrow against the normal variations in wakefulness and sleep and this is why we encourage people if they're not training first thing in the morning to push their caffeine and take out about 90 to 120 minutes after waking so they can clear some of that adenosine in the morning which tends to happen even uh uh after we wake up um people can listen to episodes on Master your sleep or perfect sleep or the caffeine episode to understand more about that but the the final thing I just want to say here and then it it um prompts a question is you know in thinking about supplement protocols um I think a lot of people assume that once they start taking something they're going to have to take it all the time and one idea perhaps is that people have some uh Alpha GPC around that they could take and granted it'd be great if people could try things without having to buy a whole product I think companies hopefully are listening to this and we um give people a sample to see if something works for them and then give them an opportunity to try it to have things around but not necessarily assume you're going to take it every time right some things you take every day foundational nutrition um uh supplements for instance but then also to take a look at how well you're eating or not eating right at times when I'm eating much better I consuming you know low sugar fermented foods which are great for the gut microbiome I consume less probiotics if ever I've been really compromised for whatever reason then I will take pill form probiotics but I don't take those all the time um because I get them from food and from certain G you know greens drinks like athletic greens and so forth so I think that nutrition and supplementation are are tethered in this way in my mind and I don't think that um most people think of supplementation as something that where you can induce a lot of variability in when and how you take them but as far as I'm concerned as long as there single ingredient formulations you can be um you can use supplements once a week if you want you could use them seven days a week you could use them um twice a day four times a day every day or you could use them not at all agreed yeah some of them uh will have an effect randomly like that others will not and we talked about creatin being one of them it's if you're going to take it once or so a week then there's I mean basically no benefit that's a very good point creatine um beta alanine is another fantastic example of something you need to take consistently if you want some sort of benefit um it needs to be built up in muscle we need to use that to create uh carnosine which is what's actually going to help us with our fatigue management that's why we call it like an acid buffer um so in our previous metabolism episode we talked about that being a major cause of fatigue um the wonderful part the one of the reasons why beta alanine works so effectively is it blocks that buildup so that is an example of another one that you would want to take uh other things like fish oil you could certainly skip a day here and there it wouldn't be that big a deal I also do support your comment of you can take absolutely none of these things and and be just fine um in terms of and we'll come back maybe to bet Allan in a second in terms of some other fun stuff my colleague Greg giki ran a really cool number of studies looking at how exercise actually alteras that got microbiome this is actually an area that we I probably have 300 stool samples sitting in my freezer in my lab oh goodness another reason to pause before entering your lab yeah another reason to not apply to come be one of my graduate students unless you want to deal with that um we actually have a number we've applied for a couple of Grants to look more into this um specifically with females uh so hopefully we can get that funded but nonetheless um you can actually see some like pretty traumatic and I say that word on purpose changes in the gut microbiome this one in particular study I was thinking of that Greg did is he looked at the the changes pre-post and ultramarathon and even within a single bot of exercise um I can't remember some of the markers but I know one of the markers uh was specifically increased by like 14,000 per. uh after a single bot of exercise now this is an ultramarathon this is like like totally absurd amount of exercise relative to what normal people would do would be but that number I remember like it was like 14,2 29% or like something some random number like that of something meaningful yeah something meaningful I can't remember which marker uh that was that had changed um I know strepto caucus was in there strepto caucus went up like maybe something more like 30 or 40 or 50% so the point is we haven't even had the proper time and we don't to even launch into the gut microbiome um supplementation there needs to be ultra specific um you wouldn't be best served to just jump in and take random things there um that's it's a whole area of emerging science we know very very very little about it but there is a number of actionable things one could do um there so probably something to not mess with uh would certainly work with a qualified physician if you think you have something going on clinical or you know some actual problem there don't work with someone who's not a specialist a medical doctor there but um just randomly assigning a bunch of probiotics or prebiotics without intention is is maybe um the next Forefront of human performance research but we'll have to maybe come back in a few years and dive into that in detail or perhaps you can bring somebody on as an expert in that to discuss that yeah gut microbiome is fascinating I think of sleep as the most powerful performance enhancing activity uh of course you still have to do the activity yeah I consider it foundational like it basically raises the tide on mental health physical health performance of all kinds um it there's recent data that during sleep your body goes through all its various forms of metabolism possible Y which is amazing so it's measured from breath in human subjects breath metabolites in human subjects so obviously uh if one is thinking about supplementation and wondering okay what's what's the best supplement to enhance performance you gave some um great rationale for why creatine would be an excellent choice provided you're eating well and um hydrating well uh and then to my mind the next thing on the list would be anything that allows you to improve the quality and maybe even the duration of your sleep although if you wake up and you feel rested throughout the day and only need a short nap in the afternoon not everyone needs one but then generally that means you're feeling okay people sometimes get flipped onto this idea that they have insomnia insomnia is excessive daytime sleepiness where you're falling asleep during the day that's insomnia could also be narcolepsy but that's insomnia but supplementation to improve the quality or duration of sleep or both seems to me like the most direct route even though actually technically it's an indirect route to to uh performance enhancement and then thinking about things that increase alertness and stimulant and F and fatigue reducers do you think that's a good logic yeah we go to absurd lengths to dial sleep in as much as we can I mean the honest answer is like truly absurd this is a conflict of interest my my company I'm a part of this absolute rest is the name of that company we actually go out to your house and run a full clinical grade sleep study in you your bedroom on you and run that over multiple nights so instead of having to go to a Sleep Clinic and have it done in this weird hospital room or sort of setting with these people looking at you through a mirror it's like totally creepy um that is important because that's the only way to truly determine how you are sleeping now that said the technology of wearable trackers is getting better in fact I would actually predict those things will reach a level of accur equivalent to the PSG in the next couple of years and probably we'll get FDA approval to be able to diagnose officially Sleep Disorders that's my total my my prediction from some inside information I don't know that to be true but it is getting a lot better right now those wearables are not accurate enough to meet that threshold so that we do is we bring up basically all the equipment um to do that so we'll come in and do that now once we understand exactly how you're sleeping the next question is to answer why are you sleeping that way and so this is a full four-fold system um number one is we're going to look at biology which means you're going to take saliva and blood and we're looking at everything from uh neurotransmitters concentrations to um vitamins B6 B12 Etc that are important for Sleep performance so we're going to see is that is it a physiological problem is there something happen there is cortisol DHEA ratio that we've previously talked about or uh is something like that off if it's not physiology then we're going on the next one which is environmental we run a full environmental scan of your bedroom during those nights of sleep that we're there and that's really important because we can look at everything from dander and pollen and allergens that are in the air um a quick tip here is wash your sheets at least once a week one of the common most common places that people um get allergens in the air is actually from accumulation on your sheets so if you clean those more often uh you'll be in a better spot and next one the next one there also is like keep your I'm sorry this hurts my heart I don't even VI I in in truthfulness I violate this but keep your pets out of your bedroom and certainly keep them off your bed our our Ghost Face Killer is my dog and no is my other one they don't go on my bed but they're right next to my bed so we violate that one but full environmental scan uh includes all those things of course there's uh we measure light and temperature and humidity and everything else that's going on in the room um volatile Organics that are coming out of the mattress from Mal theide lead out of out of the wall like all these things that could potentially disrupt your sleep and we want to make sure that none of those things are kicking on uh we see this constantly people will have things like trying to be cool and they want to be cold at night because that's important and so they'll turn an air conditioner on or a fan but the air conditioner kicking on and off and night actually can shoot you out of various sleep stages so you want to be really careful how this going the last metric on that is actually CO2 and so what you remember from our metabolism discussion is when you exhale you're breathing out CO2 well if your room is closed and the ventilation isn't great the amount of CO2 in your room starts to build up and we actually very specifically know the threshold uh based on information collected from the International Space Station actually we know the Threshold at which CO2 crosses and starts disrupting sleep so we want to make sure that you're not sitting in this CO2 bath in front of your face and then breathing it back in and disrupting your sleep so environment is the second one the third one is actually now psychology so um one of the members on our team is a Harvard MD and Psychiatry and put together an entire sleep scan survey so we run through all that to see if there's anxiety depression anything like that psychologically going on and then the F fourth one there is if you have some sort of actual sleep pathology and so this again will include some eye tracking stuff that we can use so we take all those data they go back to our team uh we work in combination with with Steve locky uh from Harvard who's done a ton of stuff he actually set up a lot of the Circadian rhythm stuff in the National Space Station as well uh himself Jeffrey Drummer and mdphd Etc and all these folks in a room go over your data identify what's going on in build action plans off of that occasionally those action plans will include supplementation but only if necessary we're really going to try to come back and work through a system um to improve the Sleep however is needed so I realize that is not U totally accessible for a lot of people but like if you really need to go to the end of the Earth to figure out sleep um that service is available absolute rest sounds like an amazing tool given that most people won't be able to use it um or access it although we will provide a link in case people are interested in it and do want to try it you mentioned a few things that I think everyone should uh assay their sleeping environment for and um determine whether or not they are hindering their sleep uh without realizing it for instance the uh air conditioning going on and off or this could be heater going on and off or um central heat heating or cooling unit um this could be uh keeping the room dark uh this could be uh cleaning your sheets certainly that doesn't require um uh that one sign up for absolute rest so cleaning one sheets routinely keeping pets out of the bedroom as you admitted you don't entirely um different opinions about that but if you're having sleep issues the dander from animals may may be part of those issues and then one that I'll just add which I think is pretty interesting is there's some beautiful data out of Michael turman's Lab at Columbia Medical School in New York um on negative ionization and this sounds pretty uh wacky new AG I'm sure some you are like negative ionization but listen the termin lab is a serious laboratory focus on circadian biology for many decades now negative ion concentrations are higher near Coastal locations so if you've ever gone to the sea or gone on vacation and you sleep better near a body of water that's actually a real thing and there are negative ionization machines but there are also some things that one can do in order to increase the negative ion concentration in their sleeping environment that are nearly zero cost if not zero cost you can look those up online and we probably will do an entire episode about this in the future but I think what you describe for absolute rest really highlights a more General set of themes that I think are really important which is your sleep environment is an environment it's got a lot going on in it and it's worth running through the checklist uh that you described and asking you know where where things you know maybe not optimized but where am I really getting in my own way in terms of sleep all of this again being related to the fact that getting excellent sleep consistently is a will completely transform everything that you do and not getting excellent sleep consistently which is a challenge for so so many people uh will also transform everything that you do and think and feel but in the negative Direction yeah I can also offer a few tips uh on sleep based on things we find most consistently for those that can't go through uh the whole protocol um one quick little actually app called time shifter is really cool for anyone that's dealing with consistent travel and jet lag so you can go and enter your location your time where you're going the location and then it'll actually back calculate and it'll give you full light uh stimulant food hydration and stuff protocol and you just follow along with that and we've used that for many years actually especially when traveling to like Abu Dhabi for vice and Mongolia and and Brazil for the Olympics and sort of all over the place so um that's I think that app is still available I hope so um it's it's great um a nice tool um a couple of things we found major if you're dealing with acid reflex so if you're someone who who has problems like that you can just Elevate the head of your bed by like 6 in so if you you know put a little piece of wood or something underneath it um you can also buy very inexpensive pillows um that can Elevate that now that's not solving the problem but at least can help you sleep whether it's just that night or if it's a consistent problem you can do there um if you're snoring like I said that's not really benign you should probably take a look at that your first step there is mouth tape um if that doesn't work you can go through what's called myofunctional therapy um which I don't know if you've covered that before but it's basically tongue exercises uh and that can be quite effective specifically for people who have problems with REM sleep so malfunctional therapy um it's just a it's kind of like you do like depending on the protocol uh some tongue exercises kind of in the morning afternoon or night and that takes a while to be honest uh you're probably going to need at least six weeks before you start seeing anything but that actually is is pretty well demonstrated to help with sleep so you can probably Google you could find a link for for exact protocols I don't want to describe all them but yeah you're going to strengthen your tongue so that it stops falling in the back of your neck and waking you up at night so that's a really free easyfree protocol to use um if you're struggling with it could be insomnia but it could be just things like when you get into bed you're super tired you can't fall asleep or things like that kind of a basic rule of thumb we use is only two things happen in your bed and if you can make sure those are the only two things you do in your bed the problems of falling sleeper insomnia tend to go down those two things are you have sex and you sleep and nothing else goes down in your bed and so you can make that environment very special and that can help uh quite effectively improve your ability to fall asleep and then not wake up early so keeping that environment specific to what it's for uh can be effective the only other thing I would think of is and I I hate to say this because it's not super practical but it's just quite clear at this point sleeping with a partner in your bed it's just not very good for sleep so good luck with that one I know um you can do a couple of things if it helps uh you can get two smaller beds and put them right next to each other um if you can actually have separate sheets that alone can be helpful um so if you get you mean if you're on a king-sized bed or something um and again I know some people they're just like there's no chance but if you want to know the the cost for your like the your relationship just lose your use your loved one ideally please don't please don't don't oh my goodness so um the only last thing I want to mention here is something that's popped up just a few times recently but you're going to see more of um which is called orthosomnia U so that is a term that is people are growing concerned over uh which is wearables and sleep trackers causing sleep issues so people be basically become too obsessed with optimizing maximizing scores and that alone well actually it's actually you so you learn when to wake up and so so you have actually U an anticipatory response when many hours prior to waking up so if you actually learn to have a little bit of a what's that little molecule of like excitement and reward oh dopamine that's the one if you start getting that because you wake up and you get super excited to check your score um or your phone it's the same thing if you check your phone or Twitter or whatever inmediately in morning that'll actually start carving back your wakeup time because you start launching it so it can ruin sleep becoming too obsessed so what I'll say is if you're going to use a sleep tracker and you just like don't care you want to check it and you have fun with it great but if like you are really really really interested in it and you pay a lot of attention to it don't check your sleep score for at least the first 60 minutes after waking up and then you that should help you that's a great tool I think that um and piece of advice I think generally because I think a lot of people are waking up in the middle of the night checking their phone two or three times per night I'm kind of wondering why they're doing that and I'm guessing it's this anticipatory wakeup circuit yeah you absolutely should use either your night mode or do not disturb or airplane mode or something overnight or leave it out of the room yeah I mean if you have to wake up and like some people have um like a a family member who's maybe not in great health and so they have to keep their phone around in case they call or things like that so I get it you're like I can't leave it out leave it in there leave it in do not disturb and enter in their phone number or whoever's phone number so only they can get through but keep it black and white so if you do have to look at your phone at night you see black and white and you do not have notifications so make sure that there's no notification for no email and a no DM like get all that stuff off your screen and so you look at the did anybody call did anybody text of importance um what time is it no emergency going on black and white okay right back to sleep so that can help a little bit one of the supplements that I found is extremely useful for being able to fall back asleep if I've woken up in the middle of the night and for some reason can't um and is also very effective for enhancing sleep when one is ingesting fewer carbohydrates m an issue that a lot of people run into um or for people that are fasting for many hours before sleep you know people are trying to not eat anything within you know two to four hours but is inositol 900 milligrams of myoinositol i i find again this is anic data to be clear if I wake up in the middle of the night and I've taken 900 milligrams of vosl before initially falling asleep that I fall back asleep much more easily so that's why I've added 900 milligrams of inositol to my called Sleep stack I've also tried just taking it alone and it works well alone but works better of course with the mag 3 and8 um apogen and cleaning sleep stack the um the also in terms of tools for Sleep the the app revery that was developed by my colleague Dr David Spiegel who's a medical doctor at Stanford Psychiatry Stanford School of Medicine Psychiatry um there is a free trial there's a nominal cost if you use it um month to month but the data are really strong that people that use that I think it's 8 to 11 minute sleep hypnosis once a week and it doesn't have to be in the middle of the night when you wake up really helps improve people's um ability to fall asleep quickly stay asleep fall back asleep if they wake up in the middle of the night in some cases curing insomnia in other cases really just helping people with their General sleep issues and I mention this because uh obviously it's a technology it's not a supplement but I know that some people are supplement averse also if you look at by at the cost comparison between taking the Sleep stack totally um and the revery app it's Pennies on the dollar really um so again I'm a proponent of both for myself but I realize that people have varying budgets and again I should say as always behavioral tools first and I I think of the Ry app as as a more or less a behavioral tool yeah it's uh it's really just a tool any of these breath work protocols hypnosis protocols they're just a tool for you to in touch back in with your own physiology rather than a a substance that's coming in so I I fully support those we have used a number of those um in in protocols there's some other tricks that we can pull in those areas um I probably shouldn't say this but the reality of it is depending on what's keeping you up um sometimes we recommend just getting up and getting it done uh like if it's a really like if it's a a project or a thing or whatever um like sometimes rather than laying there all night not sleeping you can get up get it done and then if you stay awake fine at least the anxiety is gone or sometimes you can actually go back to sleep cuz you're like especially if the task only literally would take like 10 or 15 minutes um it may ruin your sleep but you're you're going to have ruined sleep anyways so you can try that tool um you don't want to pull that card very often and you have to have be very careful with what you consider to be something worthy of doing that um but that is like between me and you and nobody else here that's a tool I have used personally more than a few times where just like I get an idea and I don't lose it or like the solution for something you've been noodling on for a long time Pops in your head and just like and you're not wanting to forget it just get up and get it done and get on with your day in several previous episodes you emphasized how exercise induces various adaptations depending on the type specificity volume intensity Etc of the exercise and that during exercise the degree of adaptation that one triggers is often associated with things that normally we don't associate with exercise related health things like huge increases in blood pressure during exercise huge increases in inflammatory markers muscle damage and these all things all sound terrible but as you beautifully explained all of that triggers adaptations that then bring those markers below the Baseline with which they were previous to the exercise so that's the adaptation and the recovery within the realm of supplementation and nutrition I'm aware of a number of things some herbal some lipid based other compounds that are used for various things but that are known to have a potent anti-inflammatory effect things like omega-3 fatty acids ashwagandha for its effect on cortisol although that's a bit indirect to the inflammatory pathway um curcumin uh and things of that sort given that we want inflammation in order to trigger the adaptation response to exercise and given that we want to reduce inflammation in the recovery period can we put together a logical framework as to when is best to take anything anti-inflammatory whether it's supplement base or prescription or over the counter drug and when to strictly avoid taking any anti-inflammatory supplement or um behavioral tool you mentioned ice can reduce inflammation that's why you don't want to do it too close to exercise anyway I think think you get the gist of the question what about specific supplements related to inflammation and anti-inflammatory responses what are the best ones when should we take them when should we avoid taking them the way that I think about it is understanding what we call the fitness fatigue model so what I mean by that is whenever you do some sort of insult the whole idea is for you to come back and get an adaptation now recovery is not adaptation right recover is recovery adaptation is what happens after you're recovered right so there's a very important distinction there Fitness fatigue model says basically you've done something and you've got an adaptation and you've enhanced Fitness and by Fitness in this case I mean it as a non-specific term so you got stronger you've uh improved your endurance like whatever thing you're trying to train for at the same time though your fatigue elevated so what happens is if Fitness increases at the same or similar rate as fatigue your performance actually isn't any better and so you may think oh my program isn't working I need to then train harder or need to take more anti-inflammatory or whatever the things are when in reality all you really need to do is reduce fatigue and if you do that your performance will increase and all the training adaptations will be actualized so the way that we do that is a couple of things first and foremost is actually a taper so the the first step I think of if someone is training very very hard and you're not seeing any results and we want to think about supplementation before I get there I want to think about taper and D Lo if you're actually training hard and sleep and everything else is taken care of so just without going too far into taper some general General parameters there um you want to think about about a 50% reduction in training volume over the course of about a week for every eight weeks of training super super rough right so if you've been training hard for three months for something you might want to taper for two weeks something like that right it's sort of a rough estimate that taper you actually don't need to reduce intensity because intensity is not the driver fatigue it tends to be volume so as long as your volume is reduced by 50% you can maintain intensity you can maintain in fact I generally would recommend maintaining frequency so if you're used to working out four days a week keep it four days a week you can go down a little bit in frequency but if you go down too much in frequency you actually tend to feel super lethargic so I wouldn't do that if you do those things correctly you can typically see somewhere between like a 3 to 8% Improvement of performance um within a matter of days so so it's important to do that um we actually ran a study on cross country Runners years ago testing on a metabolic cart um muscle biopsies blow a whole bunch of things and we did it pre and post three weeks of taper and we actually this is cool because we did this in competitive season so this were Collegiate cross country Runners and we got them to come to our lab three weeks before their conference Championship ran them all through a bunch of testing biopsied them they went through their three-week taper and then we biopsied them again and then they went and ran um their conference championships and stuff well what happened was they end up hitting about a 50% reduction because what they did is they took out what we call the junk volume so they kept their race tempos high intensity stuff in there um they kept the recovery stuff and that Medium Pace they just basically reduced now they were terrified as any endurance Runner or endurance athlete or participant would understand um when you take volume away they tend to get very nervous and so they didn't like that um but as a result of that what we saw is their V2 Max despite the fact that they covered half the mileage their V2 Max did not go down in 3 weeks of reduced taper your Fitness is in is extremely stable and in fact once we actually looked at their data the enzymes in their muscle were responsible for oxidative metabolism were maintained and so you don't have to worry about losing uh Again Fitness or we're talking about overall performance or even um oxygen capacity mitochondrial function Etc that was all preserved obviously we saw performance go up what was actually really interesting is we saw I think it was around a 10% increase in type 2 which are fast twitch muscle fiber size so we saw a 10% increase in fast switch fiber size at the end of 3 weeks of tapering now what you may think is like wow I guess tapering is anabolic but that's probably not what happened what realistically probably happened was their volume of training was actually causing their fibers to be reduced in size and then once we remove that fatigue they just recovered back to normal so that's a good example of what I'm talking about once you remove the fatigue you can actually see enhancements and performance not because you're necessarily getting better but because you're removing the simul light light suppressing you so that being said the way that you want to think about recovery like this is although recovery especially like injury recovery like seems chaotic biology is very organized and there's a very specific three-step process that you're going to go through for recovery and then there are different supplements that can can help you in each of those three areas so area one is basically inflammation so this is when the cyto storm comes rolling out uh it starts signaling the injuries there in this case even if it's muscle damage um and activates immune system to kick on and that whole repair process happens there um what you're trying to do effectively in fact this is why you probably ever wondered like why is inflammation a thing um what you're trying to do is bring in fluid enhance the size and increase blood flow in so you can get nutrients for repair and immune cells and everything like that in the system and get the waste out so short-term inflammation even in the case of muscle soreness is the example we we talked about in the previous episode but any inflammation it is part of the necessary process that's why you would not want to take an anti-inflammatory in that state and so why you also would not want to do things like an ice spat um so in that immediate inflammatory response time window this is you know seconds to hours after training you would want to stay away from things like that that um a good option here are things like Omega-3s um good evidence some somewhere in the neighborhood of like 2 to 5 GRS total typically like a 1:1 um EPA to DHA ratio is fine similarly this is another example of when good doesn't mean more is better um because for example there is EV actually evidence showing up to 15 grams will harm the immune response and so you don't just want to be like man I'm super sore I'm training harder I'm just going to go to 10 grams a day or more and more more you're actually causing yourself more of a problem um so antioxidants anti-inflammatories are fine again Omega-3s in that dosage um are a decent thing um you can also do something like 500 milligrams of curcumin three times a day that's going to be enough uh to keep you in a decent spot um there are some other things that you could look up um maybe some potential benefit for ginger um and bellia and some things like that for inflammation but under unless we're in like very specific circumstances where we have like an injury we're probably not going to those you know areas I just wanted to highlight one thing that came up in a previous episode some not all people but some including myself are very sensitive to kirkum Y it has a very potent effect in reducing DHT dehydrotestosterone and leads to all sorts of uh clamping of testosterone Associated positive things so um I have experienced that myself I've had people write to me and say I don't understand I started taking the supplement um Kirin is supposed to be a great anti-inflammatory it flatlined my libido it took away my drive um and kind of wondering what's going on there those people are very likely to be very DHT sensitive circumin while it's a potent anti-inflammatory can also potently reduce DHD but some people tolerate it quite well and are hearing this and probably think that's ridiculous well it's U certainly substantiated by the biochemical Pathways that kiriman Taps into in the known roles of DHT on libido aggression power output Etc and mood so just be wary that um a there's no way to predict this one simply has to figure it out empirically meaning you have to try and see if you like it or don't um the good news is is those um negative effects on DHD seem to reverse pretty quickly after um ceasing to take uh circumin so just a mention of something that came up in a previous episode but in case people didn't hear that on that segment um just wanted to highlight those those facts further evid do I I strongly discourage strongly discourage taking anything in the anti-inflammatory antioxidant realm unless you actually have a reason to do so um if you're waking up and you're like maybe I'm inflamed that's probably not a good approach let's have a reason to do so step two is actually what we call proliferation and that's kind of like the cleanup crew that's when you're going to be going in there and cleaning out dead cells and debris and misfolded proteins and things like that at this stage a fantastic evidence based supplement uh is glutamine glutamine 20 gram a day we typically honestly split it up into two dosage 10 grams morning 10 grams night it's a conditional amuno acid which means you can make it uh your body can make enough of it at times and other times you may want to support it uh generally those conditional times are things like burn victims um high stress situations or injury things like that so um there isn't also like a ton of downside to glutamine because it can go through uh transamination which means your body can take it and say like we don't need anything here for our Muscle Recovery let's make it into something else and use it um for whatever else is needing so it's kind of another one of these like lowrisk uh products it's hon why you see it in a lot of recovery products um if you're ever wondering like what the heck is that in there I don't need amino acids and you're thinking it's like for protein synthesis it's really not it's because of this it is uh beneficial to this proliferation process I've been taking glutamine for years um I tend to take it in higher dosages several times throughout the day if I'm ever feeling particularly run down y I know they're decent data not great but decent data on the role of glutamine for leaky gut totally for offs saying leaky gut that's getting a little bit into the realm of uh like not super well substantiated but in the in the peer-reviewed literature but some a lot of anec data and um and certainly some peer-reviewed work but not a ton and then there is also um grown interest in the idea that glutamine because it can trigger activation of the neurons in the gut that signal to the dopamine pathway in the brain that it can be used to offset sugar Cravings this is kind of an interesting new uh and emerging theme which makes sense given the biology of the neurons in the gut that respond to uh specific amino acids including glutamine essential fatty acids and sugar and because they respond to any uh and all three of those um any one or combination of those I should say um to trigger this dopamine response some people have taken to uh a teaspoon or so of glut of glutamine in some water or other drink couple times throughout the day as a way to reduce their sugar Cravings because what's essentially doing is it's tricking the pathway into into activation of those neurons through an alternate uh ligan receptor interaction right also another interesting point there are very I'm trying to think right now at the top of my head I can't think of a time and I've used glutamine a lot I can't think of a time where I've ever heard anybody come back with any side effect reports I think if you take enough of it you can get some gastric distress but of course you take enough of any powdered substance uh mix in water you're going to get a a gastric distress response and I what I've noticed about gastric distress with things like uh creatine glutamine and even protein powders for that matter I use a high quality uh whey protein powder routinely um is that if you build up to it over the course of a few days then can get away with using much higher dosages without any issue yeah yeah um beta alanine is the same thing by the way we sort of talked about that earlier if uh you've ever tried that and you're like oh my gosh like I feel like I've just rolled around in grass and my skin is itching everywhere it's that ants under the skin sensation yeah all that stuff um you can just take a little bit of a lower dosage and be fine for the most part and then you will build up a tolerance to that pretty quickly so you can up that dosage along the way so what we will often times do there is start at a dosage that's pretty minimal like 2 grams um and then every week or so you can go up another gram until you get to whatever final point you want to be five six grams day you know whatever um so that's another way you can sort of mitigate that problem so the third step in this recovery process um after inflammation proliferation we're now into Remodeling and this is when you're actually you know quote unquote growing back bigger and stronger um this is where the majority of the repair is actually taking plays and at this point we're basically playing a micronutrient and macronutrient game right by that I mean talked about basic macronutrients um one thing to pay attention to often times if people are hurt whether they had an injury or they've had uh just they're super sore and they are concerned about eating excess calories they tend to want to eat less food during this process because they're like I'm not working out so much so I'm going to eat less calories one of the things that you have to pay attention to is injury can increase basal metabolic rate by up to 10% wow so what you want to do in general is just take your calories up about 10% at least that's what I recommend um if that is an extended period of time then yes you may put on a slight amount of body fat or something but if that also means you come back some percentage faster then it's worth the exchange um so we recommend that in terms of your carbohydrate or fat split I'm not super worried about it my general recommendation is just don't make any major changes relative to what you were doing right keep yourself uh pretty much in in the same spot in terms of protein this is the big one you want to make sure you were absolutely at 1 G per pound of body weight because we need those amino acids to come in and start helping um with recovery one gram uh of protein per pound of body weight or more or one gram or more yeah there's going to be very little downside to to having more um remember protein and carbohydrates both stimulate insulin and remember insulin is anabolic and so we're trying to drive this process of recovery um that's why you want both so you wouldn't want to skimp on carbohydrates in this phase nor would you want to skimp on protein because you need the activation the drive into the tissue as well as the structure going back to one of our earlier conversations and at this point in the week I honestly can't remember at all what episode we covered this in but I gave an analogy about um use making a campfire and using fat and carbohydrates is the wood and the log and the protein wory the metal structure so you need that Supply if you're trying to B if you've cleared out in the previous step um damaged proteins and you need to make new ones to recover that process you have to have the raw Supply and material so you wouldn't want to avoid either one of those things um there's actually some indirect inflamation management that comes from fatty acids which you actually sort of alluded to earlier um I don't think you need to necessarily go crazy you don't need to change your fat intake that much just don't drop it you know depending on where you're at so if you're a little bit of a higher carb lower fat person great great if you're moderate great if you're the indirect if you're higher fat lower carb person awesome just don't make an extreme change and don't and try to not be on the extremes of either one of those ratios but the only specific number to pay attention to again is that protein number and if you go a little bit high or even a lot high it's totally fine just don't go low so that's the the macronutrient portion of remodeling in terms of micronutrients to be honest you just get your bases covered uh this is when a basic multivitamin uh is effective what you're really trying to look at here are vitamin A and zinc they actually have independent mechanisms that are helpful here but those are typically covered in most multivitamins so we generally just give people a multivitamin U magnesium is actually has some some benefits here something like 6 milligrams per kilogram of body weight is the dosage you're looking for there um magnesium citrate is probably has the most evidence uh in terms of this respect but it doesn't mean I actually have no reason to think you couldn't use glycinate or if you're using another form for Sleep um that probably fine I don't know that for sure but I I can't think of a reason why the other forms of magnesium would all of a sudden not work so you could probably choose whichever form you like um OB citrate has probably the most research in this aspect the only other things you would probably consider here uh three things um calcium might be on your list particularly if you're trying to if you're concerned with some sort of bone injury that we've sort of got gone past like recovery and we're actually like into injury um so you'll see that in recovery products occasionally and that's why uh and then the last two ones of course are vitamin D and that's pretty well researched uh and then the last one is actually uh something that can help you if you're at this stage and you still are dealing with a lot of soreness or not and that is tart cherry juice that's actually effective for both THS muscle injury muscle soreness and actually has another benefit of potentially aiding with sleep so not a bad one to turn to as well 's a number of companies that make these things um yeah and then there's actually more ongoing research that I know of on those areas but uh promising literature will'll say not often but every once in a while on this podcast I will solicit social media for questions from the audience where I should say the audience to be and then ask some of those questions on the fly during the podcast I did this with Dr Lex Friedman I'm going to do it with you your goal is to answer each of these questions certainly not all of them thousands of them within the last couple of hours to answer each of these questions in three or four sentences I certainly won't be counting the number of sentences that you speak so just know that if you want to go over a little bit that's fine but feel free to refer to your Instagram site at a future time where you might go more in depth or to refer to a study or um if you like you can also say pass if you don't think that you can answer the question um assistant ly enough for this format and here the goal is not to put you on the spot um the goal is simply to allow the audience to ask some questions directly and I I confess I'm looking at these for the first time uh so I'll try and be quick with my with my reading um some of these we may have touched on in previous episodes or in this episode even in which case you can just kind of cue us to the reminder this is not directly related to supplementation but it is related to nutrition and I don't think we touched on this directly can we do intermittent fasting AKA time restricted feeding with keto and still gain muscle mass TBD I am am quite clear such study does not exist so I don't know I think I've alluded to to before that we did run an intermittent fasting 168 hypertrophy study there was no keto arm uh the results of that study by the time this comes out will probably be ready though I'm not sure so I can't comment I not have the data but regarding whether or not if you did that with keto or not I can't comment scientifically do you ever prescribe the use of Gaba supplements well I can't prescribe anything to to make sure we're clear but you're Professor you can profess I can profess uh we generally don't spend too much time on Gaba rarely is it okay to weight train fasted than not break the fast and eat for three or four hours after training so in other words y train fasted I do this but then also not eat immediately following training and wait another three to four hours after training once we have our results from our intermittent fasting study back we will we will have a better answer here my general recommendation as it stands now though is as long as your total protein intake is sufficient um you should be in a decent Spot Great a lot of questions about fasting and training just to to note that um can you train high performance fasted and how long before um you need to refuel the body yeah you can certainly do that I know of actually many athletes uh some athletes that will do that though the vast majority will not uh as it gets higher and higher in intensity and or duration it gets more challenging but it really does come down to what you did the day before as well so if you ate sufficient calories the day before uh didn't train and your glycogen stores are topped off you have a fighting chance now the duration part of that equation is really kind of dependent upon you um so are you really talking 30 45 minutes 60 Minutes you're probably fine whether you're out past that in several hours you may not be and then the only other comment I would make is there is keep in mind whenever you think about fasting and any other let's say against the textbook you know quote unquote St style you really really need to be careful and thinking the difference between can I do it and is it optimal so I have absolutely no reason to think fasting like that would improve improve performance I only work for the most part with people who are trying to perform at the highest level possible so I can't think of a scenario in which I would go too fasting to try to enhance performance so whether or not you can maintain some level of performance probably um will it provide any benefit I struggle to find scenarios in which that would actually make you perform better how do different forms of carbohydrates impact performance and then right below it another question about carbohydrates which is does carbohydrate cycling work so these are two uh questions from people that I think don't know one another but a lot of carbo questions about carbohydrates and performance which we've touched on anything else that you want to add to that conversation I don't think I really maybe you might want to think about carb loading uh SL carb cycling so carbohydrate loading does help uh however a misconception there is it's just you know a big bowl of pasta the night before that can help top off storages but really optimal carbohydrate loading prior to a long duration endurance performance is probably best over the course of three or four days so you want to gradually increase carbohydrate intake for multiple days rather than just have one big bowl of pasta Branch chain amino acids and essential amino acid supplementation yay nay or as I would say meh uh meh usually if your total protein intake is fine then you don't really have a need for them um if you're for whatever any number of valid reasons total protein is not then going to an essential amino acid would be my first step rather than a BCA um now admittedly we actually do use essential amino acids somewhat regularly because it's it's also sort of like a there's no real harm other than if you're price conscious and you're sort of like I'm wasting money that's fine the people I work with generally again that's not a few dollars for to maximize recoveries is not that big so we will sometimes use that uh premit or post training in in some circumstances uh total protein would be high quality way something like that um if you can't use whey for whatever reason there are plenty of high quality vegan proteins you could use if you want to top all that off though and add some essential amino acids it wouldn't hurt anything and may potentially help slightly so you choose um based on that algorithm ah I was hoping somebody would ask this we touched on it a little bit it's a a little bit of a loaded question the way they phrased it so um at risk of leading the witness does the mythical anabolic window really exist and I'm just laughing because the way they pose the question they're already telling us what their stance is um making it more effective as to create hypertrophy uh to eat within a certain time frame after working out I'm going to assume that this person genuinely wants to know whether or not the anabolic window really exists or not um because they refer to it as mythical I'm going to assume that they're um suspicious but what's the deal is the anabolic window a real thing the post exercise anabolic window is extremely real so what this is uh you can see more detail in a number of videos on my YouTube page I believe it is the idea that you need to must uh consume some sort of nutrients specifically usually protein uh in some time domain 30 or 60 Minutes post exercise in order to maximize growth so is that window real yes are you hyper sensitized to nutrients in that time frame yes is it very important that you rehydrate uh replenish muscle glycogen and rebuild tissue quickly after exercise to maximize recovery absolutely it's not real though in the sense that you that you have to have it within 30 minutes um in the case of protein as we talked about a second ago your total protein intake throughout the day is more important um timing though for things like carbohydrate especially if you're training multiple times a day it is very real so it is a very real thing it's just you may or may not actually care about it it may not be important for your context garlic seems like an appropriate question what if any functional roles does garlic have in performance Garlic's actually really cool there's a number of things you can dive into that are outside of my three to four sentences considering them at like two and a half probably already um you're not going to find strong human data on garlic extract however there is a little bit uh suggesting it can actually enhance hands recovery from injury or potentially tissue damage so you got to kind of be careful though because in order to understand what's happening you have to differentiate between innate and adaptive recovery processes and when we say things like immunity realiz defense that's not one thing that's just like a very colloquial term for a number of things again it's a verb like it's a noun right the immune system but it immunity is a bunch of processes or processes if you're about to correct my speech I'll correct your right back um not yours Andy but the listeners process tomato tomato it's a verb immunity is a verb this is my problem with immune boosters same issue right you're like whoa what are you boosting specifically because in fact if you're boosting the wrong part of immunity during the wrong phase of recovery with garlic you may be actually hurting uh the the process because you were theoretically could be trying to downregulate that ption that you can upregulate a next portion that's the faster way to say it if you will so um we actually you may see more data come out that says the garlic extracts now overrated I don't know I actually don't even know yet we just don't have enough human data on it but yeah there's some stuff there if you want to look hard enough I'm gonna ask this question for myself because I'm curious to know the answer selfish tart cherry extract uh pretty effective actually uh for two things uh potentially ating and sleep getting to sleep as well as muscle soreness that's the bulk of the research is in muscle soreness and um seems to be a moderate effect there I think for people that might be interested in dosages of things like tart cherry extract garlic Etc um obviously Dr Andy galpin's Instagram and Twitter are great places to ask questions like that and to find qu answers to questions like that as well as examine.com is a terrific website um they actually recently overhauled their entire website so they have this human effect Matrix that shows the um the effects and the the strength of different effects in human studies of many many different compounds um relating to everything to you know Hormone Health in men and women sports performance cognitive performance it doesn't cover everything but it certainly covers a lot with links to studies there's a lot that's available at completely zero cost by joining examine.com um you can access some addition features and this is by the way not a paid endorsement from examine.com I'm simply a longtime user of examine.com myself um and so I just want cue people to it and again many of the resources there are available completely free of cost It's a Wonderful site um so for dosages of garlic tart cherry extract and things of that sort whether or not you're getting it from food or you're getting it from extract uh powders rather um all of that information is is pretty nicely laid out there so unless you have something to add to that I was just going to um cue people to that resource no I've been using that since the first day that website was launched I I was made aware that it was coming I've been fortunate to know those guys for a while so yeah I've used it I've used it in all my classes I use it I don't even know probably weekly at this point uh another NE nice feature that's actually on there is they have a a series of like they'll do some topical reviews basically so they'll write a big paper out on muscle damage or blood pressure or testosterone en or um hormone uh you menstrual cycle and and yeah PCOS I think they do one on and all kinds of stuff so you can search by topic uh like you know energy or recovery or whatever or you can search by you know black human seed extractor like whatever number of things you want to do and they'll also tell you if there's any interactions to pay attention to so it's really really nice so be careful if you're taking a and b or whatever so yeah it's wonderful wonderful yeah they've done a marvelous job so thank you examine.com keep keep up the amazing work well we've come close to the end of this episode and that means that we are close to the end of this series where you have so graciously joined us for six full episodes of The hubman Lab podcast to educate us on all things Fitness episode one you reviewed and educated us on assessing our level of Fitness in fact I learned so many ways of assessing Fitness that I had not thought about and also assessing my recovery capacity for instance one thing that I'm definitely going to implement from that episode is a routine broad jump test and uh an inhome high jump jump and touch test if people don't know what I'm referring to that's all contained in that episode it's timestamped these are very straightforward zeroc cost ways to assess one's level of Fitness um there are few others that require a bare minimum of Technology like taking your pulse rate in very specific ways at specific time also some timing of Mile runs and some other things related to strength and hypertrophy and on and on really it's a it's a buffet of options that we can select from and I already know the four or five that I started implementing this week I've recognized how I'm pretty good in a couple of areas I'm doing maybe maybe better than pretty well in one area but that I'm doing abysmally poorly in a few areas that um I just wasn't aware of and so I've already started um taking on ways to uh adjust that over time and I I'll keep people posted so that first episode was absolutely incredible and just provides so much actionable knowledge and the rationale behind it the second episode you educated us about strength speed and hypertrophy training and there too an immense amount of incredible knowledge we got way down into the details you explained sets reps the rationale for sets reps rest Cadence number of workouts per week I'm definitely going to take away my need to do some speed Based training and some power-based training normally I think in terms of strength or hypertrophy and I'm relieved to learn that a lot of the speed and power-based training it it's low intensity enough that it can be done fairly often and incorporated into my program which already touches on strength and hypertrophy and indeed some endurance work as well so amazing tips that you provided there I'm certainly going to implement the 3 to five program that you describ um 3 to five exercises done for 3 to five repetitions 3 to 5 minutes between sets uh you're doing this three to five times per week and so on and so forth all the details again timestamped um in the strength and high pervy uh episode show note so just incredible we even use that to set up PR with you this week that's right I did PR this week thanks thanks to your input and following that program and um I'm really grateful for that it it does feel good to break through a barrier um and I intend to break through more barriers but not just with strengthen hypertrophy because episode 3 you taught us all about endurance the four different forms of endurance how to train for each of those different forms the value of doing even very brief 20 second Sprints or bouts of jumping jacks throughout the day which to some people might just sound like a you know like a little hack or gimick but no these are actually tapping into fuel systems and modes of neuromuscular interactions that great greatly Aid other forms of endurance like long duration endurance I would love to return to my um High School mile time I won't reveal what that is because this is not really about me but I plan to start doing um if not mile repeats then doing some mile mile runs and testing there once a week you laid out a beautiful program for how to do that and then in the next episode you wowed us again with a description of the science and the tools and this right down to the details but all laid out very cleanly and clearly as to how to design an optimal fitness program what are the things that really represent an optimal program what questions does one have to answer before designing a program what are some of the barriers in the way this concept of Defenders as things that prevent you from reaching your goals and one of the key things I have it right here in front of me um that I took away from that episode is was this quadrant um approach of really thinking about and figuring out how much one intends to devote to work career calling let's make that one bin um relationships another bin Fitness in the other bin and Recovery in the other bin and um here we'll tip our hat to our our good friend Kenny Kane um for um mentioning that overall um scheme for doing things it's been immensely useful and I've actually charted it out and thought about and drawn out which Different Things fall into each of these categories you might think it's obvious okay relationships but that includes a lot of different things and there's crossover between these bins um in terms of how you can combine enhancing relationships with Fitness work recovery and so on so that episode is just again a treasure Trove of knowledge and then in the next episode you you educated us on recovery in all its forms in the very short term in within the workout immediately after the workout and from workout to workout ways to really accelerate recovery assess recovery and as you pointed out for people like me who always assume that we don't recover very well and that some sort of character trait or nervous system thing or genetic to really think about how my training is impacting my level of recovery and in doing so is revealed to me that I have far more capacity than I thought I had and already this week I've managed to train more often doing more work and I feel better than ever um and that's also despite the fact that we've we spent a fair amount of time in these chairs across from one another it's a kind way to say it well it's it's been it's been a pleasure and then in today's episode you explained nutrition and supplementation as it relates to Performance and of course that touches into recovery but also optimal mental States for training how to approach one's training and how to extract the most from training through quality nutrition right so what to eat and when which carbohydrates protein amounts Windows of opportunity um Windows you absolutely don't want to miss and then some that are a bit more flexible and then we went deep into the weeds of magnesium garlic tart cherry extract Alpha GPC we touched on neurotransmitter related systems hormone related systems we went deep into a discussion about sleep because of course sleep is the foundation for recovery and performance of all kinds emotional mental and physical recovery and performance and in taking us through this enormous Arc of a journey through Fitness I think it's fair to say that you've given us your knowledge contained in your head I was telling someone uh just the other day that one of the things that I always lamented in science is that I would encounter these incredible professors and scientists and in other domains of life too and you just wish there was some way to download their brain because they had so much knowledge inside them and um I'm looking for a USB or USBC uh port on you and I don't see one yet but what you've effectively done for us across these six episodes is to download the actionable knowledge and you know it's wonderful the information you've provided is clear it's super interesting it's highly highly actionable and in many cases it's counterintuitive and surprising but once one understands the logic behind it as you've provided for us also then it all makes sense in a way that's extremely satisfying and extremely motivating so it's certainly motivating me to change the way that I train in a number of ways and I promise that I'll report back to our audience and to you as to what my results are but really as we both agree this is not about me this is not about you this is really about the people listening and so for those of you listening I uh hope you can appreciate what an Incredible Gift it is to have somebody of Dr Annie galpin's experience and um drive and uh scholarly background who also works with athletes in Everyday People just to splay out all this knowledge for us systematically over six episodes Dr Andy Galpin thank you ever so much I appreciate that far too kind of uh words to me there if you've been following along through this entire Journey as you called it you know I like first principles thinking and I like lists so I'm going to get you with one more list and I got five things on this final list get your pen and pad out please uh number one I want to really emphasize science itself is a verb which means it's ongoing and changing I I did my best over the course of these many many many hours to um provide my inter a of the science uh to provide my practical knowledge and things that I use uh but that's fallible uh science changes there are many many things in my career that I was very sure the that the evidence was clear on and then it changed so as you move forward do not think of any of the recommendations I gave you whether they were about supplement dosages and timing uh rep ranges or breathing tactics anything in between just use them as guidelines so number one science is a verb number two I really want to thank the audience this has been an extremely long haul as some of you have somehow I'm sure which I'm not sure how but some of you have probably made it through this entire journey and listen to all six episodes and you should probably get some sort of free hubman lab shirt or something or a plaque or I don't know how about a Galpin plaque ah gin plaque how about a internet high five um and even if you just dropped in for a few of the episodes uh you know I I appreciate you taking the time there's a lot of things you could be doing with your time and uh to make to spend those resources on my words is uh touching number three uh I want to actually thank you of course Andrew and the whole team and the crew up here for three things number one um I think it's incredibly important that you have gone out of your way to give other people credit for their work you go out of your way on your large platforms of social media to tag people to give scientists credit for their work and most people do not do that uh and that's something you don't have to do and I think that is a culture you know I know why you do you come from science that's just what you do you give people credit for their work but you go out of your way to do that and so I want to thank you for that the next one is many people who have outlets and platforms will try to fill those with people who are going to grow their platforms doesn't mean these people are wrong or bad but I think what's extremely special about what you've created here is again you have gone out of your way to bring on the direct source of information um I can't even imagine how many of your podcasts guests have never been on a podcast before or been on a very short number of them and you've made an extremely large platform doing nothing but talking about super deep dork science directly from the scientists themselves U and to create a community like that it's um I'm so happy that science is is made it here and you've shown the world um people aren't stupid people want detail and people want science and you've given it to them um and the last one of course let's see if I can get through this is uh thank you for what you've done for me in my career I I understand there could have been any number of people in this chair to put me on your your platform once was um incredibly gracious but to do it for 600 hours or whatever we did in this series is uh um I can't thank you enough for that opportunity so I hope I lived up to it and I had a tremendous time and and thank you for being such a gracious host well you more than exceeded uh expectations you are absolutely the person to be in this chair talking about these topics with me and for the world and once again I just want to say thank you as a colleague as a public educator as an exercise scientist and as a friend if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel Channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for us or comments or suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover or guests you'd like me to include on the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube we do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and during today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast I'd also like to inform you about the hubman Lab podcast free newsletter it's called the neural network newsletter and each month the neural network newsletter is sent out and it contains summaries of podcast episodes specific protocols discussed on the hubman Lab podcast all in Fairly concise format and all completely zero cost you can sign up for the neural network newsletter by going to hubman lab.com go to the menu and click on newsletter you provide us your email we do not share it with anybody and as I mentioned before it's completely zero cost by going to hubman lab.com you can also go into the menu tab and go to newsletter and see some example newsletters from months past thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion about fitness exercise and performance with Dr Andy Galpin and as always thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 223 ---
Video ID: x4m_PdFbu-s
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x4m_PdFbu-s
Title: How to Breathe Correctly for Optimal Health, Mood, Learning & Performance | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-02-20 13:00:46 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I explain the biology of breathing (respiration), how it delivers oxygen and carbon dioxide to the cells and tissues of the body and how is best to breathe—nose versus mouth, fast versus slow, deliberately versus reflexively, etc., depending on your health and performance needs.  I discuss the positive benefits of breathing properly for mood, to reduce psychological and physiological stress, to halt sleep apnea, and improve facial aesthetics and immune system function. I also compare what is known about the effects and effectiveness of different breathing techniques, including physiological sighs, box breathing and cyclic hyperventilation, “Wim Hof Method,” Prānāyāma yogic breathing and more. I also describe how to breath to optimize learning, memory and reaction time and I explain breathing at high altitudes, why “overbreathing” is bad, and how to breathe specifically to relieve cramps and hiccups. Breathwork practices are zero-cost and require minimal time yet provide a unique and powerful avenue to improve overall quality of life that is grounded in clear physiology. Anyone interesting in improving their mental and physical health or performance in any endeavor ought to benefit from the information and tools in this episode.

#HubermanLab #Breathing #Science

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
HVMN: https://hvmn.com/huberman
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/pages/huberman
WHOOP: https://join.whoop.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Concentration of carbon dioxide, interstitial pH and synaptic transmission in hippocampal formation of the rat: https://bit.ly/3k3BG3y
Effects of voluntary hyperventilation on cortical sensory responses Electroencephalographic and magnetoencephalographic studies: https://bit.ly/3k9rkyS
Brief structured respiration practices enhance mood and reduce physiological arousal: https://bit.ly/3KgN5rj
Breathing Rhythm and Pattern and Their Influence on Emotion: https://bit.ly/3XRxsda
Nasal Respiration Entrains Human Limbic Oscillations and Modulates Cognitive Function: https://bit.ly/3EgX1gr
Effect of breathwork on stress and mental health: A meta-analysis of randomised-controlled trials: https://go.nature.com/3XMKYi7

Books
Jaws: The Story of a Hidden Epidemic: https://amzn.to/2UZoudJ

Timestamps
00:00:00 Breathing
00:05:41 Sponsors: HVMN, Thesis, WHOOP
00:09:36 Respiration, Oxygen & Carbon Dioxide
00:18:18 Breathing Mechanics
00:30:08 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:31:23 Chemistry of Breathing, Hyperventilation
00:40:35 High Altitudes, Oxygen & Breathing
00:47:16 Tool: Sleep Apnea, Nasal Breathing
00:51:50 Brain Centers & Breathing Rhythm
00:57:23 Brain, Hyperventilation & “Over-breathing”
01:03:53 What is Healthy Breathing?
01:08:26 InsideTracker
01:09:44 Tool: Train Healthy Breathing, Carbon Dioxide Tolerance Test & Box Breathing
01:22:39 Tool: Breathwork & Stress Reduction; Cyclic Sighing
01:33:56 Tool: Physiological Sighing & Exercise Side Cramp
01:39:16 Breathing & Heart Rate Variability
01:46:21 Tool: How to Stop Hiccups
01:51:17 Tool: Stress Management & Cyclic Hyperventilation, “Wim Hof Method”
01:57:11 Deliberate Cold Exposure & Breathing
01:59:54 Tool: Inhales & Learning; Exhales & Movement
02:09:15 Mouth vs. Nasal Breathing, Aesthetics
02:16:19 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Sponsors, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are discussing breathing. Now, breathing is something that we are all familiar with because, frankly, we are all doing it right now. And we do it during our waking states and while we are asleep. And most of us have probably heard that breathing is essential to life. We hear that we can survive without food for some period of time, maybe even up to a month or more, that we can't survive that long without water, but we could survive a few days without water, depending on how well hydrated we are when we go into that water deprivation and the heat of the environment we happen to be in, but that we cannot survive without breathing for more than a few minutes and that if we cease to breathe, that our brain and our bodily tissues will die. And, in fact, that is true. However, despite everybody's knowledge that breathing is essential to life, I don't think that most people realize just how important how we breathe is to our quality of life. And that includes our mental health, our physical health, and what we call performance, that is, our ability to tap into skills, either physical or cognitive, in ways that we would not be able to otherwise if we are not breathing correctly. So today, we are going to talk about what it is to breathe correctly, both at rest, during sleep, in order to reduce our levels of stress, in order to wake up or to become more alert deliberately, and many, many other things, including how to stop hiccuping. This is one of the most searched for topics on the internet. Today, I will teach you the one method that is actually linked to science. No, it does not involve drinking a glass of water backwards from the opposite side of the cup or holding your breath in any kind of esoteric way. It actually relates to the neural mechanisms, that is, the brain to body connections that cause the hiccup. Hiccup is a spasm of that neural circuit, and I'll teach you how to turn off that neural circuit in one try. And that's not a technique I developed. It's a technique that's actually been known about for several centuries. And we now know the underlying mechanism. So today's discussion will give to you many tools that you can apply. All of these tools are, of course, behavioral tools. They're completely zero cost. And in telling you how those tools work, you'll learn a lot about how the breathing, a.k.a. the respiratory, system, works and how it interfaces with the other organs and tissues of the body, in particular the brain. In fact, one of the most important things to understand about breathing right here at the outset is that breathing is unique among brain and bodily functions in that it lies at the interface between our conscious and our subconscious behavior. And it represents a bridge literally in the brain between the conscious and the subconscious. What do I mean by that? Well, breathing does not require that we pay attention to our breathing or that we are even aware that we are breathing. It will just carry on in the background either normally or abnormally, and I'll teach you what normal and abnormal breathing is in a little bit. However, breathing is unique among brain and bodily functions in that at any moment, we can consciously take control of how we breathe. This is an absolutely spectacular and highly unusual feature of brain function. For instance, your digestion is carrying on in the background right now whether or not you've had food recently or not. But you can't simply control your digestion by thinking about it in a particular way. In fact, most people can't even control their thinking by trying to control their thinking. That actually takes some practice. It can be done-- a topic for a future episode. However, breathing is unique. Breathing will carry on involuntarily, subconsciously in the background, as I said before. But if, at any moment, you want to hold your breath or inhale more deeply or vigorously or exhale longer than you inhale, you can do that. Very few, if any, other neural circuits in your brain and body allow that level of control. And it turns out that level of control is not an accident. It has been hypothesized that by controlling breathing, the brain is actually attempting to control its own state of mind. Now, the way this was originally stated in a scientific research paper was a little bit different. It was a little bit physiological. The statement was, "The brain, by regulating breathing, controls its own excitability." Excitability in the context of neurobiology is how able the brain is to take in new information or not, how able the brain is or not to turn itself off to go to sleep and to regulate its own levels of anxiety, focus, et cetera. If that seems a little bit abstract, I'll make it simple for you. By changing your pattern of breathing, you can very quickly change what your brain is capable of doing. In fact, a little bit later, I'll tell you that while you inhale, you are far better at learning and remembering information than during an exhale. And it is a very significant difference. Does that mean you should only inhale and not exhale? No, of course not. I'll teach you how to breathe for the sake of learning and memory as well as for physical performance and a number of other things. So hopefully I've been able to highlight for you the importance of breathing not just for life, because, yes, breathing is essential for life, but that the subtleties of how we breathe, the duration and intensity of our inhales and our exhales, how long we hold our breath between inhales and exhales, very critically defines our state of mind and our state of body, what we are able to do and what we are not able to do. And the great news is we can control our breathing and, in doing so, control our mental health, physical health, and performance. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is HVMN. HVMN, which is a supplement that increases ketones, can be used in the context of a ketogenic diet. However, many people, including myself, find that increasing blood ketones by using a supplement such as HVMN can greatly improve cognitive ability and physical output for mental work and for exercise even when not on a ketogenic diet. There's a lot of research supporting the fact that even if you are consuming carbohydrates and you are not in ketosis, that is, you are not following a ketogenic diet, consuming supplements that can increase blood ketones can allow you to think more clearly for cognitive work, and physical work, for that matter, perform at greater output for things like resistance training and endurance exercise. And, indeed, that's what I've found. So I use it largely for preparing for podcasts or other aspects of my scientific work and sometimes prior to workouts, especially if I'm working out having not consumed any food prior. I find that I have a lot more energy. It also has the property of suppressing hunger. If you'd like to try Ketone-IQ, you can go to HVMN.com/Huberman to save 20%. Again, that's HVMN.com/Huberman to save 20% off your order of Ketone-IQ. Today's episode is also brought to us by Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics. And as many of you have probably heard me say before, I am not a fan of the word nootropics because nootropics means smart drugs. And, frankly, the brain doesn't work that way. The brain has neural circuits for focus. It also has neural circuits for creativity and neural circuits for task switching and for imagination and for memory. There is no such thing as a neural circuit for being smart. And therefore, the word nootropics doesn't really apply to anything specific neurobiologically speaking. Thesis understands this and therefore has designed custom nootropics that are tailored to your unique needs. I've been using Thesis for over a year now, and their nootropic formulas have been a game changer for me, in particular in the realm of cognitive work. My go-to formula for when I'm doing any kind of cognitive work is their Clarity formula. That's the one I've been using most often lately. If you'd like to try Thesis customized nootropics, you can go online to TakeThesis.com/Huberman. You'll take a brief three-minute quiz. And Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. Again, that's TakeThesis.com/Huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout for 10% off your first box. Today's episode is also brought to us by WHOOP. WHOOP is a fitness wearable device that tracks your daily activity and your sleep but goes beyond that by providing real-time feedback on how to adjust your training and sleep schedule to perform better. I've been working with WHOOP on their scientific advisory council to help WHOOP evolve their mission to improve the way that people are sleeping and thereby to improve their levels of focus, mood, and alertness and performance in all endeavors during the day. As a WHOOP user, I've experienced the health benefits, the focus benefits, essentially all of the major benefits that come with getting an excellent night's sleep on a consistent basis. I've also learned from using my WHOOP how certain daily activities, like the timing of exercise, caffeine, and a number of other things, impact the depth, quality, and duration of my sleep. WHOOP is one of those tools that can really help guide you and provide you with personalized data, recommendations, and coaching around your body and your overall health. So it's not just about tracking sleep. It's about tracking all aspects of your activity and health and, of course, including sleep. If you're interested in trying WHOOP, you can go to Join.WHOOP.com/Huberman today and get your first month free. Let's talk about breathing. And, of course, we breathe in order to bring oxygen into the body. But we also breathe to remove certain things from our body, in particular carbon dioxide. So the main players in today's discussion are going to be oxygen and carbon dioxide. Now, a common misconception is that oxygen is good and carbon dioxide is bad. That's simply not the case. Let's just take a step back from that statement, and let's think about this. When we breathe in, we are largely breathing in air in order to bring oxygen into our body. And we can just stop right there and say, why do we breathe at all? Why can't we just get oxygen from the world around us? Well, it's because oxygen can't diffuse through our skin into the deeper cells of our body. Other single cell and very simple organisms can actually bring oxygen into their system without the need to breathe. But we have to breathe in order to bring oxygen to the cells that reside deep in our body. In particular, our brain cells, which are the most metabolically active cells in our body, require a lot of oxygen. And those brain cells are sitting, of course, in the brain, which is encased in the cranial vault, the skull. And so oxygen can't simply pass to those cells. So we need to have a system that will deliver oxygen to those cells. We also need a system, which turns out to be the breathing or respiratory system, that can offload or remove the gas that we call carbon dioxide, not because carbon dioxide is bad but because too much of it in our system is not good. In fact, much of today's discussion will also center around the common misconception that carbon dioxide is something that we want to get rid of. You don't want to get rid of too much carbon dioxide or else you can't actually get oxygen to the cells and tissues of your body in an efficient way. So you need oxygen and you need carbon dioxide in your body. You also need to be able to offload or remove carbon dioxide and bring in oxygen in the correct ratios so that you can perform the kind of mental functions and physical functions that you want to. So if we just dial out even further, we say, what are the key components of breathing? What are the elements within the body that allow us to bring oxygen to the tissues and cells as is required and remove carbon dioxide from the body as is required and yet keep enough carbon dioxide around in order to allow oxygen to do its thing? Well, that breathing or respiratory apparatus has two major components, and I'm going to just briefly describe those. And as I do this, I really want to highlight the fact that any time you're thinking about biology and physiology in particular, whether or not it's about the brain or the liver or the gut microbiome, it's useful to categorize things either as mechanical mechanisms or chemical mechanisms. What do I mean by that? Well, let's just take the analogy of hunger. There are mechanical mechanisms that tell us when we should eat. For instance, you have neurons, nerve cells in your gut that signal how stretched or nonstretched the walls of your stomach are, how full or how empty your gut is, and send that information to the brain to make you feel to some extent hungry or not hungry. In general, when our stomach is very full and especially if it's very distended, even with liquid, it suppresses our hunger. Whereas when our stomach is devoid of that mechanical pressure, especially for a number of hours, it tends to trigger hunger by signaling via neurons to the brain. In addition, there are chemical signals that go from the gut to the brain. For instance, we have neurons in our gut that can detect the presence of amino acids from proteins that we eat, fatty acids from the foods that we eat, the lipids, and sugars, different forms of carbohydrate. The neurons in our gut are paying attention to or respond to how much amino acid, fatty acid, and carbohydrate is in our gut and sends signals to the brain to either stimulate or suppress hunger. So those are chemical signals that are being passed from gut to brain, and they work in parallel with the mechanical signals. And this idea of "in parallel with," again, is a very common theme in biology, especially neuroscience. The term parallel pathways refers to the fact that any time there's a critical bodily function, it's very unlikely that just one type of information, like just mechanical information, is going to be used. / Almost always, it's going to be mechanical and chemical information. I could pick a number of other examples. For instance, if you want to avoid damaging your skin or other tissues of your body, which is essential to life, well, then you have mechanical information about, for instance, whether or not something is pinching or ready to pierce your skin. That's mechanical information. It's sent via specific neurons up to the brain to signal a retraction reflex if you move your limb away from wherever that intense pressure is coming. You also have chemical sensing in your skin, the presence of things that elicit a burn or that elicit itch or that elicit extreme cold. All of that chemical information is being signaled up to the brain as well in parallel. So parallel pathways is a common theme. So when we're thinking about the respiration, a.k.a. the breathing, system, we also need to look at the mechanical system. What are the different components of the nose, the mouth, the lungs, et cetera, that allow oxygen to be brought in and carbon dioxide to be removed from the body but not too much carbon dioxide removed to allow breathing to work as efficiently and as optimally as possible? And then we also need to look at the chemical systems of the lungs, the bloodstream, and how different cells use oxygen and carbon dioxide in order to understand that as well. If you can understand the mechanical and chemical aspects of breathing, even just at a top contour, well, then the various tools that I discuss during today's episode, such as the ability to calm yourself down most quickly by doing what's called a physiological sigh-- I'll go into this in more detail in a little bit, but this is two very deep inhales through the nose. So the first one is a long inhale [INHALES DEEPLY],, and then the second one after that is [INHALES SHARPLY] a quick, sharp inhale to maximally inflate your lungs, followed by a full exhale through the mouth to lungs completely empty. So it's big inhale through the nose, then short inhale through the nose immediately after that in order to maximally inflate the lungs, and then a long exhale through the mouth until your lungs are empty. You will understand why that particular pattern of breathing and not simply one inhale or not simply an inhale through the nose and an exhale through the nose as well is optimal for reducing your stress quickly. That double inhale through the nose followed by a long exhale through the mouth works to reduce your levels of stress and lower your levels of so-called autonomic arousal very fast in real time. And it works better than any other known approach. It's not a hack. This is actually something that your body has specific neural circuits to do, and it actually performs during sleep on a regular basis and even throughout the day, and that you can perform voluntarily. And it works so well to reduce stress very quickly not because it brings in the maximum amount of oxygen and removes the maximum amount of carbon dioxide but, rather, because it optimally balances oxygen and carbon dioxide. If you understand the mechanical and chemical aspects of breathing, then you will understand exactly why that particular pattern of breathing, the so-called physiological sigh, is the most efficient way to rapidly reduce stress in real time. If you can understand the mechanical and chemical aspects of breathing, you will also understand why most people are overbreathing. That is, they're breathing too often, even if they're breathing in a shallow manner. They're breathing too often. And they are blowing off or removing too much carbon dioxide. And if you understand that carbon dioxide is critical for the way that oxygen is delivered from the bloodstream to the tissues of the body, including the brain, well, then it will make very good sense as to why people who are breathing too much don't actually experience all the effects of elevated oxygen, but, rather, they're putting their body into what's called a hypoxic state. They're not getting enough oxygen to the tissues of their body, in particular their brain. And this is true not just for people who are obese or who suffer from sleep apnea, although that's certainly the case, but for people that have, believe it or not, certain personality types. We'll talk about breathing and personality type and actually how breathing has been shown to alter personality. That's right. Breathing can alter personality in positive ways that allow anyone to show up to the various social and nonsocial endeavors of their life with more calm, more focus, alertness, and improve their overall health. OK, so let's talk about the mechanical components of breathing. It's really quite simple. You've got your nose, obviously, and you've got your mouth. And a little bit later, we'll talk about the incredible advantages of being a nasal breather most of the time but also the incredible advantages of using your mouth to breathe both for inhales and exhales during particular types of endeavors. And we'll get back to that a little later. But for the meantime, the only two ways to bring air into your system are through your nose and through your mouth. We also have the larynx, which is a rigid tissue or pipe that brings the air from the nose and mouth down to the lungs. Now, that word rigid is really important here because what we will soon learn is that your lungs basically act like a pump. You sort of know this already. But these are two big bags basically that can fill with air or that can squeeze air out. Now, what most people don't realize is that the lungs are not just too big bags of air. Your lungs are actually too big bags of air that inside of them have hundreds of millions of little sacs that are called the alveoli of the lungs. And by having those hundreds of millions of little sacs, you increase the surface area of the lungs. And by increasing the surface area, you allow more oxygen to pass from the air in your lungs into the bloodstream than if you didn't have those sacs. And you allow more carbon dioxide to move from the bloodstream into those sacs of the lungs, and then when you exhale, the carbon dioxide can be removed. So those little sacs we call alveoli of the lungs are an important part of the mechanical aspect of breathing we'll get to a little bit later. So at a first pass, the mechanical aspects of breathing are really straightforward. You can breathe through your nose. You can through your mouth. It goes down through the larynx. I told you the larynx is a rigid pipe. The lungs are not rigid. They can expand and they can contract like a pump to bring in air or to expel air. Keep in mind that the lungs do not have any muscles themselves. So we need muscles that can either squeeze the lungs or that will allow the lungs to expand. And there are two general groups of muscles that do that, and they are the diaphragm and the so-called intercostal muscles. The diaphragm is a thin muscle that sits below the lungs and above the liver. And when we inhale, provided that we are using what's called diaphragmatic breathing, that diaphragm contracts. And when it contracts, it moves down, which allows more space for the lungs to inflate with air. Now, the intercostal muscles are the muscles between our ribs. A number of people probably don't realize this. But your ribs, of course, are bone, but in between those bones, you have muscles. And the intercostal muscles, when you inhale, contract, and that allows your rib cage to move up and to expand a bit. And I think, again, people probably don't realize that your ribs are not fixed in place. They can actually get further and closer apart from one another. So when you inhale, your rib cage actually moves up. Sometimes the shoulders will move up as well. And that's because those intercostal muscles are contracting. Now, muscles can't move on their own. They are controlled by nerves. So we've got the nose, the mouth, the larynx, and the lungs. The lungs have all those little alveoli in them. And as I told you, we've got the diaphragm as a muscle to move the lungs, and we have the intercostal muscles to move the ribs, which can allow the lungs to expand. Again, we're just on the mechanical components of breathing. But because muscles can't move themselves, you should be asking, what moves the muscles? And it's really nerves that control muscles. So whether or not you're contracting your biceps or you're walking and you're contracting your quadriceps and your hamstrings and your calf muscles, it's neurons, nerve cells that control that. There's a specialized nerve called the phrenic nerve, P-H-R-E-N-I-C, phrenic nerve, that comes out of the neck. And when I say it comes out of the neck, what I mean is that there are little neurons that reside in the brainstem, in the back of your brain, and they send little wires that we call axons down and out of the neck. They go close to the heart and a little bit behind it. And they go down, and they form synapses. That is, they form connections with the diaphragm. And when those neurons release neurotransmitters, which are little chemicals, the diaphragm contracts, and it moves down. So we say that the phrenic nerve is a motor nerve. It's designed to move muscle. However, the phrenic nerve, like a few other nerves in the body, is interesting in that it has not just motor nerves in there, neurons that control the contraction of muscles. It also can sense things, has sensory neurons. So it also sends connections down to the diaphragm and actually down deep into the diaphragm and close to the liver. And note that I said liver twice now already, and we're going to get back to this later when we talk about physical movement and cramps of the body. Those sensory neurons dive deep into the diaphragm. And then they go back up to the brain, and they allow you to sense where the diaphragm is. So they're giving information about where the diaphragm is in your body. Now, most of the time, you're not paying attention to this. But right now, you can actually try this. And I would encourage you to do this. Diaphragmatic breathing is, in many ways, the ideal way to breathe and that it's the most efficient way to breathe. We'll talk about what we mean exactly when we say breathing efficiency later. But the diaphragm is designed to allow the lungs to expand or to contract the lungs, to bring air into the body or to remove carbon dioxide from the body. And if you want to know whether or not you're using diaphragmatic breathing, it's very simple. If you inhale-- probably best to do this through the nose, but you could do it through the mouth. If you inhale and your belly moves outward on the inhale, well, then that phrenic nerve is controlling your diaphragm properly. And then when you exhale, your belly should go in just a little bit. That's diaphragmatic breathing. Now, diaphragmatic breathing is talked about in the context of yoga. It's often talked about as a way to calm down and so on. But diaphragmatic breathing is just one mode by which your brain and the phrenic nerve can control muscle, the diaphragm, to control the mechanical aspects of the lungs to bring in air and expel air. As I mentioned before, you also have these muscles between your ribs or the intercostal muscles. And there's a separate set of nerves that allow those muscles to contract and for your rib cage to expand in order to create more room for your lungs to get larger and fill with air or for your rib cage to contract a bit when those muscles relax in order to expel air. I'd like to go on record by saying that there is no rule that diaphragmatic breathing is better than breathing where your rib cage moves. This is a common misconception. People say, oh, if your shoulders are going up and down and your rib cage is moving while you're breathing, well, then you're not breathing right. And if your belly goes out and the rest of your body is still while you breathe, well, then you're breathing correctly. I know of zero-- in fact, zero minus one data to support that statement. You have multiple parallel mechanisms to control the mechanics of your lungs and for breathing. And when you're exerting yourself very hard, you tend to use both the intercostal muscles and your rib cage moving as well as your diaphragm in order to bring in a lot of oxygen and to offload a lot of carbon dioxide. And when you're calmer, frankly, you could use diaphragmatic breathing or you could use rib cage type breathing in order to bring enough oxygen into your system. There's no real data showing that diaphragmatic breathing is somehow better or worse. However, being able to mechanically control those independently or to combine them and use them together is of tremendous power toward regulating your mental and physical states. And we'll talk about how to do that a little bit later. For right now, please understand that you have these different mechanical components that allow you to bring oxygen into your system and to expel air and to thereby offload carbon dioxide from your system. Again, we haven't talked about the gas exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen and how that's happening in the bloodstream. We'll talk about that next. But the basic mechanical components are pretty simple. Once again, just to review, it's nose, mouth, larynx, lungs, alveoli within the lungs, and then those two muscles, the diaphragm and the intercostal muscles of the ribs. And one thing I failed to mention is why it's so important that that larynx be rigid, that it's a tube that is very rigid. And the reason for that is that unlike the lungs, which you want to act as sort of a bellow pump where you can deflate it and inflate it in order to move air in and out, the larynx needs to be rigid so that it doesn't collapse while you're bringing air in and out. You can imagine that if it was a very flimsy tube or the walls of the larynx were very flimsy and thin, well, then you can imagine breathing in very vigorously, and it would shut like a tube that suddenly flattens on itself, which would not be good. So the fact that the larynx is rigid is actually a very crucial part of this whole system. The other important aspect of this system as it relates to the mechanics of breathing is the fact that your nose and your mouth have different resistances to air. You can probably notice this right now if you were to, for instance, breathe in through your mouth [INHALES] and only through your mouth versus breathing through your nose [SNIFFS]. Some of you perhaps have a harder time breathing in through your nose. By the way, it's perfectly normal that one or the other nostril would be harder to breathe through or easier to breathe through and that switches across the day. It has to do with the flow of mucus and cerebrospinal fluid and intracranial pressure. Totally normal. Many people out there think they have a deviated septum who don't actually have a deviated septum. A little bit later, we'll talk about how to repair a deviated septum without surgery because that actually is possible in many, not all, cases and is immensely beneficial to do. But what we know is that breathing in through the nose is a little bit harder, and it's supposed to be a little bit harder. However, because it's a little bit harder because there's more resistance, as we say, you are actually able to draw more force into these mechanical aspects of the breathing apparatus and actually bring more air into your lungs. You can try this right now. Try breathing in through your mouth to maximally inflate your lungs and try and do it through mostly diaphragmatic breathing, just for sake of example. In other words, try and breathe in through your mouth. And as you do that, have your belly expand and maximally inflate your lungs. I'll do it right now with you so that we can do it together and I can prove to everyone that I'm just as deficient in this as you are. [INHALES] OK, so I can inflate my stomach doing that. But now try doing it with your nose, and please do exhale before you try doing it with your nose. With your nose, you're going to feel more resistance, but you'll notice that you can inflate it quite a bit further. [SNIFFS] And you'll feel your entire cavity, your belly and maybe even in your lower back, fill with some pressure. So the increased resistance actually allows you to draw more air into the system. This turns out to be very important. And it also wipes away a common misconception, which is if you're somebody who has challenges breathing in through your nose, that somehow you should avoid breathing in through your nose, actually, quite the opposite is true. And we can go a step further and say that if you have challenges breathing in through your nose, chances are that's because the increased resistance of breathing in through your nose, provided it's not completely occluded, is going to allow you to bring more oxygen into your system. This will turn out to be useful later when we explore different techniques, for instance, not just to calm down quickly but to elevate your energy quickly, to remove a cramp during exercise, and a number of other things that breathing can be used for that can be immensely useful for mental and physical challenges. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens, now called AG1, is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Green since 2012. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or usually twice a day is that it gets me the probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important. It's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health. And those probiotics in the Athletic Greens are optimal and vital for microbiota health. In addition, Athletic Greens contains a number of adaptogens, vitamins, and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met. And it tastes great. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to AthleticGreens.com/Huberman, and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, et cetera. And they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3/K2. Again, that's AthleticGreens.com/Huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year's supply of vitamin D3/K2. So now let's talk about the chemical aspects of breathing. And the two major players in this discussion are oxygen, which all the cells and tissues of your body need, and carbon dioxide, which all the cells and tissues of your body need. In fact, carbon dioxide plays critical roles in delivering oxygen to your cells. And without carbon dioxide, you're not going to get enough oxygen to the cells and tissues of your body. That said, if carbon dioxide levels are too high, that is very problematic. In fact, one of the ways that one can reliably induce panic in anybody is to have them breathe air that contains too much carbon dioxide, so much so that for people that lack a so-called amygdala-- many of you have probably heard of the amygdala. This is a brain area that's associated with fear and threat detection. Even in people who completely lack amygdalas on both sides of the brain because they were removed because they had epileptic seizures there and, therefore, those people are completely unafraid of things that they ought to be afraid of like heights, poisonous snakes, any number of different things dangerous to humans, well, if those people breathe an excess amount of carbon dioxide, they immediately have a panic attack. What that tells us is that, again, there are parallel mechanisms, there's redundancy in the system to protect ourselves from having too much carbon dioxide in our system. So we need enough carbon dioxide and enough oxygen in our system but not too much. The way that's accomplished is, of course, we breathe in air. Our lungs inflate. And if you recall those little alveoli of the lungs, those little sacs, oxygen can actually move from the air into those little sacs and then from those little sacs into the vasculature-- the vasculature are the capillaries, the veins, and the arteries of the body-- because the walls of those little alveoli are exceedingly thin, and they have tons of little capillaries that go into them and are all around them. So this is amazing, right? There's oxygen literally passing from inside of these little sacs in our lungs because we inhaled the oxygen from the air into the bloodstream, and then that oxygen gets bound up by proteins in the blood, in particular hemoglobin. And hemoglobin then delivers oxygen to the various cells and tissues of the body. However, oxygen can't just hop on hemoglobin and cruise along with hemoglobin until it gets to, say, your brain and then hop off. It doesn't work that way. You require carbon dioxide in order to liberate oxygen from hemoglobin. Carbon dioxide has this incredible property of actually being able to change the shape of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is shaped as a sort of a cage around oxygen molecules. And when it's in that cage shape, the oxygen can't be liberated. So you've got oxygen and hemoglobin bound to one another moving through your bloodstream. But if a tissue needs oxygen, there needs to be carbon dioxide present to open up that cage. And that's what carbon dioxide does. It allows that cage to change shape, and then the oxygen can be liberated and then can be delivered to the tissues, whether or not that's brain tissue or muscle tissue, so on and so forth. And so those are the major chemical components of breathing. There are a few other aspects related to the chemical components of breathing, such as the fact that carbon dioxide is strongly related to how acidic or how basic your body is in general. So for instance, if carbon dioxide levels go way down, your blood pH goes way up. That is, you become more alkaline. Now, for many people, the word pH and the whole concept of pH immediately starts to evoke anxiety in and of itself. pH is actually very simple. You want the body basically to be at a pH of about 7.4. There are some regions of your body, in particular along the gut, for which that number is importantly different in order for digestion to work properly. You've all heard of the gut microbiome, the little microbes that, provided you have enough of them and they're diverse enough, allow your brain and body to function optimally at the level of immune system, hormone system, brain, et cetera. Well, in the gut, you want the pH sometimes be slightly more acidic. Because when it's more acidic, the little microbiota flourish far more than if it were more basic. But basically, you want the rest of the body to be at about pH 7.4. If carbon dioxide levels go to low, the pH increases in a way that you might say, oh, well, that's bad, but that actually allows more oxygen to be available to the tissues of your body, at least temporarily. We'll talk about this a bit more later. If I'm losing any of you, just hang in there because we're almost done with this whole business of the mechanics and the chemistry of breathing, and then we can get into the tools and revisit some of this later to clean up any misunderstandings that may have arisen. But as we're talking about carbon dioxide over and over again and how key it is to have carbon dioxide and the problems with it going too high to low, you should probably be asking yourself, what actually makes carbon dioxide go too low? We know that we breathe in oxygen, and then it can pass from the lungs and the alveoli into the bloodstream and that we need carbon dioxide to liberate oxygen from the hemoglobin into the cells and tissues of the body. And we know that when we exhale-- well, actually, I haven't told you this yet. But you should know that when you exhale, carbon dioxide is actually taken from the bloodstream back into the alveoli of the lungs. And then when you exhale, it's expelled through your mouth or through your nose out into the world. So the way I just described all that-- inhale, bring in oxygen, exhale, expel carbon dioxide-- pretty straightforward, right? Indeed, it is. And it also tells you that were you to exhale a lot more or a lot more vigorously, you would expel more carbon dioxide. And in fact, that's exactly the way it works. When you hyperventilate, of course, you are inhaling more than usual, but you are also exhaling more than usual. So you're, of course, bringing in more air and oxygen to your body. But you're also removing more carbon dioxide from your body than normal. Carbon dioxide, because of the ways that it regulates brain state-- in fact, the way in which it regulates the excitability, literally the ability of your neurons to engage electrically or not-- it can create states of panic and anxiety, which is why when you hyperventilate, you feel an increase in anxiety, or when you feel an increase in anxiety, you hyperventilate. It's a reciprocal relationship. In fact, I don't want anyone who has anxiety or who has panic attacks to try this now. But for most people, it's probably safe as long as you're not driving or doing something mechanical or operating machinery, that is. Probably safe to do 25 or 30 deep inhales and exhales. And you'll notice that by about breath 10, you'll start to feel tingly, and you'll probably feel a little bit more alert. And, again, if you have anxiety or panic attack tendencies, please don't do this. But you will feel an increase in so-called autonomic arousal, an increase in the activity of your overall sympathetic nervous system, which has nothing to do with sympathy, has everything to do with alertness. You'll actually deploy adrenaline from your adrenals. So I'll just do this now. You can try this now, again, provided you're in a safe place and you don't have anxiety or panic attack tendencies. You would just breathe in through your nose and out through your mouth. Remember, we're breathing in more and more vigorously, and we're exhaling more and more vigorously than we normally would. It goes something like this. [INHALING, EXHALING] Now, by breath 8 or 9 or 10, you'll notice that your body starts to heat up. That's due to a couple of things, mainly the release of adrenaline from your adrenals. I'm already feeling a little bit lightheaded. The lightheadedness is actually because your vasculature, the capillaries and veins and, to some extent, even the arteries of your body and particularly in your brain, are actually starting to constrict. So you're cutting off blood flow to the brain. Why? Well, because carbon dioxide actually is a vasodilator. Normally, it exists in your body to keep capillaries, veins, and arteries dilated to allow blood to pass through them. When you hyperventilate, sure, you're bringing in a lot of oxygen, which you think would make you more alert, and, indeed, it does. But you are also expelling a lot more carbon dioxide than you normally would. And that's causing some vasoconstriction, and you're going to start feeling tingly in the periphery, in your fingers and toes perhaps or your legs. You will also notice that you're feeling more alert in the brain but that you might start to feel a bit of anxiety. So hyperventilation, yes, brings in more oxygen, also removes more carbon dioxide. The removal of excess carbon dioxide puts you into a state that's called hypocapnic, hypoxia. Hypoxia is reduced levels of oxygen relative to normal. Hypocapnia is reduced levels of carbon dioxide relative to normal. And it is those reduced levels of carbon dioxide that are largely responsible for that elevation in energy and at the same time a feeling of a bit of anxiety, the construction of the microvasculature in the brain and body, and therefore the feelings of being kind of tingly and having kind of an urgency to move. OK, so by now, it should be clear that we need both oxygen and carbon dioxide. And across the course of this episode, I will explain how to adjust those ratios of oxygen to carbon dioxide depending on what your immediate needs are and what you plan to do next, whether or not that's sleep or exercise or mental work, et cetera. Before going any further, however, there is something I want to touch on. Because even though not everyone will experience this, I think enough people experience it that it is of interest, and now's the right time to touch into what happens when you go up to a very high altitude, meaning why it's hard to breathe when you get up to high altitudes. So if you're close to sea level, you are getting out of the optimal balance of oxygen in the air you breathe. As you ascend in altitude-- so let's say you go to 6,000 feet or 10,000 or maybe even 11,000 feet above sea level. Or maybe you're one of those rare individuals that climbs Denali, or you climb Mount Everest, and you get up there, and you notice that most people are going to wear an oxygen mask. Why is it that you need an oxygen mask at those very high altitudes or when people do these very high altitude skydives that they need oxygen way up high? Well, a lot of people will say, oh, there's not much oxygen up there. The air is thinner. OK, well, perhaps a better way to think about it is that, remember when we were talking about the mechanical aspects of breathing and the fact that the lungs don't really move themselves, that they have the muscles, the diaphragm and the intercostal muscles to move them? Well, a lot of the reason why your lungs can fill so readily with air is that when you don't have much air in your lungs, there's very low air pressure in your lungs relative to outside you. So what we mean then is if you were to open up your mouth [INHALES] or your nose and breathe in, that is, breathe in through your nose or mouth, what's going to happen is air is going to move from high pressure to low pressure. So it's very easy to fill your lungs. Even though you need those muscles to move the various things around that allow your lungs to fill, the air is going to go from high pressure to low pressure. So [INHALES] for those of you listening, I just took a big inhale through my nose. And then when you exhale, you're basically taking the lungs from a state in which the pressure is really high in the lungs, high pressure, like a balloon that's full-- and the pressure in your lungs when your lungs are full is higher than the air outside. So it's pretty easy [EXHALES] to expel that air through the nose or mouth. When you're at high altitudes, the air pressure is lower. And so what happens is when the air pressure is lower outside your body and your lungs are not full of air, you don't have that really steep gradient of high pressure outside the body to low pressure inside your lungs. And so you actually have to put a lot more effort into breathing air into your lungs. You have to really exert a lot of force. You have to get the diaphragm, those intercostal muscles working really hard. You might even find that your shoulders are lifting with each breath [INHALES] because you really have to generate a lot of force to get enough air and oxygen into your lungs. Now, an important principle to understand is that in humans, and in some other species, but really what we're talking about now is humans, when you inhale, that's an active process. You really need to use those muscles of the intercostals and the diaphragm in order to inflate the lungs. But the whole process is made easier when air pressure outside your body is higher than it is in your lungs because then they're going to fill up really readily. Exhaling, at least for humans, is a passive thing. You just have to relax the diaphragm and relax the intercostals and let the rib cage kind of fall back to its original position. So inhaling is active, and exhaling is passive. And so what happens is if you're at a high altitude and the air pressure is very low, then you have to put a lot of energy into breathing air into your lungs to get an equivalent amount of oxygen into your lungs and then into the bloodstream. So that's why when you arrive at a high altitude location, for the first few days, you're going to feel lightheaded maybe a headache. You're also going to have more buildup of carbon dioxide in your system. And so the whole balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide is going to be disrupted. I mention all that because, yes, indeed, there are some changes in the atmospheric gases at high altitudes, and that can impact how much oxygen you can bring into your system, into your tissues. But I've heard many explanations of why it's hard to breathe or why you feel lousy at altitude. Well, you just discovered one reason, which is that you don't have that steep high pressure to low pressure gradient from the outside of the body into the inside of the body. The converse is also true. If you've been at altitude for a few days and you've had the opportunity to adjust-- a lot of athletes, for instance, will go train at altitude. It's hard for them in the first days or weeks, and then they get really good at training at altitude. There are a number of different adaptations that occur in terms of the amount of oxygen that can be carried in the blood by hemoglobin and the interactions between carbon dioxide and hemoglobin and oxygen that allow more oxygen to be delivered to the tissues, such that, at altitude, you can function just normally. But if you then move very quickly from altitude-- say, you've been training at 8,000 feet or 10,000 feet. You've been hiking up at that high level, and you've adapted, and you come down to sea level. Well, for about two to five days, you're going to feel like an absolute beast. You're going to be able to essentially deliver far more oxygen to your muscles per breath. In part, that is because of the way that the hemoglobin and the oxygen that it's carrying has been altered when you were at high altitude. But it's also because when you were at that high altitude, those intercostal muscles and those diaphragms got trained up quite a bit and allowed you to generate more air volume for every breath. In other words, those muscles got stronger, and you got more efficient at driving the phrenic nerve consciously to [INHALES] really breathe in a lot of oxygen so you don't feel lightheaded, headache, et cetera. OK, so that's a little bit of an aside. But it's an important aside, I believe, because, A, it answers a question a lot of people ask and they a lot of people wonder about and, B, because it incorporates both the mechanical aspects of breathing and the chemical aspects of breathing. I realize it's a little bit of a unusual circumstance. But now if anyone asks you why it's hard to breathe at altitude, you know it has to do with this lack of a high pressure to low pressure gradient across the body and with the atmosphere outside you. It's also an opportunity for me to say that if you do find yourself at altitude and you have a headache or you're feeling like you just can't catch your breath, spending some time really consciously trying to draw in larger breaths of air, as much as that might seem fatiguing and you'll be short of breath, it will allow you to adapt more quickly. And a little bit later in the episode, we'll touch on a few methods, including deliberate hyperventilation combined with some breath holds, that can allow you to deliver more oxygen to the cells immediately upon arriving at altitude so you don't get quite as much headache, disorientation, and so on. So leaving breathing at altitude aside let's all come back down to the same conceptual level. We can ask ourselves, for instance, what is healthy breathing, and what is unhealthy breathing? And the first place we want to tackle this is within the context of sleep. So when we go to sleep at night, we continue to breathe. That's no surprise. If we didn't, we would die during sleep. However, there is a large fraction of the population that underbreathes during sleep. They're not taking deep enough or frequent enough breaths. And therefore, they are experiencing what's called sleep apnea. They are becoming hypoxic, hypo-oxic. There's less oxygen being brought into their system than is necessary. People that are carrying excess weight, either fat weight or muscle weight or both, are more prone to nighttime sleep apnea. However, there are a lot of people who are not overweight who also experience sleep apnea. How do you know if you're experiencing sleep apnea? Well, first of all, excessive daytime sleepiness and excessive daytime anxiety combined with daytime sleepiness is one sign that you might be suffering from sleep apnea. The other thing is if you happen to snore, it's very likely that you are experiencing sleep apnea. And I should mention that sleep apnea is a very serious health concern. It greatly increases the probability of a cardiovascular event, heart attack, stroke. It is a precursor or sometimes the direct cause of sexual dysfunction in males and females. Cognitive dysfunction during the daytime. It can exacerbate the effects of dementia, whether or not it's age-related dementia of the normal sort or Alzheimer's type dementia, which is an acceleration of age-related cognitive decline. If you're somebody who has had a traumatic brain injury, if you're experiencing a lot of stress, sleep apnea is going to greatly disrupt the amount of oxygen brought in to your brain and body during sleep and is going to lead to a number of nighttime and daytime issues. So it's something that really needs to be addressed. And we'll get into this a bit more later. But since I raised it as a problem, I do want to raise the solution. One of the major treatments for sleep apnea is that people will get a CPAP device, which is this face mask and a machine that they'll sleep with. And while those can be very effective, not everyone needs a CPAP. One of the more common methods nowadays that's being used to treat sleep apnea, which is purely behavioral, an intervention, and is essentially zero cost, is that people are starting to shift deliberately to nasal breathing during sleep because of the additional resistance of nasal breathing and because of the fact that there's far less tendency if any, excuse me, to snore when nasal breathing. Taping the mouth shut using medical tape prior to sleep-- excuse me. Putting medical tape on the mouth prior to going to sleep and then sleeping all night with medical tape on the mouth is one way that people can learn to nasal breathe during sleep and can greatly offset a lot of sleep apnea, snoring, and sleep-related issues. A number of people don't want to or don't feel safe putting medical tape on their mouth prior to sleep. For some reason, they think they're going to suffocate. But, of course, you would wake up if you start to run out of air at any moment. So that's not so much a concern. But what they'll do is they will start to use pure nasal breathing during any type of exercise or even just for some period of time walking during the day or while working. And, again, later, we'll get into the enormous benefits of shifting to pure nasal breathing when not exercising hard, meaning at a rate that you could normally hold a conversation-- although if you're pure nasal breathing, you won't be holding that conversation-- or when simply doing work or any number of things that are of low intensity. You can train your system to become a better nasal breather during the daytime through these deliberate actions of taping the mouth shut or just being conscious of keeping your mouth shut. And that, in addition to having a number of positive health and aesthetic effects during the daytime, is known to also transfer to nighttime breathing patterns and allow people to become nasal breathers as opposed to mouth breathers during sleep and to snore less and to have less sleep apnea. Again, if you have severe sleep apnea, you probably do need to check out a CPAP. You should talk to your physician. But for people who have minor sleep apnea or sleep apnea that's starting to take hold, these other methods of shifting to becoming a nasal breather are going to be far more beneficial and far more cost effective than going all the way to the CPAP, which, by the way, doesn't really teach you how to breathe properly as much as it does adjust the airflow going into your system. That's an important point, that when you shift from mouth to nasal breathing during sleep, you're actually learning and training your system to breathe properly. And when I say learning and training your system to breathe properly, what do I mean? Let's put some scientific and mechanistic meat on that. We already talked about the phrenic nerve, this nerve that innervates the diaphragm and that allows for the lungs to fill up because of the movement of the diaphragm. What we didn't talk about, however, were the brain centers that actually control the phrenic nerve and control breathing. Knowing about these two brain areas and what they do is extremely important, not just for understanding the content of this episode but for understanding all of the tools that we'll discuss and, indeed, your general health as it relates to respiration. So there are basically two areas of the brain that control breathing. The first is called the pre-Botzinger complex. You don't have to worry about the name so much. Just know that it was named after a bottle of wine and that it was discovered by the great Jack Feldman, who's a professor of neuroscience at the University of California, Los Angeles. This is one of the most fundamental discoveries in all of neuroscience in the last hundred years or more because this brain area that Jack and his colleagues discovered controls all aspects of breathing that are rhythmic, that is, when inhales follow exhales follow inhales follow exhales. That's all controlled by a small set of neurons in this brainstem area, so around the region of the neck, called the pre-Botzinger complex. And we really owe a debt of gratitude to Jack and his colleagues for discovering that area because it's involved in everything from breathing when we're asleep to breathing when we're not thinking about our breathing. It may have a role-- that is, when its function is disrupted, it may cause things like sudden infant death syndrome. Believe it or not, it can explain in large part many of the deaths related to the opioid crisis because exogenous opioids like fentanyl and other sorts of drugs, which are opioids obviously, bind to opioid receptors on that structure and shut it down. Now, keep in mind these neurons are designed to be incredibly robust and are designed to fire inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale no matter if we're awake or aware, unaware or asleep to keep us alive. Exogenous opioids like fentanyl and drugs that are similar to that can shut down that structure because it's rich with these opioid receptors. So it binds to that, and it shuts off the pre-Botzinger complex, which is the major cause of death of people who die from opioid overdoses. I think a lot of people don't realize that. They think, oh, the opioids must shut off the brain or shut down the heart. No, it shuts down breathing. So Jack's discovery no doubt will lead to some important things as it relates to addiction, and hopefully I think we frankly can expect that it's also going to eventually lead to ways to prevent death in people using opioids or other types of drugs, maybe by blocking opioid receptors in pre-Botzinger complex using things like naltrexone, et cetera. In any event, pre-Botzinger complex is controlling inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale patterns of breathing. The other brain center controlling breathing, again, through the phrenic nerve-- it all converges and goes out through the phrenic nerve in these intercostal muscles-- is the so-called parafacial nucleus. And the parafacial nucleus is involved in patterns of breathing where there is not an inhale followed by exhale, inhale followed by exhale-- that is, it's not rhythmic, one than the other-- but, rather, where there is a doubling up of inhales or a doubling up of exhales or a deliberate pause in breathing, so inhale, pause, exhale, pause, inhale, pause, exhale, pause, this sort of thing. A little bit later, we'll talk about a pattern of breathing called box breathing, which has very specific and useful applications, in particular for adjusting anxiety. And in that case, it involves going from rhythmic breathing of inhale, inhale, inhale, exhale, that is, relying on the pre-Botzinger complex neurons, to reliance on the parafacial nucleus neurons and box breathing, just to give away what's probably already obvious, as you inhale, hold, exhale, hold, and repeat. And that pattern of breathing, even though it's rhythmic in nature because inhales precede exhales precede inhales and so on, there's a deliberate breath hold inserted there. So anytime we're taking conscious control of our breathing, the parafacial nucleus is getting involved. Now, you don't have to assume that the parafacial nucleus is the only way in which we take conscious control of our breathing. We can also take control of the pre-Botzinger complex. You can do that right now. So for instance, you are breathing in some specific pattern now that, unless you're speaking or eating, no doubt is going to involve inhales followed by exhales. But you could, for instance, decide that, yes, inhales are active and exhales are passive. But now you're going to make the exhales active as well. So rather than just inhale and then let your lungs deflate, you could inhale [INHALES] and then force the air out. [EXHALES] That's going to represent a conscious taking over of control of the pre-Botzinger complex. And so the reason I'm giving this mechanistic detail is, A, it's super important if you want to understand all the tools related to breathing. B, it's actually a pretty simple system. Even though the areas have fancy names like pre-Botzinger or parafacial, it's pretty straightforward. You have one area that controls rhythmic breathing-- inhale follows exhales-- and the other area which gets involved in breathing any time you start doubling up on inhales or exhales. In fact, the parafacial nucleus is the one that you're relying on while you speak in order to make sure that you still get enough oxygen. It's also the one that you will use if you incorporate the physiological sigh or box breathing. And, frankly, most of the time, you're using both of these circuits or these brain systems, parafacial and pre-Botzinger, in parallel. Again, biology loves parallel systems, especially for things that are so critical that if we didn't do them, we would die, like breathing. And so it makes sense that we have two different brain structures that control this. So now you have an understanding of the mechanical control of breathing, that is, the different parts within the parts list that are involved in breathing, everything from nose to mouth to alveoli, the lungs, et cetera, and the muscles involved in moving the lungs. You understand, I like to think, a bit about bringing oxygen in and removing carbon dioxide but not so much carbon dioxide that you can't actually use the oxygen that you have. And you know about two brain centers, one controlling rhythmic breathing and one that controls nonrhythmic breathing. I want to repeat something that I said a little bit earlier as well, which is that breathing is incredible because it represents the interface between conscious and subconscious control over your not just body, not just your lungs, but that how you breathe influences your brain state. So by using your brain consciously to control your breathing, you are using your brain to control your brain. The best way I've ever heard this described was from a beautiful, I should say now classic paper in The Journal of Physiology, published in 1988 from Balestrino and Somjen, where the final line of their summary intro states, "The brain, by regulating breathing, controls its own excitability." And just to remind those of you that don't remember what excitability is, excitability is the threshold at which a given neuron, nerve cell can be active or not. So when we breathe a certain way, the neurons of our brain are more likely to get engaged. They're more likely to be active. And when we breathe in other ways, our brain becomes harder to activate. Its excitability is reduced. Now, you might think excitability is a great thing. You always want your brain to be excitable. But that's actually not the case. And, in fact, that very statement that Balestrino and Somjen made led to a number of other investigations that were really important in defining how if people overbreathe, that is, if they hyperventilate, at rest, they expel, that is, they exhale too much carbon dioxide, what that classic paper by Balestrino and Somjen led to was a number of different investigations in humans looking at how different patterns of breathing impact the overall state of the brain and the ability of the brain to respond to certain what are called sensory stimuli. Keep in mind that your brain is always active. The neurons are firing at low level, low level, low level. But when you see something or hear something, or you want to focus on something, or you want to exercise or really listen to something or learn, certain circuits in your brain need to be more active than everything else. That is, there needs to be really high what's called signal to noise. There's always a lot of noise and chatter in the background, just like the chatter at a cocktail party or at a stadium event. In order to really pay attention, focus, learn, all the incredible things that the brain can do, you need that signal to get above the noise. There's a beautiful paper that asks, how does the pattern of breathing, in particular, how does overbreathing, change the patterns of activity in the brain? This is a paper entitled "Effects of Voluntary Hyperventilation on Cortical Sensory Responses." And I will provide a link to the study in the show note captions. It's a somewhat complicated paper if you look at all the detailed analyzes. However, the takeaway from this paper is exquisitely simple and I also believe incredibly important. Basically, what it showed is that when people hyperventilate, they expel, that is, they exhale more carbon dioxide than they would normally. So they become what's called hypocapnic, OK? Carbon dioxide levels are low in the blood. And over a short period of time, they become low in the tissues of the body. When that carbon dioxide level drops low, you would say, OK, well, you're still bringing in a lot of oxygen, because these people are hyperventilating. So they should feel really alert. And, indeed, that's what happens. The people feel very alert. However, because they're not bringing enough carbon dioxide in or, rather, the proper way to say it would be because they're overbreathing, exhaling too much, they are not retaining or keeping in enough carbon dioxide. Well, then that lack of carbon dioxide means that the oxygen that they are breathing in can't be liberated from the hemoglobin, can't get to the brain. And what they observe is about a 30% to 40% reduction in the amount of oxygen that's being delivered to the brain. And the reduction in carbon dioxide also prevents some of the normal patterns of vasodilation, the dilating, the opening up of the capillaries, so, again, less blood flow. But most importantly, as it's shown in this paper, the brain overall becomes hyperexcitable. It's as if it's being starved of oxygen and blood flow. And all the neurons in a very nonspecific way start increasing their firing levels. So the background activity is getting louder and louder. It's like the rumble or the noise of a crowd at a stadium. And as a consequence, the sensory input from a sound or from a touch or from some other event in the world doesn't get above the noise. What this means is that when we hyperventilate, because we aren't retaining enough carbon dioxide, we are not getting enough oxygen to the tissues that need oxygen. And as a consequence of that, the brain becomes hyperexcitable. We actually know that there's an increase in anxiety. And we become less good, less efficient at detecting things in our environment. So we're not processing information as well at all. The noise goes up, and the signal goes down. Again, incredibly important set of findings. I should also mention that hyperventilation is one way that, in the laboratory anyway or in neurosurgery units for some time, physicians would evoke seizure in seizure-prone patients. The reason that works is exactly the explanation I just gave you. Seizure is a excitability of the brain, not enough inhibition or suppression of the overall circuitry. So you get these waves or these storms of electrical activity. Low levels of carbon dioxide in the brain because of low levels of carbon dioxide in the blood are one of the major triggers for seizures. Now, I realize that most people listening to this are not epileptic. But nonetheless, this brings us all back to this question of what is normal healthy breathing. As I mentioned before, normal healthy breathing is breathing about six liters of air per minute. But of course, most of us don't think in terms of liters of air, and we're not going to measure our lung capacity, at least most of us aren't going to do that. Basically, if you are taking relatively shallow breaths and you're just sitting there working or maybe even walking slowly, again, not talking or engaging in any kind of speech or eating, chances are six liters of air per minute is about 12 shallowish breaths. And when I say shallow, I don't mean breathing [INHALES SHALLOWLY] like a little bunny rabbit or something like that. I just mean casually breathing in out, in out. The studies that have explored the breathing patterns in large populations of individuals who are not suffering necessarily from any one specific ailment have shown that most people breathe far too much per minute, that they're engaging in anywhere from 15 to 20 or even 30 shallow breaths per minute. So they are vastly overbreathing relative to how they should be breathing. Now, of course, if you breathe more deeply, so you take a vigorous inhale [INHALES] and then you expel that air, well, then to get six liters of air into your system per minute, you're probably only going to need somewhere between four and six breaths in order to get that six liters per minute. Now, the total time that it takes to do that inhale and exhale isn't that much longer than a shallow breath, provided you're not deliberately breathing quickly during those shallow breaths. So then you say, well, how is it that normal healthy breathing that delivers the appropriate amount of carbon dioxide into the system and doesn't expel, doesn't exhale too much carbon dioxide-- how are we supposed to do that normal breathing? Are you supposed to breathe four times and then hold your breath until the minute passes? No. What you find is that the correct pattern of breathing is going to involve two things. First of all, nasal breathing, because of the resistance it provides through the nose that we talked about earlier, is going to deliver more oxygen into your system. You're going to be able to generate more air pressure to fill your lungs. That greater air pressure is going to take longer to exhale. So already we're increasing the amount of time that each breath is going to take. And also what you find is that people that are breathing in the proper healthy manner, that is, that are balancing oxygen and carbon dioxide in the proper ways, are also taking pauses between breaths. This is extremely important. Because even though we have a brain center, the pre-Botzinger complex, that can control or, I should say, does control inhale-exhale rhythmic breathing, those pauses between breaths are not always present and, in fact, often are not present from people's baseline breathing patterns. As a consequence, they overbreathe. And as I told you before, when people overbreathe, their brain becomes hyperexcitable at the level of the background noise. And yet they are less efficient at detecting and learning information. We'll get into the specific studies that really illustrate the learning aspect a bit later. But they are less efficient at detecting and learning information, at focusing, and so on as a consequence of this overbreathing and the hyperexcitability that it causes. Now, of course, that's also just emphasizing the effects of overbreathing and lack of carbon dioxide on the brain. There are hundreds, if not thousands of studies showing that when we don't have enough carbon dioxide in the tissues of our body, that's also problematic for all the tissues-- the liver, the lungs themselves, the stomach, et cetera-- that relate largely to shifts in pH because of the fact that carbon dioxide strongly regulates the acidity, alkalinity of the blood and the tissues that that blood supplies nutrients to, including carbon dioxide. So the basic takeaway here is you want to breathe in a healthy manner at rest. And the best way to do that is to spend some time-- and it doesn't take much, maybe a minute or so each day-- paying attention to how quickly you are breathing per minute when you are simply at rest, when you're making coffee in the morning, when you're sitting down to read, when you're on social media. Chronically holding your breath isn't good but neither is overbreathing. And, again, every study that has examined the typical patterns of breathing and patterns of breathing that show up as normal and abnormal has found that more often than not, during the nighttime, people are underbreathing. And in the daytime, they are overbreathing. They're hyperventilating. I'd like to just take a brief moment and thank one of our podcast sponsors, which is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that blood work is the only way that you can monitor the markers, such as hormone markers, lipids, metabolic factors, et cetera, that impact your immediate and long-term health. One major challenge with blood work, however, is that most of the time, it does not come back with any information about what to do in order to move the values for hormones, metabolic factors, lipids, et cetera, into the ranges that you want. With InsideTracker, changing those values becomes very straightforward because it has a personalized dashboard that you can use to address the nutrition-based, behavior-based, supplement-based approaches that you can use in order to move those values into the ranges that are optimal for you, your vitality, and your longevity. InsideTracker now includes a measurement of apolipoprotein B, so-called apoB, in their ultimate plan. AboB is a key marker of cardiovascular health, and therefore, there's extreme value to knowing your apoB levels. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to InsideTracker.com/Huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Again, that's InsideTracker.com/Huberman to get 20% off. So next, I'd like to address what you can do about your normal patterns of breathing, that is, how you or anyone can adjust their normal patterns of breathing from an unhealthy to an unhealthy state. But the first thing we have to do, of course, is determine whether or not you're already breathing in an unhealthy or in a healthy way. And, again, when I say healthy or unhealthy, I mean, are you overbreathing? Are you underbreathing? Are you delivering the appropriate ratios of oxygen and carbon dioxide to the tissues of your brain and body? In order to do this, we're going to do a simple test. Again, please don't do this while driving or operating heavy machinery or near water of any kind. But assuming that you're not doing any of those things, I encourage you to sit down, certainly not lie down but just sit down. I suppose you also could do it standing. And we are going to do what's called the carbon dioxide tolerance test. The carbon dioxide tolerance test is a sort of back of the envelope measure of how well you are managing carbon dioxide, that is, how well you can control your breathing at both the mechanical and the chemical level. It's a very simple test. What you're going to do is for the next 10 seconds or so while I'm speaking, you're just going to breathe normally. Now, again and again throughout this episode, I'm going to encourage you to be a nasal breather whenever possible. But of course, there are instances in which you want to engage mouth breathing. But for the time being, as I continue to blab on for the next few seconds, just inhale through your nose, exhale through your nose. You don't have to deliberately slow your breathing or increase the cadence of your breathing. However, in that time, you're also going to want to find some sort of time measuring device, like could be your phone or it could be a stopwatch. What I'm going to ask you to do in a few minutes is I'm going to ask you to inhale through your nose as deeply as you possibly can. That is, you're going to fill your lungs as much as you can through your nose. And then start a timer and measure how long it takes for you to deliberately control that exhale until your lungs are empty. So this is going to be a controlled exhale through the nose after a big deep breath. But for the time being, keep breathing at a kind of calm, regular cadence. So you can find that time measuring device now, or you can come back to it later if you like. When I say inhale, you're going to inhale as deeply as you can through your nose, remembering that the diaphragm can really help you here to get a deep inhale by having your belly move out while you inhale. And then when I say start, you're going to measure the time that it takes to do a complete lungs empty exhale. In fact, I'll measure it for you. This will be one of the rare instances in this podcast where there's going to be a long period of silence as I measure something. So I've got a stopwatch here. So please prepare to do the big inhale and start inhaling now. So inhale as deeply as you can through your nose. Fill your lungs as much as you can. OK? Now start, meaning slowly control the exhale through your nose. You're trying to let that air out as slowly as possible. And I'm just going to call out every 10 or 15 seconds or so. And you want to note when your lungs are empty. I know you can hold your breath with your lungs empty. That is not an accurate measure. 15 seconds. It is important that when note your lungs are empty and that you're trying to control the exhale as much as possible so that you don't arrive at that lungs empty time too quickly. I'll explain what too quickly means. 30 seconds. OK, for those of you that have already reached lungs empty, please go back to breathing normally. For those of you that haven't, you can hang in here a little longer if you're still discarding that air. 45 seconds. And we're rounding toward a minute, not quite there. Some of you are probably still letting out that air. I want to point out none of this has to do with cardiovascular fitness level, at least not in any kind of direct way. And 60 seconds. And I realize there will be a small subset of you out there that are still expelling your air in a slow lungs-- slow exhale manner through the nose. OK, so what we just did is a back of the envelope carbon dioxide discard rate if you need to pause this and go back and try it again you just want to time how long it takes you to go from lungs full to lungs empty, again, with the full understanding I know that you can all sit there like beasts and hold your breath with your lungs empty. But please don't do that because that's not going has been informative for what I'm telling you now. What I'm going to tell you now is that if it took you 20 seconds or less to expel all your air, that is, you couldn't extend that exhale longer than 20 seconds, in a kind of back of the envelope way, we can say that have a relatively brief or low carbon dioxide tolerance. If it took you somewhere between 25 and 40, maybe 45 seconds to expel all your air, that is, you could control that exhale for about 45 seconds or 30 seconds, then you have a moderate level of carbon dioxide tolerance. And if, for instance, you were able to go 50 seconds or longer for that discard until you hit lungs empty, you have a fairly high degree of carbon dioxide tolerance. Now, here's the deal. If you had low carbon dioxide tolerance, that is, you're 20 seconds or less, you're going to write down the number three. If you had moderate levels of carbon dioxide tolerance, you're going to write down the number five. or you could even put five to six. And then if you are in that bracket of people that was able to discard your air over a period of 50 seconds or more, you're going to write down the number 8 to 10. OK? Now, what are these numbers? What are we talking about? And before we get into what to do with these numbers, I want to emphasize again, this does not have to do with fitness level per se. I know some world class triathletes that have very fast carbon dioxide blow-off times. That is, their discard rates are 20 seconds or less. I should also point out that if you're very stressed, that number is going to be very small. If you're very relaxed, like you just woke up after a long night of sleep and you feel great, that number is going to be extended. So this is a back of the envelope measure that you're going to use each time you decide to do the exercise I'm going to tell you about in a moment. And the exercise I'm going to tell you about in a moment can be done every day if you like. But what the most interesting studies, at least to me, indicate is that you could do the exercise I'll tell you about even just once or twice a week and greatly improve your efficiency of breathing and shift yourself away from overbreathing when at rest, even if you're not thinking about how you're breathing at rest. So what is this exercise? Well, you just got your number, either low, medium, or high bracket number for carbon dioxide discard rate. Remember, if you're in the low category, your number is three. If you're medium, it's five to six. And if you are in the long carbon dioxide discard rate, long duration carbon dioxide discard rate, that is, 8 to 10 is your number. Now you're going to do two minutes of what most people would call box breathing. What is box breathing? Box breathing are equal duration inhale, hold, exhale, hold, repeat. So inhale, hold, exhale, hold. Sounds very easy, right? How long do you inhale and then hold, exhale and then hold? Well, you now know. If you are in the low group of carbon dioxide discard rate, your inhale is going to be three seconds, your hold will be three seconds, your exhale will be three seconds, and then you repeat, three seconds. So each side of the box, if you will, is going to be three seconds long. If you were in the moderate carbon dioxide discard rate category, then you're going to inhale for five to six seconds, hold for five to six, exhale for five to six, hold for five to six, repeat for about two minutes. You could do three minutes if you want. But I think it's important to have protocols that are feasible for most people. And that's going to mean doing things for about two to five minutes when it comes to these breath rehabilitation exercises for restoring normal breathing. And then, of course, if you are in the long category of carbon dioxide discard rate, you should be able to do an 8 to 10 second inhale, 8 to 10 second hold, 8 to 10 second exhale, 8 to 10 second hold, and repeat. So you could do that exercise now if you like, or you could do it at some point offline. You can pause this podcast if you want and go try it. That's an exercise that you can do for about two to three minutes once or twice per week. What's happening when you do that exercise? Well, first of all, you are greatly increasing your neuromechanical control over the diaphragm. This is very important. Most people are not aware of this phrenic nerve pathway in the diaphragm. And you are greatly increasing your mechanical control over this pathway through the process we call neuroplasticity. When you deliberately focus on a aspect of your nervous system control and particular nervous system control over musculature that normally is subconscious and you're not paying attention to and when you actively take control of that, it requires that your brain adjust and rewire the relationship between the different components of that circuit. And the wonderful thing is that has been shown to lead to changes in your resting pattern of breathing. Now, why did we go through the whole business of doing the carbon dioxide tolerance test? Well, for people who don't tolerate carbon dioxide very well, they don't have very good phrenic, that is, neuromechanical control of the diaphragm, for whatever reason-- again, it doesn't mean you're not fit. It just means you don't have or you have not yet developed neuromechanical control of the diaphragm. It would be near impossible for you to do box breathing for two or three minutes with eight seconds in, eight seconds hold, eight seconds exhale, eight second hold. So that's why we do a test to see what you're capable of doing. You don't want the box breathing to be too strained where you're [GRUNTS],, where you're really challenged to get around the whole box. You want it to be relatively easy because, remember, you're trying to translate this pattern to your normal pattern of breathing, that is, your pattern of breathing when you're not consciously thinking about breathing. And what are we really translating when we do this box breathing type exercise? What you're translating is the ability to pause between breaths and yet take full mechanically-driven breaths that involve the phrenic nerve and diaphragm. So, again, you're encouraging, especially if you use nasal breathing when you do the box breathing-- you're encouraging phrenic control over the diaphragm. And you're getting that six liters of air per minute or so using fewer and fewer breaths over time. So this is a, again, zero cost-- although it does cost a little bit of time-- zero cost approach to adjusting your normal pattern of breathing at rest, which has a huge number of positive outcomes in terms of your ability to stay relatively calm, to not get the hyperexcitability of the brain. It has actually been shown in various studies-- and we'll talk about one in particular later-- to greatly improve not just levels of calm and reduce bouts of stress but also improve nighttime sleep. There are huge number of benefits that can come from doing this box breathing exercise. But you got to get the duration of the size of the box right, and that's why you do the carbon dioxide tolerance test. One thing that many people notice after doing the carbon dioxide tolerance test even just once and then doing this box breathing exercise once or twice a week is that after two or three weeks, the box breathing itself becomes very easy. And in that case, I recommend taking the carbon dioxide tolerance test over again. And almost always what you'll find is that you have been able to extend your carbon dioxide discard rate, and therefore, you now fall into a different category, not just the lower medium but the long carbon dioxide discard rate category, and you are able to extend the duration of those inhale, hold, exhale, holds during the box breathing. And, of course, the ultimate benefit of all this is that it translates to deeper and yet less frequent breathing when at rest and when not consciously paying attention to how you're breathing during the daytime. Again, if at all possible, do all of this breathing through the nose. For those of you that have a severely occluded nose, the recommendation always is to breathe through your nose more. But I do realize that for some people, it's really uncomfortable to breathe through the nose because they have such an occluded nasal pathway. And for you folks, doing some of this breathing through the mouth can probably suffice. But if at all possible, do the breathing through the nose. And please also let me know how your progress evolves over time with the carbon dioxide discard rate and the box breathing. And of course, the positive shifts that occur in normal unconscious daytime breathing translate to all the opposite things that we talked about when you are overbreathing during the daytime. So what I just described in terms of the carbon dioxide tolerance test and the exercise using box breathing to restore normal patterns of breathing and not overbreathe and therefore not eliminate too much carbon dioxide is exactly the two tests that were incorporated into a study that my laboratory did in collaboration with our associate chair of psychiatry at Stanford School of Medicine, Dr. David Spiegel, who's also been a guest on this podcast previously. And that study explored box breathing. But it also explored other forms of breathing and actually compared those forms of deliberate breathing to meditation as a means to explore what are going to be the minimal effective doses and most effective ways to chronically reduce stress around the clock and improve mood and improve sleep. So the study I'm referring to was just published recently. It's entitled "Brief Structured Respiration Practices Enhance Mood and Reduce Physiological Arousal." We will also provide a link to this paper in the show note captions. What this study really focused on was a simple question, which is, what is the shortest and most effective practice that people can use in order to reduce their levels of stress not just during that breathwork practice or meditation practice but around the clock, 24 hours a day, including improvements in sleep? And we were excited to do this study because many studies had explored how meditation or, in some cases, fewer studies have explored how breathwork can impact different brain states or bodily states. But very few studies had explored how those breathwork or meditation practices influenced body-brain states around the clock when people were not performing the particular meditation or breathwork practice. The reason we were able to do this study was really fortunate. The folks over at WHOOP were generous enough to donate a bunch of WHOOP straps, which allowed us to measure heart rate variability, a number of other different physiological parameters. We also got subjective reports about people's mood and feelings of well-being. We got data about their sleep pinged to us from remote locations. So these people, rather than being brought to the laboratory and being in a very artificial circumstance, the laboratory, as much as we like to think our laboratory is realistic-- we have virtual reality and things like that-- there's nothing as realistic as the real world. And so we were able to have more than a hundred subjects out in the real world living their real lives pinging back to us data all the time, 24 hours a day so that we could measure how their different interventions that we asked them to do, breathwork practices or meditation practices, were impacting physiological parameters. And they were also informing us regularly about their subjective mood, et cetera. We got a lot of data, as you can imagine. And the basic takeaway from the study was twofold. First of all, we discovered that deliberate breathwork practices done for about five minutes per day across the course of about a month led to greater reductions in stress than did a five minute a day meditation practice. Now, that is not to say that meditation is not useful. In fact, there are dozens, if not hundreds, of papers, including one particular, I should say, particularly beautiful study from Wendy Suzuki's lab at New York University showing that a daily 10 to 13 minute mindfulness meditation practice can greatly improve focus, memory, and a number of other things related to cognition and learning. However, the research on meditation has shown us that meditation, at least short meditations, mainly lead to improvements in focus and memory, not so much reductions in stress, although they do lead to reductions in stress. What we found was that any number of different breathwork practices-- and we explored three-- done for five minutes a day outperformed meditation in terms of the ability of breathwork to reduce stress around the clock compared to meditation. The three types of breathwork that we explored also showed different effects. I should mention the three types of breathwork that we compared were box breathing of the sort that you just learned about. We compare that to something called cyclic sighing, which involves two inhales through the nose to get maximally inflated lungs followed by a long exhale. I'll return to that in a moment. That was repeated for five minutes at a time for each session. And a third breathwork practice, which was cyclic hyperventilation, which, as the name suggests, involves people inhaling deeply through the nose, then exhaling passively through the mouth, and then repeating inhale through the nose, exhale through the mouth, repeating that for 25 cycles, one cycle being an inhale and an exhale. So that equals one cycle. Repeating that for 25 cycles, then exhaling all their air and holding their breath with lungs empty for about 15 to 30 seconds, and then repeating inhale, exhale, cyclic hyperventilation for the duration of five minutes. So people were divided into these different groups, either mindfulness meditation where they sat, they were not told to control their breathing in any specific way. They closed their eyes. They focused their attention on a region just behind their forehead. One group did that. The other group did cyclic sighing. Another group did box breathing. Another group did cyclic hyperventilation. As any sort of clinical trial like this ought to, we then swapped people into different groups. So they served as their own control. So we could evaluate any between and within individual variability. Again, there are a lot of data in this paper. But the takeaway was that for the sake of stress reduction around the clock and for the sake of improving sleep and mood, the most effective practice of the four practices that we examined was the cyclic sighing. Again, cyclic sighing is performed the following way. You inhale through the nose as deeply as you can. Then you do a second inhale immediately afterwards to try and maximally inflate the lungs. In fact, that's what happens. We know that during that second inhale, even if it's just a very sharp, short inhale, the extra physical vigor that's required to generate that second inhale causes those alveoli of the lungs, which may have collapsed-- and, indeed, in between breaths and often even just through the course of the day and especially if we get stressed, those alveoli of the lungs start to collapse. And because they're damp on the inside-- they have a little bit of fluid. They're like a balloon with a little bit of fluid in the middle. It takes a little bit of physical force to pop those open. Now, you're not literally exploding them pop. But you're reinflating them with air. And then you perform the long exhale through the mouth until lungs are empty. So it looks exactly like this. [INHALES DEEPLY] [INHALES SHARPLY] [EXHALES] Now, we know that one single physiological sigh of the sort that I just described performed at any time of day under any conditions, whether or not you're about to walk on stage to give a talk or you're in a meeting and you're feeling stressed, or you're in a conversation that's very stressful, or you can feel stress mounting because you're in traffic or any number of psychological or physical stressors that may be approaching you or you feel are oppressing you, doing one physiological sigh of the sort that I just described is the fastest physiologically verified way that we are aware of to reduce your levels of stress and to reintroduce calm, that is, to shift your autonomic nervous system from a state of heightened levels of autonomic arousal. That is, sympathetic nervous system as, it's called, is at a higher activation level than the so-called parasympathetic nervous system. Again, sympathetic nervous system having nothing to do with sympathy, has everything to do with so-called fight or flight, although it controls other things, too, including positive arousal. And the parasympathetic nervous system, often referred to as the rest and digest system, although it does other things, too, is associated with calming. Those two things are always in kind of push-pull with one another, like a seesaw or push-pull, however you want to think about it. One physiological sigh, meaning that big, deep inhale, short second inhale also through the nose, and then long exhale to completely lungs empty, is known to restore the level of balance in the sympathetic-parasympathetic neural circuitry and is the fastest way to reintroduce calm. That's one physiological sigh. In this study, what we asked was that people perform that repeatedly, so-called cyclic sighing, for the duration of five minutes. And the people who did that cyclic sighing for five minutes a day, regardless of the time of day that they did it, experienced the greatest reductions in stress not just during the practice but around the 24-hour cycle. And it translated, again, to all sorts of positive subjective changes-- improvements in sleep, lower resting heart rate at all times of day. So this is important. Again, this study was not just exploring what happens during meditation or breathwork, cyclic sighing, et cetera. It was exploring how the changes that occur during that practice translate to changes in breathing and heart rate, mood, et cetera, throughout the 24-hour cycle. So the takeaway here is twofold. First of all, if you are somebody who wants to improve your mood and reduce your overall levels of stress and you only have five minutes a day to invest in that, hopefully you're doing all the other things like trying to get proper sleep and exercise, social connection, nutrition, et cetera, sunlight in the morning, of course. Can't leave that out. But if you were going to devote five minutes a day to a stress reduction practice that is now supported by data to translate to reductions in stress around the clock, the data say that you would want to invest that in cyclic sighing, that is, double inhale through the nose, extended exhale through the mouth until your lungs are empty, then repeat for five minutes a day. You, of course, if you like, could do meditation. It still had positive effects, meaning it reduced stress, although not as much as cyclic sighing. You could do box breathing if you want for the purpose of reducing stress. All the practices we explored did reduce stress. But cyclic sighing performed for five minutes a day had the most robust and pervasive effect in reducing stress, improving mood, and improving sleep. That's the first message of the study. The second takeaway is that one physiological sigh-- that's right just one physiological sigh, where you inhale deeply through the nose another inhale through the nose to maximally inflate the alveoli of the lungs, and then you exhale to completely lungs empty and then go back to normal breathing, is the fastest way to introduce a level of calm and to reduce your overall levels of stress in real time. And this is very important. I think that out there these days, we hear a lot about stress reduction techniques. And most all of the stress reduction techniques that have been explored, everything from massage to meditation to breathwork to a hot shower to a foot rub, will calm you down. The question is, do they calm you down just during that practice? Great if it does. But does it also translate to reduced levels of stress at other times in the 24-hour cycle and other positive effects as well? So one physiological sigh is a very efficient way to adjust that ratio of sympathetic to parasympathetic activation and immediately bring about calm. So it's excellent for real-time control of stress. The other thing about physiological sighs is that it's not a hack. It's not the application of a breathing practice to something that it wasn't intended for. In fact, physiological sighs were not discovered by me at all. They were discovered by physiologists in the 1930s, who found that when people underbreathe, they have a buildup of carbon dioxide in their system. And even though carbon dioxide is essential for life, you don't want too much of it in your system. And that people, whether or not they were asleep or awake, would engage a physiological sigh spontaneously, subconsciously. They would do this double inhale through the nose and extended exhale through the mouth. And that did not just eliminate excessive carbon dioxide from the system. It also rebalanced the oxygen-carbon dioxide ratio in the proper ways. In fact, it's observed in animals. You might see this in animals that are tired. When animals or humans get tired, they tend to start underbreathing a little bit, and that can often disrupt the balance of carbon dioxide and oxygen. And right before a dog will go down for a nap, for instance, you'll notice that it'll do this double inhale, exhale. people when they are sleeping, if they hold their breath for a period of time, which, frankly, all of us do periodically throughout sleep, they will engage a spontaneous physiological sigh. During the daytime, we are often holding our breath, especially nowadays-- and there's a study on this that we'll talk about a little bit later-- where when people text message or they're emailing, although nowadays people are mainly on social media and text messaging, they often are holding their breath. They will follow a breath hold by a physiological sigh because during that breath hold, they're building up the level of carbon dioxide in their system. Now, mind you, I spent close to a half an hour telling you that most people are overbreathing at rest, and that's also true. But people often will shift from overbreathing to underbreathing, which is a terrible pattern. So physiological sighs done either as a one-off, one physiological sigh to clamp stress or reduce stress in real time, or repeatedly over five minutes as a practice that you do each day is going to be not just the most effective way to approach reducing stress around the clock and in real time but also the one that's highly compatible with the way that the neural circuits that control breathing were designed. The physiological sigh has some other very useful applications. One of the more, I would say, useful ones, at least to those of you that exercise, is going to be the use of physiological sigh in order to remove the so-called side stitch. So if you've ever been running or swimming or exercising and you felt a cramp on your right side, chances are, despite what your high school PE coach told you, that raising your arms above your head or drinking less water before you exercise is not going to get rid of that cramp. And here's why. It's not a cramp at all. If you recall the cervical 3, 4, and 5 nerves that give rise to the phrenic nerve and go down and innervate your diaphragm, well, as I mentioned before, a certain number of those nerve fibers actually course into the diaphragm and go up underneath. And if you recall earlier, I also said that the diaphragm sits right on top of the liver. In other words, you actually have a sensory innervation of the diaphragm, the deep diaphragm, and the liver. And there's something called referenced pain, which is what people generally experience when they have that side stitch on their right-hand side. So if you're ever exercising and you feel a cramp on your right-hand side, it's possible that it's a genuine cramp. But more likely is the fact that that phrenic nerve sensory innervation is now being carried up to your brain and you are detecting some local or referenced pain in the liver and in the diaphragm. Now, that doesn't necessarily mean you're doing anything wrong, although you might not be breathing properly for running at that moment, and that's what gave rise to it. It could be some spasming of the phrenic nerve or some inefficient breathing during running. We had an entire series on fitness with Dr. Andy Galpin. One of those episodes included a lot of information on breathing. It was the episode on endurance, although breathing was a topic that was thread through multiple episodes in that series. You can find that series at HubermanLab.com. Talks a lot about how to breathe during running, how to breathe during weightlifting, et cetera. But the point for now is that if ever you're experiencing that right-side side stitch, I encourage you to perform the physiological sigh. And the good news is you can perform it while still running or while still swimming, although I suppose with swimming, you might have to make some adjustments because, of course, you don't want to inhale water, or while cycling or any type of activity. If you perform that physiological sigh generally two or three times, what will occur is that because of changes in the firing of the phrenic nerve, and in particular because of changes in the sensory feedback from the sensory component of the phrenic nerve back to the brain, you will experience an alleviation of the pain from that right-side side stitch. In other words, you can get rid of side cramps doing physiological sighs during activities, in particular during running activities. Now, I should also mention that if you're experiencing a side stitch on the left-side, chances are that has to do with excessive air or fluid in your stomach. And there are reasons for that that also have to do with the way that the phrenic nerve is-- it's bilateral and branches to both sides and is catching sensory input on the left side from some of the local organs and sensory innervation of those organs. But if you have right-side side stitch, the physiological sigh done two or three times while still running ought to relieve that side stitch. Now, as long as we're talking about breathing and the phrenic nerve and the relationship between the phrenic nerve and your liver and your stomach and some of the other organs in that neighborhood, we should talk about the relationship between breathing and heart rate. This is an incredibly important topic, so much so that I perhaps should have brought it up at the beginning of the episode. But nonetheless, you now know what your diaphragm does. When you inhale, your diaphragm moves down. That's right. When you contract your diaphragm, it moves down. It creates space for your lungs to inhale. And when you exhale, your diaphragm moves up. Well, when you inhale and your diaphragm moves down, what happens is there's more space created in the thoracic cavity and particularly if you're also breathing deeply and you're using those intercostal muscles to expand your ribs. As a consequence, the heart actually gets a little bit bigger. It's a temporary enlargement in the heart. But it's a real enlargement. And as a consequence, whatever blood is in the heart is now in a larger volume because the heart got bigger. And as a consequence, that blood is moving more slowly through that larger volume for a short period of time. But nonetheless, it's moving more slowly. Your nervous system detects that and sends a neural signal to the heart to speed the heart rate up. In other words, inhales increase heart rate. The opposite is true when you exhale. When you exhale, your diaphragm moves up. Your rib cage tends to move inward a bit. And you compact the heart. You reduce the volume of the heart overall. When you reduce the volume of the heart overall, blood flow through the heart accelerates because it's a smaller volume. So a given unit of blood is going to move more quickly through that small volume. Your nervous system detects that and sends a signal to slow the heart down. So just as inhales speed the heart up, exhales slow your heart rate down. Now, of course, even though you can double up on inhales or even triple up on inhales, sooner or later, if you inhale, you're going to have to exhale. And the converse is also true, of course. So what does this mean in terms of controlling your heart rate? Well, let's say you are going in for a blood draw, or you're going out on stage and you're stressed. Well, I would encourage you to do a physiological sigh, maybe two physiological sighs to bring your level of calm up and your level of stress down. Nonetheless, if you have any reason why you want to quickly reduce your heart rate or accelerate your heart rate for sake of physical work output or to calm yourself down additionally, not just use the physiological sigh, well, then you can take advantage of this relationship between inhales and exhales controlling heart rate. If you want to increase your heart rate, you can simply inhale longer and more vigorously relative to your exhales. And if you want to decrease your heart rate, well, then you're going to make your exhales longer and/or more vigorous than your inhales. In fact, this process, which is called respiratory sinus arrhythmia, is the basis of what we call heart rate variability. Heart rate variability involves the vagus nerve, the 10th cranial nerve, which is a parasympathetic nerve that is associated with a calming aspect of the autonomic nervous system, slowing your heart rate down by extending your exhales. And it really forms the basis of most all breathing practices. If you look at any breathing practices, whether or not it's Wim Hof breathing, Tummo breathing, Kundalini breathing, Pranayama breathing, physiological sighing, cyclic sighing, and on and on and on, if you were to measure the ratio of inhales to exhales and the vigor of inhales to exhales, what you would find is that each one would create a net increase or a net decrease in heart rate that could be very accurately predicted by whether or not that breathing practice emphasized inhales, emphasized exhales, or had those two features, inhale and exhale, be of equal duration and intensity. In fact, if you wanted to equilibrate your heart rate, what you would do is you would do box breathing because inhale, hold, exhale, hold is, by definition, creating equal duration inhales and exhales of essentially equivalent vigor. When you do a physiological sigh, you're doing two big inhales, which is going the speed your heart rate up just a little bit, but then a long extended exhale. The exhale in the end is much longer than the two inhales even when combined. And so you get a net decrease in heart rate, the calming effect. And then practices such as Tummo breathing or Wim Hof breathing or cyclic hyperventilation, [HYPERVENTILATES] deep inhales and exhales, the inhales are more vigorous compared to the more passive exhales-- are going to lead to increases in heart rate. So the relationship between breathing and heart rate is an absolutely lockstep one where your heart rate follows your breathing. Your heart rate and your breathing are in an intimate discussion with one another, but where always and forever your inhales increase your heart rate, your exhales decrease it. Now, this feature, which physicians call respiratory sinus arrhythmia, or we sometimes hear about more often nowadays as heart rate variability, is something that people in sport have known about for a very long time. It's why, for instance, that marksmen will exhale just prior to taking a shot. That's particularly true for people that compete in the biathlon, where they cross country ski. So their heart rate is up, up, up, up, up. Then they'll get to the point where they actually have to shoot a target, and they'll exhale, and then they'll shoot the target. This is also why, for instance, if you want to bring your heart rate down very quickly between rounds of martial arts, there are a number of different ways to do that. But an extended exhale of any kind or, frankly, any breathing practice that emphasizes exhales is going to bring your heart rate down. This has been incorporated in a number of different contexts, including sport, military. It's also now being incorporated in a clinical context for people who feel a panic attack coming on. I'm very gratified to learn that the physiological sigh is now being explored as a tool to prevent panic attacks and anxiety attacks. This is prior to the panic attack, people bringing their heart rate down, again, through those extended exhales. So learning to extend your exhale is really a terrific skill to master, and it's a very easy skill to master, frankly. Why do I say a skill? Well, remember what I said earlier, which is that humans inhale actively and most typically will passively exhale, just let the air [EXHALES] drop out of them at whatever rate, depending on how much air they inhaled. Actively exhaling, that is, actively relaxing the diaphragm and actively relaxing those intercostal muscles of the chest, those ones that are, I should say, between the ribs, is a skill that you can very quickly acquire and will allow you to use that relationship between the phrenic nerve, the diaphragm, and the size of the heart, the heart volume, and all that stuff to really take control of heart rate quickly. So that if you feel like your heart is racing too much-- and, frankly, a lot of people have a lot of what's called interoceptive awareness, especially anxious people. They can really sense what's going on in their body, other people less so. Like, oh my god, my heart's beating. It's ready to jump out of my chest, and I don't like that. I don't like that. [EXHALES] Big, long exhale. It doesn't matter if you do it through the nose or the mouth. Big, long exhale is going to allow you to slow your heart rate down. Let's talk about hiccups. Everybody experiences hiccups from time to time. I think most people would agree that one hiccup is sort of funny. Two hiccups in a row is really funny. And three hiccups in a row is where it starts to be concerning, in part because hiccups can be kind of painful. You can experience pain in your gut or your lower abdomen and sometimes in your chest as well. And it feels kind of intrusive. It gets in the way of having conversation or just sitting there and relaxing. Fortunately, there's a simple way to get rid of hiccups. And you can arrive at that simple technique if you understand a little bit about what gives rise to hiccups. The reason we get hiccups at all is because we experience a spasm of the phrenic nerve. The phrenic nerve, as you recall, is a nerve that emanates from the cervical region, to be specific C3, 4, and 5. Those spinal nerves go down, of course, behind the heart and innervate the diaphragm, which is the muscle that when it contracts, it moves down and allows the lungs to fill. And then when you relax the diaphragm, then the diaphragm moves up, and the lungs shrink or they expel air, so-called exhalation. Now, the phrenic nerve also has that sensory branch. So it's not just involved in controlling the diaphragm at the motor level. It's also sensing things deep within the diaphragm and in the liver as well because the liver sits right below the diaphragm. So a hiccup has that painful sensation from time to time because there's a rapid sensory feedback or a signal, rather, of a sharp sensation of contraction within the diaphragm. And that's relayed back to the brain. And you consciously perceive that as a little bit of pain. And then, of course, the hiccup is [HICCUPS] the hiccup, which is the spasming of the phrenic nerve that you experience more or less in your throat. But all this really is happening along the phrenic nerve and toward the diaphragm. What this all means is that if you can stop the phrenic nerve from spasming, you can stop hiccups. There are a lot of approaches that people have tried to take to eliminate spasming of the phrenic nerve. You'll hear that breathing into a bag, which is one way to reingest or reinhale carbon dioxide that otherwise would be expelled out into the environment, can help. That's a very indirect method. It rarely works, frankly, because it really has to do more with adjusting your breathing to try and adjust the activity of the phrenic nerve. It's a really roundabout way of trying to alleviate hiccups. Some people will experience relief from drinking from a glass of water from the opposite side of the glass. So you have to tilt over at the waist. It's a kind of messy approach. Again, it doesn't tend to work a lot of the time. For some people, it works every time. But for most people, it doesn't work at all. However, there is a technique that can reliably eliminate hiccups. And it's a technique that takes advantage of hypercontracting the phrenic nerve over a short period of time so that it then subsequently relaxes or alleviates the spasming of the phrenic nerve. And that simple method is to inhale three times in a row. This is a very unusual pattern of breathing. But what it involves is taking a big, deep inhale through your nose. Then before you exhale any air, take a second inhale through the nose, however brief that inhale might be, and then a third even micro or millisecond long inhale through your nose to get that third inhale. And then hold your breath for about 15 to 20 seconds, and then slowly exhale. So even though I'm not experiencing any hiccups right now. I will demonstrate the method for eliminating hiccups so that you're all clear on how to do it. OK, here I go. [INHALES DEEPLY] [INHALES] [INHALES] [EXHALES] OK, so it's three inhales all through the nose. And it is true that that second and third inhale takes some physical effort to really get additional air into the lungs without exhaling first. It feels like-- the only way I can describe it really is as a sharp second and third inhale because you really have to engage the musculature of those intercostal muscles and the diaphragm in order to do it. And then that long exhale can be through the nose or the mouth. But I find it particularly relaxing or even pleasant to do it through the nose. This method of three inhales through the nose followed by a long exhale through the nose or mouth will eliminate hiccups right away because what it does is it hyperexcites the phrenic nerve three times in a row, a very unnatural pattern for the phrenic nerve to fire. And then it undergoes a hyperpolarization, as we call it, in which the phrenic nerve actually stands a much lower probability of getting activated again for some period of time afterwards. So it is important that you try and return to normal cadence of breathing after doing this three inhales followed by a long exhale. If you need to perform it a second time in order to eliminate hiccups because they're simply not going away, that's fine. You can do that. But as far as we know, this is the most efficient and science-supported way to eliminate hiccups. Now, up until now I've been talking about breathing techniques, and I've mainly focused on breathing techniques that emphasize the exhale, whether or not it's the carbon dioxide tolerance test, whether or not it's cyclic sighing or the physiological sigh that you use in real time to reduce stress. One thing that we haven't talked about so much is cyclic hyperventilation. Cyclic hyperventilation, as you recall, is a bout of 25 or so breaths inhaling deeply through the nose and then passively exhaling or sometimes actively exhaling, typically through the mouth. So it might look like this. [HYPERVENTILATES] That's a very active inhale through the nose and exhale through the mouth. It can also be done active inhale through the nose, passive exhale through the mouth, like so. [HYPERVENTILATING] In any event, that pattern of breathing repeated for 10 to 25 breaths greatly increases levels of autonomic arousal. In fact, it's known to deploy adrenaline from the adrenals. And in our study, we had people then expel all their air, so breathe out, hold their breath for 15 to 30 seconds, and then repeat for a period of five minutes. That did lead to some very interesting and positive physiological changes in terms of stress mitigation, although not as significant as was observed with cyclic sighing, as I talked about earlier. Now, there is a lot of interest in cyclic hyperventilation for sake of, for instance, extending breath holds. This has become popular in part because of the so-called Wim Hof method, which is a method that combines breathing, cyclic hyperventilation, followed by lungs full or lungs empty breath holds, depending on which variant of the Wim Hof method one is using. Separately-- and I really want to emphasize separately-- the Wim Hof method also involves deliberate cold exposure, which, as all of you know, I'm a big fan of and we've done episodes of this podcast on. And we have toolkits on deliberate cold exposure for increasing dopamine levels, epinephrine levels, immune system function, et cetera. Wim Hof method also incorporates that. And it has a mindfulness component. I do want to caution people that any time you're doing cyclic hyperventilation, you want to be very cautious about not doing it in or near water because it does greatly increase the risk of shallow water blackout. And that's because when you do cyclic hyperventilation, you are expelling, you're exhaling more carbon dioxide than usual. And what I haven't told you yet is that the trigger to breathe is actually an increase in carbon dioxide. What I mean by that is you have a small set of neurons in your brainstem that can detect when carbon dioxide levels in your bloodstream reach a certain level. And when they reach that level, they trigger the gasp reflex and/or the hunger for breathing. In other words, we don't breathe because we crave oxygen, although we do need oxygen, of course, in order to survive and for our brain to function and our bodily organs to function. But our brain is wired such that it has a threat sensor, which is carbon dioxide levels are getting too high, and that's what triggers the motor reflex to breathe and to, in some cases, gasp for air, depending on how starved for air we are. So if you do cyclic hyperventilation, whether or not it's Wim Hof method or whether or not it's Tummo method-- again, these things are similar. They're not exactly the same. There are other breathing methods that incorporate cyclic hyperventilation. What you're doing is you're getting rid of a lot of carbon dioxide, and therefore, you're removing the impulse or lowering the impulse to breathe so that when you enter that breath hold phase after the hyperventilation, it's a much longer period of time before you feel the anxiety and the hunger and the impulse to breathe. That's one of the real benefits of any technique that incorporates cyclic hyperventilation, is that rather than reduce your stress level in real time, it actually does the opposite. It increases your stress level. It increases your levels of autonomic arousal. But you're doing it deliberately. And then during those breath holds, what's happening is you have a lot of adrenaline circulating in your system because of the way that hyperventilation triggers the release of adrenaline from your adrenal glands. It also triggers the release of epinephrine, which is the same as adrenaline, from a little brain area called locus coeruleus, which makes you feel more alert. And then during those breath holds and in the subsequent rounds of cyclic hyperventilation, people experience what it is to have a lot of adrenaline in their system. But they are controlling the release of that adrenaline, which is far and away different than when life events are triggering that adrenaline. So what it really is is a form of self-induced stress inoculation. And I do think there are benefits to practicing cyclic hyperventilation because it does allow you to learn how to self-deploy adrenaline and epinephrine from locus coeruleus and from the adrenals. Or I got that backwards-- adrenaline from your adrenals and epinephrine from locus coeruleus. And it allows you to explore what it is to maintain calm state of mind and body when you have a lot of adrenaline in your system, which certain studies are starting to show can allow people to be able to lean into the stressful aspects of life. And let's be honest, life is stressful in any event. And we're all going to experience stress at some point or another. And when we do, we want to make sure that we're not overtaken by the release of adrenaline from the adrenals, that sudden surge of epinephrine from locus coeruleus. So doing cyclic hyperventilation maybe one or two times per week-- again, 25 breaths, active inhale, passive or active exhale. Do expect to feel tingly because of that reduction in carbon dioxide from exhaling so much. Do expect to feel a little bit agitated. Be very careful doing this if you're somebody who has anxiety attacks or somebody who has panic attacks or disorders of any kind. But if you don't and you want to explore this, you'll notice you start to feel really ramped up. And then during the breath holds, which, again, can be done by exhaling and stopping for some period of time, 15, maybe even 60 seconds, is a time in which you can explore how to remain mentally calm. Some people even choose to do math problems or think of things in a kind of structured way while they have a lot of these hormone neurotransmitters circulating at high levels in their system, in other words, as a way to learn to manage your mind and body under conditions of stress. Now, if you are somebody who's using deliberate cold exposure, either cold showers or ice baths or cold immersion, I often get asked how best to breathe during those different types of activities. Really, there's no best way to breathe. Although if you wanted to turn those activities into their own form of stress inoculation, again, please don't use cyclic hyperventilation. That's dangerous. I don't recommend it whatsoever. But you can try to actively slow your breathing, that is, to make sure that you're engaging in rhythmic breathing. Now, up until now I've said that rhythmic breathing is the default. Pre-Botzinger nucleus controlling rhythmic breathing is the default and that doubling up on inhales and exhales is something that happens when you deliberately take over the action of pre-Botzinger complex. Now, that's true 99% of the time. However, there are certain conditions, such as conditions of heightened state of emotional arousal-- if you think about somebody who's been crying, oftentimes they'll do the double inhale, exhale [INHALES SHAKILY] or triple inhales. Or if somebody is very, very afraid, it's all inhales. So it does sometimes happen spontaneously. Actually, when we get into very cold water, there's a very robust decrease in the activation of the prefrontal cortex, which is the area of brain real estate right behind the forehead that controls structured thinking, your ability to reason and make sense of what's going on. If you get into really cold water, you should not expect that brain region to work or at least not work very well at all for the first 20 or 30 seconds that you're in the cold water. From the time you get into cold water, because here we're talking about deliberate cold exposure, I encourage you to try and control your breathing and make it rhythmic, that is, inhales follow exhales follow inhales follow exhales, even if they have to be fast inhale exhale, inhale, exhale. Why? Because the default when we get into a stressful circumstance, emotionally or physically stressful circumstance, is that rhythmic breathing stops and that parafacial nucleus takes over and it's [INHALES RAPIDLY],, and it's that kind of panicky mode. And by simply controlling our breath, again, even if it's fast from inhale to exhale and making sure that we're alternating inhales and exhales rhythmically-- and what you'll find is that you'll be able to navigate that what would otherwise be a very stressful circumstance and make it less stressful or maybe even pleasant. And that skill definitely translates to other aspects of life in which you're hit square in the face with something stressful. You'll notice your breathing and your pattern of breathing switching to multiple inhales or breath holding, essentially departing from rhythmic breathing. And by quickly returning to rhythmic breathing and maybe even trying to slow the breathing and extend those exhales, you'll find that you can very quickly calm down. Next, I'd like to discuss what I find to be an absolutely fascinating topic. It's also one that's highly useful in the world, which is how your specific patterns of breathing relate to your ability to learn and to remember information, how it can modulate fear, and a number of other aspects of how your brain functions. This is a literature that's been reviewed recently in a lot of exquisite detail in a beautiful review by Jack Feldman, who I mentioned earlier, one of the pioneers of the neuroscience of breathing. The title of the review is "Breathing Rhythm and Pattern and Their Influence on Emotion." Again we'll, provide a link to this review in the show note captions. This review includes discussion of several studies, one in particular that I'll get into in a bit of detail, that describes the following. Right now, I just want you to breathe regularly, meaning rhythmically. You can inhale and exhale through your mouth or through your nose. I'd prefer that you do it through your nose because nasal breathing, unless you need to breathe through your mouth because of hard exercise or eating or talking, is always going to be the better way to go. Nasal breathing improves the aesthetic of your face. That's been shown. We'll talk about that just briefly in a few minutes. Nasal breathing improves the amount of oxygen you can bring into your system, et cetera, et cetera. OK, so just breathe. Inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale. And know that during your exhales, your pupil, that is, the pupil of your eye, is getting bigger. And as you exhale, it's getting smaller. In addition, when you inhale, your reaction time to anything that happens around you-- a car swerving in front of you, something that you might detect in the periphery of your vision or hear off in the distance-- increases significantly compared to when you're exhaling. In addition, when you are inhaling, your ability to remember things, especially things that take a bit of effort to remember, and your ability to learn new information is significantly greater than it is when you're exhaling. Now, as you hear all that, you're probably thinking, OK, how do I just inhale? Well, of course, that's not going to be the best approach. You need to exhale as well for all the reasons you now are well aware of. But what these findings really illustrate-- and I should mention these findings are all carried out in humans. So these relate to some stuff in animal studies. But what I just described has been shown in human studies consistently. When we inhale and, in particular, when we inhale through our nose, our brain is not functioning in the same way as when we exhale. Now, that doesn't mean that our brain is functioning in a deficient way when we exhale. It just doesn't function as well as it relates to memory retrieval, memory formation, and some other aspects of cognition. Now, you might be asking, why in the world would this be? Well, I wasn't consulted at the design phase, and anyone that tells you that they were you should back away from quickly. But one reasonable explanation for why our brain functions better, at least in the context of what I just talked about, when we inhale is because the olfactory system is actually the most ancient sensory system of all the sensory systems we have. So before vision, before audition, before touch, before all of that, the olfactory system is the most ancient system. And the olfactory system, of course, is designed to detect chemicals in the environment. And so if you imagine an early organism that perhaps we evolved from or perhaps we didn't but nonetheless that we share some features of, at least in terms of olfactory function, in order to get that chemical information into the brain, you need to inhale. You need to bring that information in. Now, for aquatic animals, they could take it in through water. But for animals that are terrestrial that live on land, they would have to get it through the air. So inhalation, we know, activates certain regions of the so-called piriformis cortex. These are areas of the neocortex that are more ancient, as well as increasing the activity of brain areas such as the hippocampus, which is a brain area involved in learning and memory. In fact, one of the studies that illustrates this most beautifully is a study that was published in The Journal of Neuroscience in 2016. By the way, Journal of Neuroscience is a very fine journal. And the title of this paper is "Nasal Respiration Entrains Human Limbic Oscillations and Modulates Cognitive Function." This is a paper that followed up on an earlier paper that showed that when people breathe in through their nose, their recognition and their discrimination of different odors was far greater than when they breathe in through their mouth. Now, that result was interesting, but it was also sort of a duh because you smell things with your nose, not your mouth. You taste things with your mouth, and you speak with your mouth, and there are bunch of other things you can do with your mouth. But nonetheless, that study pointed to the idea that the brain is different during nasal inhalations versus nasal exhalations versus mouth inhalations versus exhalations. What it basically showed is that the brain ramps up its levels of activity, and that signal to noise that we talked about earlier, if you recall, that ability for the brain to detect things in the environment, is increased during inhalations. But because that earlier study focused on smell, on olfaction, there was a bit of a confound there. It was hard to separate out the variables. So this paper, the one I just mentioned, "Nasal Respiration Entrains Human and Limbic Oscillations and Modulates Cognitive Function," did not look at detection of odors. Rather, it looked at things like reaction time or fear. And basically, what it found is that reaction time is greatly reduced when people are inhaling. So they had people look at fearful stimuli. They looked at their reaction time to fearful stimuli, in other words, their ability to detect certain kinds of stimuli. And they were given a lot of different kinds of stimuli. So they had to be able to discriminate between one sort of-- oops, excuse me. By the way, folks, for those listening, I just bumped the microphone, getting rather animated here. What the subjects had to do was detect one type of stimulus versus another stimulus that they were being exposed to. And what they found is if people were inhaling as that fear-inducing stimulus was presented, their reaction time to notice it was much, much faster. And they related that to patterns of brain activity, and they were able to do that because they were actually recording from the brain directly from beneath the skull. And they were able to do that because they had some patients that had intracranial electrodes embedded in their brain for sake of trying to detect epileptic seizures. So there's a lot to this study and a lot that we could discuss. But the basic takeaway is that when people are inhaling, that is, when they're drawing air in through their nose in particular, their ability to detect what's going on in the world around them is greatly enhanced and not just for fear but also for surprise of all sorts. So when people are inhaling, their ability to detect novel stimuli, things that are unexpected or that are unusual in their environment, is significantly increased. Again, we'll put a link to this study as well. I find it to be one of the more interesting studies in this realm, although there are now many additional studies that support this statement that I made earlier, which is that during inhalation, also called inspiration, there are a number of very fast physiological changes, such as changes in pupil diameter, changes in the activity of the hippocampus, this memory encoding and retrieval area of the brain, and other areas of the brain. So what's the tool takeaway from this? If you are sitting down to read or research or study or you really want to learn some information-- maybe you're listening to a podcast or some other sorts of information that you want to retain-- it actually makes sense to increase the duration or the intensity of your inhales as you do that. The more that you're inhaling relative to exhaling in terms of duration, the more that your brain is in this focused mode and this mode of being able to access and retrieve information better. Now, there's one caveat to this that I think is important because I know a number of people listen to this podcast for sake of gleaning tools not just for cognitive enhancement but for physical enhancement. It turns out that when you are inhaling air, you're actually less able or, I should say, less efficient at generating voluntary movements. Now, that might come as a surprise. Up until now, we've basically been talking about inhalation is great, almost to the point where you wonder like, is the exhalation good for anything? You don't want to overbreathe and kick out too much carbon dioxide. Well, of course exhalation is great for things. In fact, if you're somebody that's played baseball or softball, what are you told? That you should exhale on the swing to generate the maximum amount of power. If you're somebody who has done martial arts of any kind, was traditional Western boxing, as you strike, that's where people typically do the hiya, laying the sort of classic karate type thing. That's more of a movie thing. I don't know whether or not people actually use the hiya. But in boxing, oftentimes people will do [EXHALES SHARPLY].. They'll do a rapid exhalation, a forceful exhalation, keeping in mind, again, that inhales typically are active. They engage the diaphragmatic muscle. They engage those intercostal muscles. Whereas exhales tend to be passive unless we take active control of the exhale. And, indeed, our ability to generate fast, directed, so-called volitional, voluntary movements is greatly enhanced if we do them during the exhale, not the inhale. Now, with all of that said, I haven't yet really talked about mouth versus nasal breathing. And it really can be a fairly short discussion because what abundant data now show and has been beautifully described in the book called Jaws, A Hidden Epidemic-- this is a book that was written by Paul Ehrlich and Sandra Kahn, my colleagues at Stanford School of Medicine. It has an introduction and a foreword from Jared Diamond and from the great Robert Sapolsky. So some real heavy hitters on this book. What that book really describes is that whenever possible, meaning unless you're speaking or eating or you're exercising or other activities require some change in your pattern of breathing, we should really all be striving to breathe through our nose, not through our mouth. And that relates to the increased resistance to breathing through the nose we talked about earlier. Again, I'll say it a third time, that increased resistance through the nose allows you to inflate your lungs more, not less. The other thing that breathing through your nose allows you to do is it both warms and moisturizes the air that you bring into your lungs, which is more favorable for lung health than breathing through the mouth. Hard breathing through the mouth or simply mouth breathing at all is actually quite damaging or can be, I should say, quite damaging to some of the respiratory functions of your lungs. That, of course, does not mean that you shouldn't breathe hard through your mouth when you're running or sprinting or exercising hard. But you don't want mouth breathing to be the chronic default pattern that you follow. Nasal breathing is the best pattern of breathing to follow as a default state. Another aspect of nasal breathing that's really beneficial is that the gas nitric oxide is actually created in the nasal passages. It's a gas that can cause relaxation of the smooth muscles that relate to the vasculature not just of your nose but of your brain and for all the tissues of your body. This is why nasal breathing and not mouth breathing is great for when you want to relieve congestion. So a lot of these things seem counterintuitive. Your nose is stuffed. So that mainly makes people breathe through their mouth. But it turns out that breathing through your nose will allow some dilation of the vasculature, more blood flow, dilation of the nasal passages, and delivery of nitric oxide to all the tissues of your body. And that dilation of the small capillaries that innervate essentially every organ of your body allow the delivery of more nutrients and the removal of carbon dioxide and other waste products from those tissues more readily than if you're not getting enough-- excuse me-- nitric oxide into your system. So a lot of reasons to be a nasal breather. If you want to check out that book Jaws, A Hidden Epidemic, it's a terrific read. And it also shows some absolutely striking pictures, twin studies and so forth, and some before and afters of people and the aesthetic changes that they experienced when they shifted from being a mouth breather to a nose breather. These are striking examples that have been observed over and over again. When people mouth breath, there's an elongation of the jaw, drooping of the eyelids, and the entire jaw structure really changes in ways that are not aesthetically favorable. Fortunately, when people switch to becoming nasal breathers-- and, of course, that takes some encouragement either by mouth taping or doing their cardiovascular exercise with mouth closed or by doing the sorts of exercises that we talked about earlier. When they switch to becoming nasal breathers by default, the aesthetic changes that occur are very dramatic and very favorable, including elevation of the eyebrows, not in an artificial sense or in a kind of outrageous way, but elevation of the cheekbones, sharpening of the jaw, and, most notably, improvements of the teeth and the entire jaw structure. In fact, one simple test of whether or not you can be an efficient nasal breather and whether or not you've been nasal breathing efficiently or most of the time in the past or whether or not you've been relying more on mouth breathing that was described in the book Jaws is you should be able to close your mouth and breathe only through your nose. Again, this is at rest, not during exercise necessarily, though you might do it during exercise. But close your mouth, put your tongue, on the roof of your mouth, and it should fit behind your teeth. And you should be able to nose breathe in that position. Now, many people won't be able to do that. But fortunately, as I mentioned earlier, if you nasal breathe, that is, you deliberately nasal breathe when at rest for some period of time, you will experience an increased ability to nasal breathe. And you should also experience some addition of space within the palate of your mouth to allow your tongue to sit more completely on the roof of your mouth. This is especially true for children that perform this technique. Again, I refer you to the book Jaws, A Hidden Epidemic. It's an absolutely spectacular book. You can also just look online "before and after Jaws, Hidden Epidemic" and look at some of the changes in facial structure that occur when people move from mouth to nasal breathing, and it's really quite striking. So during today's episode, per always, we covered a lot of information. First, we talked about the mechanical aspects of breathing-- the lungs, the diaphragm, the trachea, and so forth. We also talked about the chemical aspects of breathing, that really breathing is a way that we bring oxygen to our cells and that we get the correct levels or, I should say, we maintain the correct levels of carbon dioxide in our system, neither too much nor too little, in order to allow oxygen to do its magic and to allow carbon dioxide to do its magic. Because as you learned during today's episode, carbon dioxide is not just a waste byproduct. It has very critical physiological functions. You need to have enough of it around. And therefore, you don't want to overbreathe, especially at rest. We talked about a tool to measure how well you manage carbon dioxide, the so-called carbon dioxide tolerance test, and various exercises that you can use simply by breathing to decrease your stress in real time, decrease your stress chronically around the clock. Obviously, that's a good thing-- improve sleep, improve mood. How to increase breath hold times and why you might want to do that. Also how to eliminate hiccups. We talked about how to breathe in order to eliminate the side stitch or side cramp that you might experience during exercise and how to breathe in order to improve learning and memory, reaction time, and various other aspects of cognitive and physical function. I do realize it's a lot of information. But as always, I try and give you information that is clear, hopefully interesting as well, and actionable toward a number of different endpoints. So if you're somebody that's just now starting to think about the application of breathwork, I would encourage you to please, yes, do that carbon dioxide tolerance test. That will give you some window into how well or how poorly you're managing breathing. And then here's the great news. The great news is that breathwork, that is, deliberate respiration practices, are very effective at creating change very quickly. In some cases, such as the use of the physiological sigh or cyclic hyperventilation, those changes can be experienced the first time and every time because, again, these are not hacks. These are aspects of your breathing apparati, including the mechanical stuff and the neural stuff and the gas exchange stuff, all of which you were born with and that are available to you at any moment. So all you really have to do is explore them and deploy them as you feel necessary. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us or comments about the podcast or guests that you'd like me to include on the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. Not so much on today's episode, but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep, hormone function, cognitive function, and so on. The Huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. We've done that for several reasons. First of all, Momentous supplements are of the very highest quality. Second of all, Momentous supplements tend to center around single ingredient formulations. This is incredibly important. Because if you're going to include supplements in your daily regimen, you're going to want to use the right supplements in the right dosages, and you want to do that in the most biologically and cost effective way. And single ingredient formulations are the only way that you can determine what works and what doesn't work for you, and it's the only way in which you can adjust the dosage of given supplements or maybe even alternate days that you take one and not the other in a way that really allows you to home in on which supplements are going to be ideal for your mental health, physical health, and performance. Also, Momentous supplements ship internationally. And that's great because we know a number of you reside outside of the United States. If you'd like to see the supplements discussed on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to live momentous, spelled O-U-S, so livemomentous.com/huberman. If you're not already following us on social media, we are HubermanLab on Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And I should mention that on all those platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which overlap with the contents of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content of the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's HubermanLab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network newsletter, it is a zero cost monthly newsletter in which we give a summaries of podcast episodes and toolkits-- for instance, toolkit for sleep, toolkit for managing dopamine, toolkit for deliberate cold exposure. Again, it's all zero cost to sign up. You simply go to HubermanLab.com, go to the Menu function, scroll down to Newsletter, and you supply your email. We do not share your email with anybody else. And there are also some example newsletters there at HubermanLab.com for you to explore. Once again, I'd like to thank you for today's discussion all about the biology and application of breathing. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 224 ---
Video ID: juD99_sPWGU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=juD99_sPWGU
Title: Dr. Andy Galpin: Maximize Recovery to Achieve Fitness & Performance Goals | Huberman Lab
Published: 2023-02-15 13:00:36 UTC
Description:
In this episode 5 of a 6-part special series on fitness, exercise and performance with Andy Galpin, PhD, professor of kinesiology at California State University, Fullerton, he explains how to optimize post-training recovery and how to avoid overtraining in order to better achieve your fitness and exercise goals. He explains the cellular mechanisms of muscle soreness and pain, why adequate recovery is essential for all physical adaptations, and how to enhance recovery using breathwork, thermal, movement, and pressure-based techniques. He describes how overtraining impedes exercise progress and how to assess if you are overreaching or overtraining, by using specific biomarkers and indicators. Like other performance metrics, recovery is a skill that can and should be trained, and that can be learned. This episode provides an actionable toolkit for how to monitor and improve your exercise recovery abilities, which will improve your overall mental and physical health.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Momentous: https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-hu.berman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Dr. Andy Galpin
Academic Profile: http://hhd.fullerton.edu/knes/faculty...
Website: https://www.andygalpin.com 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/drandygalpin
Instagram: https://instagram.com/drandygalpin
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCe3R2e3zYxWwIhMKV36Qhkw

Articles
Brief structured respiration practices enhance mood and reduce physiological arousal: https://bit.ly/3xleMHI
Altered brown fat thermoregulation and enhanced cold-induced thermogenesis in young, healthy, winter-swimming men: https://bit.ly/3YuoDa4

Other Resources
Carbon Dioxide Tolerance Clip (Galpin Guest Series Episode 3): https://youtu.be/oNkDA2F7CjM 
SHIFT Breathwork Assessment: https://shiftadapt.com/breathwork
BMJ tool for visualizing the variability of lab test results: https://www.bmj.com/content/368/bmj.m149/rapid-responses

Timestamps
00:00:00 Recovery
00:04:17 Exercise & Delayed Muscle Soreness, Pain
00:11:35 Muscle Spindles, Reduce Soreness
00:18:56 Exercise, Homeostasis & Hormesis; Blood Test & Fitness Level
00:30:20 Recovery Timescales, Adaptation & Optimization
00:35:10 Adaptation & Biomarkers Levels
00:40:36 4 Recovery Levels, Enhance Recovery
00:47:28 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:48:19 Overreaching vs. Overtraining
00:52:53 Tool: Acute Overload & Recovery, Breathwork
01:03:39 Tool: Alleviate Acute Soreness, Compression Clothing
01:08:27 Tool: Acute Soreness, Massage, Temperature
01:14:21 Cold & Heat Contrast, Cold Shower vs. Immersion, Sauna & Fertility
01:20:44 InsideTracker
01:21:46 Combine Recovery Techniques
01:24:34 Monitoring for Overreaching & Overtraining
01:31:33 Overreaching/Overtraining, Performance & Physiology, Sleep
01:45:41 Overreaching/Overtraining, Biomarkers, Cortisol
01:50:45 Cortisol, Daily Levels & Performance; Rhodiola Supplementation
02:01:25 Carbohydrates, Cortisol & Sleep
02:05:05 Tool: Stress Biomarkers, Heart Rate Variability (HRV)
02:15:07 Tool: “Acute State Shifters”, Stimulants, Dopamine Stacking, Phones
02:25:04 Mirrors & Resistance Training
02:29:01 Tool: “Chronic State Shifters”
02:32:43 Training Recovery & Resilience; Bowling Alley Analogy
02:39:45 Trigger Adaptations & Stress Recovery 
02:42:41 Tool: Measure Recovery; Blood Biomarkers
02:50:06 Libido & Sex Hormones, Supplementation Caution
03:00:08 Tools: No-/Low-Cost Recovery Measurements
03:03:45 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Recovery #Science

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
[Music] welcome to the hubman lab guest Series where I and an expert guest discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine today's episode is the fifth in a six episode series on fitness exercise and performance and today's episode is all about recovery that is how to maximize your recovery to achieve your fitness and exercise and performance goals and how to avoid overtraining Dr Andy Galpin great to be back today we're discussing recovery and I'm very excited to have this discussion because as we know despite the fact that different types of exercise can be used to trigger different types of adaptation such as increased long distance endurance Anor robic capacity strength hypertrophy Etc the workouts themselves are not actually when the progress occurs when the adaptation occurs occurs and this to me is extremely interesting because it parallels what we see with so-call neuroplasticity which is the nervous systems ability to change in response to experience we sit down to learn something we experience something and that is the trigger for rewiring of the nervous system but the actual rewiring occurs away from the experience or the learning so to in Fitness and in exercise recovery is where the Real Results actually emerge where we get better so I'd love for you to explain what recovery really is and the different types of recovery certainly different ways to enhance recovery and I'd also love for you to explain whether or not there are ways that people can become better at recovering because if indeed recovery is when progress emerges when we get better well then anything that supports our recovery and gets us better at recovering ought to increase our rate and our degree of progress absolutely you nailed it in the description what people really want is some sort of change whether we're talking athletes or general population this change is uh some sort of improvement in muscle function reduction in body fat higher functioning metabolism whatever the case is and the only way that happens is we talk about the equation of stress causes adaptation but as you alluded to the piece in the middle is only if you can recover from it and so the game we're playing here is we all agree we want more adaptation that means we need to bring more stress into the system but we then have to ensure that our recovery outpaces the stress input or else we no adaptation will occur in fact what happens is you will actually be in a negative spot and start going backwards and so what I would love to do is is talk about how we've handled this um and I've had a decent amount of experience here I was fortunate enough to do my master's degree in the laboratory of a gentleman named Andy fry who's an NCA lifetime time Achievement Award winner and he studied in large part recovery overtraining overuse overload in a lot of areas in addition I've been fortunate enough to work with individuals from high functioning CEOs and Executives who have little time for Recovery High job stress to to athletes uh in the think of the example of pitchers in Major League Baseball who have to recover in a matter of 4 days so that they can pitch again at maximum velocity so I would love to outline some of the tools and tactics strategies that we use for all these individuals um give you some foundational stuff and I would love to maybe actually cover some things that most people have never heard of um some stuff you may not have access to some technologies that we use some biomarkers um and then even a whole bunch of things that are keeping with the theme of your show here cost free or extremely low cost so all those strategies um what i' would also like to do is cover nutrition and supplementation and fueling and hydration and things but that's probably going to have to be saved for an additional conversation that we'll do in the next episode yes so we will absolutely hold a conversation about nutrition and supplementation where you can educate us about all the top C toour stuff all the way down to the the uh fine details I do have a question about recovery and it's one that I think most people are familiar with themselves which is soreness we think of it as muscle soreness but I was trained early on in my scientific career to always question the seemingly obvious so couple of questions about soreness first of all what does soreness really reflect is it really muscle soreness it feels like it's in the muscles uh but what other organ systems and tissues and cell types does it involve and then I'm particularly interested in this concept or this experience that many of us including myself had which is delayed onset muscle soreness why would it be that when we are less in shape or when we perform a movement that is extremely novel to us the soreness seems to arrive after a reasonable delay of maybe even a day you know we're F the next day with 48 hours later we are exceedingly sore and as we get more fit or more familiar with the movement the soreness seems to arrive earlier so I realized I just asked you about three questions or more first of all what is muscle soreness at a Cellar level which cells which organ systems and so forth what does it mean if we are sore is something I know we'll get into a little bit later and then why the delayed onset muscle soreness it's actually one question so it's totally fine you answered all you asked all three because I'm going to actually answer number three which will answer number two which will actually answer number one I'd love to tell you that I set it up uh that way intentionally but uh I'm just happy to hear that where I was unable to be concise you are able to be concise thank you yeah we are still learning a lot about this area it's actually really difficult to perform these studies anytime you ask a question about something like pain or soreness you're immediately talking about perception and there is obviously a physical component to that but there's also perception and so teasing those things out is extraordinarily challenging that said there has been a lot of work in this area in fact probably you may have a show already out on pain or maybe one's coming down the road we did an episode on pain uh while ago but it's definitely time to revisit that literature I also have some amazing colleagues at Stanford who work on pain both from the uh cellular and molecular side but also from the psychological side about how our um understanding of pain and what we believe about pain shapes the experience of pain and Pain Relief amazing that's that stuff is incredibly important and I'm I'm glad we flagged that and maybe we'll just call that good for now they can come back later for another one of your shows so that being said why does it happen uh 28 to 48 hours after you exercise well that actually should give you some Clues into what's happening so the traditional dogma of delayed onset muscle soreness is what this is called is that it is a result of quote unquote micro tears in the muscle and so you can sort of think I challenged the muscle there was some small tears in there and I'm feeling the result of that well in fact that certainly does happen and it can happen that is not what's explaining your muscle soreness and in fact you can be quite sore from exercise and have no measurable amount of muscle damage and so much like anything else when we're in this idea of pain it's not a onetoone explanation there are multiple factors that are probably causing your perception of pain muscle damage can be one of them it is not the only one and it is probably in my opinion though this is yet to be shown definitively probably not even the leading cause of it and so what's actually happening well the reason it's taking you 24 to 48 hours is is you can actually uh find various papers uh literature reviews dating back in a number of years now over a decade that show these wonderful curves of an inflammatory uh and immune response and and we don't need to necessarily go through the entire physiology right now but effectively what's happening is those things have a little bit of a time delay and so some of those steps happen immediately like right when the exercise is there and then some of them are delayed six to 24 to 48 hours um if you know a little bit about this uh physiology it's you have a combination of neutrophils and macras and a bunch of things happening and this has a Time sequence so what happens is by the time we get to this 28 to 48 hour window now the muscle soreness kicks in which wait a minute if I if this was a result of my muscles being torn and that happened immediately wouldn't that pain start immediately well the answer is it would and so that that is your first clue that that's not responsible for it when we look at that immune response and we see that that is actually Peak 24 to 48 hours later and then that's the same time the pain kicked in that's cluing you with the problem so we have this immune response happening in inflammation then all of a sudden we start getting fluid accumulation and now there are what are called nose receptors and you're probably very obviously you're very familiar with these and these are pain receptors what's actually interesting is we don't necessarily know a lot of information about how many pain receptors are in muscle they're not really in the belly in fact this is why I can perform my muscle biopsies and they don't really hurt you mean in the belly of the muscle correct yeah we do have pressure sensors though and so if you change the volume of the tissue you will respond to that very very quickly so by enhancing swelling in the actual muscle that is immediately putting pressure on those pressure receptors if you will that's the signal so what's probably happening here and I just I just hate to give you another bone but a lot of delayed on some muscle sorus is probably just a neural feedback loop rather than it is actual MUSC damage yeah makes a lot of sense there's a lot of interactions between the um types of neurons that control touch sensation and pain sensation and itch sensation in fact a lot of people um kind of collapse itch and pain together Pingo you know that's something it's painful and it itches is is a familiar thing for people mosquito bites and such um and of course there's the uh classic gate theory of pain which uh people will be familiar with and then I'll explain why I'm explaining this um which is if you you something hurts you know you Bonk your knee or you stub your toe we tend to grab that body part and try and rub it totally and that rubbing is not a coincidental thing it activates a set of uh touch sensors that are that respond to kind of broad dull touch um and that actively inhibits through the release of an inhibitory neurotransmitter the fibers that control the pain signal so anytime we we rub a you know like a charlie horse our leg or we or we stub our toe and we you know we winse and then we grab the toe and we kind of like squeezing in a little bit that's actually deactivating or partially inactivating the the pain mechanism so the idea that uh a swelling response would then trigger a neural response that then then would recruit the pain receptor response here I'm using broad broad brush um Strokes here to explain this um makes very good sense to me um now and only now that you've explained how this process works I can actually even add more to that so if you remember how muscles work so we have to have some sort of signal from the nervous system that has to actually go in and tell the muscle to contract well remember there a few episodes ago we covered the physiology here of what's called a motor unit okay well what I didn't explain to are called muscle spindles and we have talked about proprioception in uh an episode of before as well but we never tied this picture together so let me walk you through that really quickly and it's going to tie this Loop in into a nice bow so what happens is um this motor unit is is coming in from what's called an alpha motor unit and that's going to be innovating your muscle fibers and that's going to tell the muscle fibers to contract those are typically spread out throughout the uh all sides of the muscle in interior exterior all over on the outside though there is another type of muscle called a muscle spindle now these are non contractile so they don't have that acon and myosin and they don't produce Force they are responsive they are proprioceptive so what that means is they sense stretch and this is why for example if you were to um stretch a hamstring stretch any muscle group it doesn't really matter or muscle its innate response is to fire back to close that distance and this is what keeps you from say if you're leaning to the right um You can imagine that the example we give is if if you're standing on one foot and you start swaying to the right all right let's say you're standing on your right foot and this make this easier for folks and you start swaying to the right like you're going to fall on your right ear will hit the ground the inside of your right calf muscle will start being stretched the outside will start being compressed right so the stretch on the inside of the right calf muscle will sense that stretch and it will respond by Contracting that pulls you back to the middle and stops you from falling that's proprioception and muscle spindles send stretch and tell you to contract the way that they work is is through gamma motor neurons and so these are sensory things so what's happening is unlike when you tell your muscle to contract it goes Alpha to the muscle contract these muscle spindles work such that it is oh I've been stretched send signal back to some Central Point typically in the spinal cord and we don't actually want to go all the way up to the brain we've got a time delay this is why these are subconscious autonomic right versus somatic so that gamma is going to go back to the central location and then come back through the Alpha motor neurons until it to contract so you have this wonderful mechanism of sensing stretch going back well one Theory that's been put forward regarding muscle damage is that the pressure is actually being applied to those nerve endings of the muscle spindles and that's actually responsible for the pain signal that's going back and coming up to your brain and you're registering that as pain rather than it is actually in the the contractile units so the muscle fibers that that's a very intriguing idea uh because it would suggest that stretching muscles in order to alleviate soreness might be the exact incorrect thing to do yeah now I'm not saying that for sure for certain I'm just building off the mechanistic logic that we've laid out here yeah really that you've laid out here there's a more effective principle based on exactly that which is this is generally why low-level movement is effective at reducing acute soreness because that's lowle contraction of the muscles antich and get tissue out and and get fluid out wow you're literally pumping it out of the the cell yes and in our previous episode where we were talking about programming or using the wi but let's be fair here where you were educating us including me um and the audience about different structures for programming exercise for specific adaptations Etc the month week year SC scales Etc we had a brief um discussion about the fact that if one trains legs very hard with resistance training you know some heavy squatting or deadlifting it or and there's some soreness that often times doing some quote unquote lighter cardio or um some uh low impact work the next day or or any number of different things that involve um not high-intensity uh contractions of the muscles but that do require contractions of the muscles that it can alleviate soreness more quickly than if one were to Simply lie around and you know watch Netflix or something yeah that's exactly right the um to go back just a little bit as well the if that's really the case um the question is like where is this inflammatory signal coming from and while there's much to be learned there uh there is a little bit of information right now that suggests it's potentially coming from free radicals released from the mondra again that may or may not hold up as more research comes I'm not sure but but if you remember back to our uh conversation on endurance so we talked about the electron transport chain and aerobic metabolism and regardless of whether or not you're getting energy from glycolysis or carbohydrates remember they have to be finished through aerobic metabolism so even if you're lifting weights and you're using carbs for your fuel you have got to finish that metabolism by running it into the mitochondria and Performing oxidated metabolism as a result of that that electron transport chain runs so theoretically if free radicals which is um which are hyperreactive oxygen species basically they're oxygen molecules that are missing an electron so that they react to a lot of things they're the opposite of antioxidants by the way this is you know oxidant molecules with extra protons so they can balance the charge if those leak out that in of itself is going to be a massive inflammatory signal and that's probably what signals the cause of these neutrophils and macroasia and kicks off this entire Cascade again I believe we need more research there I need to look into it maybe it's more definitive than I that I know um but that's probably what's happening potentially what's happening rather that causes that Cascade in Signal also um what you have is this combination of well if that's the case why am I not getting tremendous amount of muscle damage when I do more aerobic based exercise well because you don't have the mechanical tension pulling on the fibers that's actually causing damage to the cell wall that allows these free radicals to escape the mitochondria and the cell cell wall so that's the best we can postulate at this moment as to why those things are happening and then why again low-level exercise tends to enhance uh even things like percussion um so using either instruments that put a low level of vibration into your leg or like pneumatic boots so you massage all these things are generally probably helping because they're moving that stuff out Adema most specifically so pressure comes off of those nerve endings in the muscle spindles and allows you to stop receiving that signal of pain despite the fact that you didn't actually regenerate tissue at all yet fascinating and I think that beautifully frames where we're headed next which is to talk about all the different modes of recovery and how to accelerate them and perhaps even how to combine different forms of recovery in order to become better at recovering and in doing so make faster progress with Fitness before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is also separate from Dr Andy galpin's teaching and research roles at Cal State Fullerton it is however part of our desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme we'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is momentus momentus makes supplements of the absolute highest quality the hubman Lab podcast is proud to be partnering with momentus for several important reasons first of all as I mentioned their supplements are of extremely high quality second of all their supplements are generally in single ingredient formulations if you're going to develop a supplementation protocol you're going to want to focus mainly on using single ingredient formulations with single ingredient formulations you can devise the most logical and effective and costeffective supplementation regimen for your goals in addition moment to supplement ship internationally and this is of course important because we realize that many of the hubman Lab podcast listeners reside outside the United States if you'd like to try the various supplements mentioned on the hubman Lab podcast in particular supplements for Hormone Health for Sleep optimization for Focus as well as a number of other things including exercise recovery you can go to live momentus spelled ous so that's liv.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by element element is an electrolyte drink that contains the exact ratios of the electrolyte sodium magnesium and potassium to optimize cellular functioning for mental and physical performance most people realize that hydration is key we need to ingest enough fluids in order to feel our best and perform our best but what most people do not realize is that the proper functioning of our cells and nerve cells neurons in particular requires that sodium magnesium and potassium be present in the correct ratios now of course people with prehypertension and hypertension need to be careful about their sodium intake but what a lot of people don't realize is that if you drink caffeine if you exercise and in particular if you're following a very clean diet that is not a lot of processed foods which of course is a good thing chances are you're not getting enough sodium potassium and magnesium to optimize mental and physical performance element contains a science spack ratio of 1,000 milligram that's 1 gram of sodium 200 milligram of potassium and 60 milligram of magnesium and no sugar if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element that's LM nt.com huberman to get a free element sample pack with your purchase again that's drink element lm.com huberman to claim a free sample pack today's episode is also brought To Us by eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity I've been using an eights sleep mattress cover for about the last eight months and it has completely transformed my sleep I'm sleeping about the same amount but I'm sleeping far deeper and I'm now getting the proper ratios of so called rapid eye movement or REM sleep and slow wave sleep and waking up feeling far more recovered mentally and physically the underlying mechanism for all that is very straightforward I've talked many times before on this podcast and elsewhere about the critical relationship between sleep and body temperature that is in order to fall asleep at night your body needs to drop by about 1 to 3° in terms of core body temperature and waking up involves a 1 to 3 degree increase in core body temperature with eight Sleep mattress covers you can adjust the temperature of your sleeping environment to be one temperature at the start of the night a different temperature the middle of the night and a different temperature as you approach morning Each of which can place you into the optimal stages of sleep and have you waking up feeling more refreshed than ever if you'd like to try Aid sleep you you can go to eights sleep.com huberman and check out their pod three cover and save $150 at checkout eight sleep currently ships in the USA Canada United Kingdom select countries in the EU and Australia again that's eights sleep.com huberman to save $150 at checkout so to kick off this discussion about recovery and with the understanding that recovery is when the specific adaptations to exercise actually occur I'd love for you to share with us what happens or needs to happen during recovery in order for us to get better at anything endurance strength Etc but also how specific types of exercise stimuli and specific types of adaptations that we trigger so running a bit further lifting a bit more weight slowing the Cadence of a given movement Etc how those specific types of triggers for adaptation relate to the specific or maybe similar types of recovery that are required for us to make progress us in one of our previous episodes we were talking about how the Harvard fatigue lab really identified this idea of homeostasis or at least sort of championed it for it and that's important because in all levels physiology wants to return to homeostasis so what happens in terms of adaptation is you've challenged it to a level that it realizes if it does not make a change it will not be able to get back to the same level of homeostasis that's fundamentally what's happening that is recovery that process of taking an insult being temporarily reduced in functionality causing a change so that now we come back and get what we often call in sport performance super compensation all that really is doing though is bringing you to a new level of homeostasis effectively it is understanding if that same insult comes again I need to be able to make sure that that doesn't cause the same level of disruption and so we raise the bar whether this is is enhancing our ability to take the same level of mechanical tension on the muscle and not result in micro damage whether this is being able to take the same reduction in energy and not have that compromise sleep or anything it's really fundamentally changing so we can have a new level of homeostasis because it's presuming it's predicting that that same insult is going to come again down the road I want to clarify for people that when Dr galin says insult while he may actually insult me um insult is the nerd speake terminology for some sort of damage inflicted to a tissue or system so um he's speaking about the insult to the muscle or insult to the neuromuscular connection created by adding more weight to the bar um running a further distance um uh running a bit fast or or pedaling faster that creates a micro insult or an insult and now because everyone is familiar with um psychological and verbal insults you'll never forget that biological concept it's important we tag another thing here which is called hormesis it's one of my favorite phenomenon and it effectively means this that there is a dosage or toxicity response to almost everything and if you think about this in the context of say drugs what this means is if I gave you 10 milligrams of something that it would be okay but if I gave you 20 it'd be a problem and eventually if I go up and give you enough this thing turns toxic this is a case of everything from cyanide uh where it can actually be in small dosages in nature in fact it's in many of the fruits that you eat but it's at a dosage that it doesn't matter if that dosage gets higher though that actually can cause problems and if it is high enough it can actually kill you instantaneously the back end of that though is because you introduce this micro insult as you framed it for me perfectly your body will then adapt to it and that's really what's happening with exercise adaptation is is it is a hormetic stressor and why that's important is if you look at the immediate responses to exercise you see an extremely large increase in inflammation you see oxidative stress you see a whole Cascade of autophagy like all these problems quote unquote happening it's that what's actually quite funny here is um as a part of my PhD the academic portion I had to go through the medical side of the school and so I was my physiology class was in med school so I'm the only non-medical doctor in that class right I'm a PhD some I leave my lab I walk across campus and I take physiology class with these folks and I I died the whole time internally because every time we would cover a new area it was basically the the exact same value or number in a medical setting is like oh my gosh they're going to die and in performance setting is like this person's in fantastic shape it's I never still amuses me to this day obviously because it's just simple things like total blood volume right and you cover like okay if you have a patient come in their blood volume is six liters you know immediately get them on a diuretic of some sort because they're going to have a heart attack as blood pressure gets up right now I'm immediately thinking damn six liters that that person is super fit because that is actually a positive adaptation to training it's one of the most important if not the most important adaptation to endurance training is enhance total blood volume so you you'll store more blood in your body when you're more fit than you are less fit so I mean I could go on all all these things sodium concentrations potassium concentrations are like you look at these things on paper and you don't know if that person's about to die cuz they're 65 years old and out of shape or if that person is going to break a world record the marathon this brings up a very important tangent which is uh for instance if you go and take a blood test and you are somebody who exercises very intensely uh with resistance training your blood creatinine levels can be way out of range and if your physician doesn't know that you're doing certain forms of exercise might say wow there's a lot of muscle tissue damage occurring in your body um as you mentioned before your total blood volume is is dangerously High when in fact you are far healthier and indeed much fitter than the person who numbers would be in range that said obviously there are um limits to these to these statements whereby you would want to be cautious and take action to amarate a very elevated um blood creatinine level or something of that sort but the point you're you're uh bringing up is is also one about the field of medicine which is that many not all but many Physicians don't take into consideration uh the outside activities that people are doing and so it becomes a kind of a plug- Inplay type um type way of looking at blood charts we've done many thousand athletes blood chemistry and uh we we don't use first of all we never look at disease stuff that's not what we do we take people that are healthy and try to optimize performance and blood chemistry is one of the best tools if you really understand what you're doing there you can uh get some incredibly powerful information out of blood chemistry that actually relates to what we're going to talk to today uh in terms of measuring uh everything from acute to Chronic dehydration to sleep deprivation can be identified in in blood chemistry to optimization improvements in nutrition supplementation there's just a lot you can get there um even people interested in that field I would i' Point them to a gentleman named Dan Garner who's just an absolute Juggernaut and wizard in blood chemistry for high performance but you can get a ton of information from that if you understand the difference between exactly what you talked about looking for signals of increased risk of cardiovascular events 25 years down the road versus is this the optimal value for high performance in an athlete which is what our our database and all of our software and stuff does is is only looking for those things so I'm going to talk about some of the biomarkers to look for a little bit later um salivary stuff some blood stuff um but we'll maybe save that part of the conversation for down the road tell me about different time scales of recovery sure this is actually where I was trying to answer your question for and then I got myself way off track but the reason I brought up the hormetic thing is if you understand that some things in the acute say 24 to 48 hour period look terrible it's actually fine right so this is the stimuli that's causing adaptation so the reason I brought up the medical U exchange there is because uh you if you looked at inflammatory markers and then you mentioned some of them you would see that they are highest acute within seconds to minutes to hours after exercise however that's exactly the stimuli needed to bring them down chronically okay and so chronically meaning maybe in that moment they are elevated and then maybe they're coming down 24 hours later and 48 Hours however if you were to compare your resting level say that Monday before you worked out so your resting level that Monday the week following the week following that what you would probably see is your Baseline inflammation goes down and so we got to be really careful are we talking immediately post exercise man these markers look terrible maybe my recovery score is awful Etc that's not necessarily a bad thing because what we're like looking to do is to not only change what's happening today but we're trying to cause adaptation that may take us weeks or months to actually access I love that you're highlighting this principle because one of the more obvious ones to me now that you've said this is heart rate absolutely my heart rate goes very very high during exercise and I do that fairly consistently or even semic consistently my resting heart rate will actually be quite a bit lower that's a fantastic example really what you're getting at here is this concept where I think it's important to differentiate between adaptation and optimization now we hear that word and I use it and most scientists hate it but it's a good communication tool of optimization if you're optimizing for the current moment you're almost surely compromising delayed adaptation right if if I were to say do the thing right now that makes you feel the absolute best in the world and you're like great you took a nap and you ate a dut like awesome you feel amazing but you know it's causing long-term issues the same can be said on the back end if you're never choosing things that make you better right now you're never actually going to see any adaptation so what we're really doing with this recovery conversation is playing this game of balancing immediate gratification with delayed gratification and how do we identify how much to do now versus not how do I use a value or a marker whether this is how tired I feel today how sore I am today versus a score on an app or a a tracking metric whether this is a blood marker anything and understand if that's what I need to cause the adaptation I want a week a month three months from now and in the case of some of our other athletes it's even up to four years right we're trying to cause adaptations that will get us where we want to get in the Olympics or World Championships or World Cup or wherever we're going to be so that's the framework we have to think about recovery we we maybe falsely think about it is I need to maximize my recovery today and you could do something like take an anti-inflammatory whether this is a supplementation or a drug or maybe this is ice oh cool that's great that will enhance your recovery in this moment that'll make you feel better today probably tomorrow but what we know is that blocks the signal for adaptation so you're not going to get the same results you know four six eight weeks from now so when we talk about recovery we have to understand what tool am I using and why and in order to do that we have to understand what am I training for and what am I trying to maximize um if I am in the middle of a season with an athlete and we are competing tomorrow I am going to headed towards acute recovery right because I have to actuate that performance right now if I am starting the off season I'm not hedging towards recovery I'm actually hedging towards adaptation so we're not going to deploy any of these especially things like uh there's evidence that a combination of vitamin C and vitamin E will blunt hypertrophic adaptations because they're anti-inflammatory they antioxidants right um other other Studies have shown maybe they don't have uh inhibitory effect they may or may not point is conceptually you want to be careful of what you're trying to optimize for and you have to have that forethought and that alone is going to dictate your decision making with whether or not again you get in the eyes uh you do everything now we will cover some tools like massage that are pretty fine to use you don't have to worry about those blocking long-term adaptation but others you're going to want to be very careful about so this principle that you've laid out for us which is that there's a set of events that occur during exercise that trigger the adaptation and that sets in motion a number of adaptations that occur during recovery that then get us the exact opposite response to what the trigger was so I'll go back to the heart rate example um heart rate is close to maximal or maximal you do that enough times within a short you know a week or so or two weeks and your resting heart rate goes down as I recall a few episodes ago you said that your maximum heart rate doesn't really change that much is that correct yes okay but your resting heart rate can go down quite a bit yep is that a general theme mean meaning do we have a more or less set upper limit or ceiling for things like inflammatory markers for heart rate maybe even things like stress and what we do when we deliberately trigger stress or a dramatic increase in heart rate or dramatic increase in inflammatory markers is that we are lowering the floor but that the ceiling Remains the Same it's very dependent upon the marker so in the case of maximum heart rate it will not change with the exception of one thing which is age age brings it down training will not change it up in most circumstances if you look at something like an inflammatory response I suppose theoretically there is a ceiling though I'm not aware of it um I can tell you right now looking at blood markers of things like creatin kise so remember the conversation about metabolism and that we use phosphocreatine as one of our primary fuel sources for explosive exercise well if we're using phosphocreatine U this creatin kinas now remember kinas are enzymes that that function to break things down for the most part so creatin kinas is the enzyme you Ed to break down creatine when you do that a lot then that creatin kise gets out of muscle and seeps into the blood um myoglobin is actually another fantastic marker by the way myoglobin is if you think about hemoglobin being in blood is the molecule that carries oxgen around when it's in the muscle tissue then it's my globin my meaning muscle and it's the same globulin thing so there's a bunch of markers you can look at muscle breakdown and one of the things that you can see is a creatin k level that's elevated after say um one bot of exercise and and you might it might be up you know five or six fold um I've actually seen this number in offensive lineman in the NFL be something like 500 plus fold so even within just one category to the next that that number can get extraordinarily high and if you know this is actually one is important Point here if if you're paying attention to any mechanistic research or use you're using that to inform your decision-making you have to be extraordinarily careful of magnitude and what I mean by that is if if I were to to be running a a western blot looking at a signaling protein um in a muscle does did this activation of this protein turn on mitochondrial biogenesis and I saw that whatever intervention we gave it whether it was an nutrition thing or a drug or an exercise and I saw that that signaling protein increased by 20% I would basically assume that to be totally physiologically irrelevant because in order for that to be important it totally depends on the marker you're looking at but you some markers I might need to see four five six hundredfold increase before I know that that will actually be enough to be what we call physiologically relevant others if they're up one or two% that is relevant and so you really want to be careful when you're either reading papers or looking at Social Media stuff if people are just talking about this marker increase this much it may not matter it may be totally irrelevant physiologically and so you have to that that's also if you're wondering like how the hell are the all these people well that's how they can trick you a little bit and intentionally or not it could be just they're trying to their best but they don't really understand that area enough and so um that's an important point to pay attention to so to answer your question again fully it would be hard to determine if there is truly a maximum level um some things don't want to move like blood pH it doesn't really want to move the range that you're going to move from is you know like 6.8 to 7.4 and if you get up to like 7.9 like you're probably in big big big trouble other things again can go up 500 5,000 fold and so the markers will really determine that answer well at some point in the future I'd love to continue this discussion around the topic of stress specifically yeah um and maybe we will get into that a little bit later today when we um get into the use of deliberate cold exposure because that certainly um has effects related directly to temperature on tissue but it certainly has mental effects in terms of raising one's level of perceived pain it's fun also good or some people love it and some people love it for the feeling they get during it um deliberate cold exposure some people only like it for the feeling that they get after it not unlike exercise totally I I love to train I love exercise but I know many people who uh um they Lo exercise but they love the feeling afterward so this will be a theme that we will come back to thank you for indulging my interest in that semi- tangent I think it's a relevant tangent if there is such a thing if you can now return us to the different time scales yeah and modes of recovery because I think where we are headed is how to get better at recovering yep let's talk about the tools let's talk about what to measure and identify for all four of these distinct levels so level one is what we call overload and just very quickly what that means is I did a workout today the sign and symptom of overload is you're fatigued per acute performance is down so I worked out hard right now if I were to go try to do a maximum effort I would be reduced in my ability the recovery period for acute overload is minutes to days right that's generally what we call acute overload and that's what we're looking for right so we system should theoretically see that hormetic stressor come back in response come back bigger better more efficient Etc if you were to continue training in that state like most of us do and say I did a workout today I had a little bit of a Cute Overload going to work out again tomorrow a little more acute overload going to work out the next day a little more acute overload even if you took a day in between it's that doesn't matter right you just continue these acute bouts of insult then you're going to be pushing into the absolute golden Target which is what we call functional overreaching so you have overreached what you can currently do and and it results in a functional outcome and what we mean functionally here is performance is enhanced and again performance being whatever you deem it to be you're stronger know you've enhanced muscle size your mitochondria has improved you've whatever the thing is it's not just a physical performance thing right amazing recovery time for functional overreaching is typically a few days to maybe even a week or so and so typically what we see happen is prior to a competition individuals will do what we call a taper which is a reduced training volume for some short period of time and the the reason they do that is to again actualize is the phrase we use here the adaptations and so you worked hard for six weeks and you know theoretically the workout you did three four five six weeks ago once you allow the system to recover will be actualized which means your performance will be enhanced here so functional overreaching is the golden Target okay if you were to be at the point of functional overreaching and you continue to train so it intensified whether this is through intensity this is through volume or really as you said earlier you had something holding back your recovery it doesn't really matter right it's it's sort of two sides of the same coin then you would move into what we call nonfunctional overreaching so you've overreached again but now it is nonfunctional as in you did not see a positive benefit once recovery allowed this typically means you have weeks it takes weeks to come back from and you basically just get back to Baseline and this is where a lot of folks are who end up in this vicious cycle and so you're like man I'm not getting the results I want I'm going to train harder I'm not getting results I want I'm going to train harder and harder but because you've recovery isn't improved you just end up in the same spot so then you train more and you end up in the same spot and you end up then just either blowing up or quitting and you're not getting where you want if you were to continue past that point you may actually be into what we actually call overtraining and that typically is uh considered to be overtrained if it takes months to recover from so most people think they're overtrained are really not you're just probably non-functionally overreached and again the classic distinction is if you took three or four days off and you felt better you weren't probably quote unquote overtrained you were probably just in this area of non-functional reaching you need a little bit of a back off if you and this has been the case I've had the app with gymnasts uh and a cheerleader and some other things where they take a month off and we're barely seeing them start to come back to their Baseline numbers in any number of areas mood desire to train testosterone cortisol ratios bow markers in a number of areas physical performance vertical jump height like all these things they just start to get back to Baseline so over true overt training is actually quite rare nonfunctional overreaching is much more common and uh it is a a shorter time frame scale so when we talk about recovery those are the four pieces that we're really thinking about and so if you are concerned about oh I'm super sore how do I get less sore how do I either not be a sore next time I do that same workout or I'm super sore now how do I recover those are playing in that first category of overload and we can certainly talk about how to figure that out but the quick answer is you got to go back to our previous episodes and just pay attention to the volume intensity recommend commendations if you're getting significantly uh more damage or fatigue in a workout you probably have increased your volume too too quickly or something else is dragging your stress bucket down but generally this is a problem of training um you either didn't warm up sufficiently your fueling strategy is off which we'll talk about in The Next Episode or You' violated one of our principles of increasing intensity and volume sort of too quickly um if it's past that and you're getting to a stage where you're just like I'm feeling beat up all the time my energy is going down I'm just not feeling like I'm recovered now we're in this overreaching stage so the the story I kind of tell here always is uh a few years ago I was working and uh my wife Natasha was in the garage training and I'm doing something and like she comes stumbling and she has this look on her eyes and they're like giant her eyeballs are giant she's just like wobbling she's like I effed up and I was like what do you mean you like effed up and she's just like I read the program wrong and she's like like what' you do like she was supposed to be doing 10 sets of three every minute on the minute and she did three sets of 10 every minute on the minute and she was absolutely wrecked she couldn't move for a few hours afterwards and then for days she's just like you have to handle the kids like I can't get out of bed I can't move so that was like a classic example of all right like we don't need to fix recovery here you're just a dummy and you did the training way too hard too long like this is not we don't have a problem here so if it's a situation like that it's generally you just the program was way off if it's constantly happening where you're just like man like for whatever reason every once in a while I'm getting really sore or having a really bad performance in these workouts then we need to go to our other stress bucket take a look at our alistic load or allostasis and get figured out what's happening there um so those are the the easy ways to flag acute overload problems I'd like to take a brief break and acknowledge our sponsor athletic greens athletic greens is a vitamin mineral probiotic and adaptogen drink designed to help you meet all of your foundational nutritional needs I've been taking athletic greens daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're a sponsor of this podcast the reason I started taking athletic greens and the reason I still take athletic greens once or twice a day is that it helps me meet all of my foundational nutritional needs that is it covers my vitamins my minerals and the probiotics are especially important to me athletic greens also contains adaptogens which are critical for recovering from stress from exercise from work or just general life if you'd like to try athletic greens you can go to athletic greens.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again if you'd like to try athletic greens go to athletic greens.com huberman to claim the special offer I'm happy that you pointed out the distinction between functional overreaching overtraining and being overtrained I think one common mistake that people make in thinking about biology generally is that they think in terms of nouns and adjectives and not verbs amazing I love that so much you know biology is a collection of processes or processes depending on who you are and where you live and who you trained with being overtrained is a state that in many ways is an adjective you're overtrained I'm overtrained it's like saying uh you know I'm an American I'm a you know Czechoslovakian whatever it happens to be right and in many ways people do start to associate with an identity at least a transient identity and they start making all sorts of decisions it sounds like about what sorts of verbs they will and will not engage in whereas I think if we look at things as processes and we assign verbs to them then we can say okay I'm functionally overreaching or I'm truly over trainining which is a matter of degrees correct right or under trining for that matter I'm not I'm reaching but I'm not functionally reaching it's just it's just performance and you know just as with the nervous system won't change unless you give it a reason to this is the reason why if you can perform something perfectly or speak a language perfectly there's there's no rewiring of the nervous system this myth that we've all been told that every experience rewires your nervous system it's different now than it was two seconds ago that's that's a ridiculous illogical statement we know that's not true if your nervous system can perform something it has no reason to change and it won't muscles the same way this is why you have to progressively overload you have to learn something new or challenge your muscle to do something new it's same thing so in the example that you gave uh with your wife doing this workout that turned out to be far more strenuous she had functionally overreached in some sense she might have been overtraining or heading in the direction of overtraining but the mistake would be to assume that she was overtrained right as a kind of it's almost becomes a bit of a a state or a character assignment um as opposed to a verb and in any case there's no perfect way to describe this we're talking about nouns and adjectives and and we're also um uh talking about verbs but I think the verbs are really anchored down in processes and things that we do actions that we can take and so um if I may I'd like to just highlight this this idea of Shifting one's thinking towards verb actions rather than labels on the state that we happen to be in or the person that we happen to be right sometimes it even does become kind of characterological in the way that people describe it and uh so I have to believe that there is something called overtraining that overtraining is real in other words but that we don't ever really know if we're overtrained you nailed it there's there's no you know it's not like a red flag you know shoots up out of your shoulder it's like I'm overtrained you know it's um so in doing so I hope that we can start thinking about some of the verbs the actions that we can take in order to ensure that we stimulate Progressive overload one way or another and at the same time that we don't fall into these bins of character assignment where suddenly we decide that we need to do X like take a month off or something like that because I I'm beginning to realize um from our discussion that that's exactly the wrong way to go those are fantastic points I I want to make sure it is clear that there is no clinical diagnosis for overtraining there are no standards there's no test or or a blood panel you can pull that would actually identify you in that state so your your distinction Here Andrew of these are verbs rather than nouns is is so wonderful because that is exactly the case uh the only way we could really come retroactively diagnose one with overtraining is if again we had you did weeks of recovery and you only got back to Baseline so we can't do it in the moment I can't take a single test um there's no subjective marker or anything that says you are overtrained it is simply you are probably overtraining and we need to reverse that quickly or in the case of the step before you are probably fun non-functionally overreaching and if you continue to do this you will probably enter into a stage uh where this is your overtraining and we need to come back so that's an important thing to let people know is there's no one thing we can actually point to that says you are here you are not a noun this is a verb so what are some tools that we can use to enhance our recovery yep let's start off with that a Cute Overload phase so in other words I just did a workout and I'm feeling awful or I just did one two days ago and I'm super sore how do I get rid of that right now well there's a couple of things you can do immediately after your workout and then others that are maybe more actionable a day later or two days later and we'll just cover handful of them we'll do some nutrition and hydration and supplementation in the next episode I'm going to cover everything else not in that category right now so a couple of things number one uh you actually start Kickstart that recovery process at the end of your current training session and I guess I should say it this way I strongly suggest you start this recovery process immediately after the workout you mentioned earlier about this idea of you got to get a really high peak of stress to cause adaptation but I actually didn't explain that correctly because what has to happen is you need that extremely high peak but then you have to be met with an extremely sharp recovery back down and so you know you've talked about this before in some of your neuroplasticity stuff and in terms of what has to happen that caus the insult and then you immediately need to be able to recover to make sure that that causes changes in the brain same thing happens here so we need a really sharp and high inflammatory response and then if you do not meet it with an immediate recovery period the signal won't be there to maximize your results so what's that mean you can actually do a couple of things number one is listening to slow paced music there's evidence that suggest fast-paced music May uh slow down your recovery and slow pace would actually enhance it so if you just change from you know your maximum get you up and get going music during the workout to a slower lower Cadence that will help you Kickstart the idea of a similar note you can also use what we call down regulation breathing you could do them in conjunction or one or the other whichever is up to you so my personal favorite method here is is somewhere between 3 to 10 minutes of finishing your training session laying down i' like to be in that position you could certainly do it in the Lotus position but I think laying on your back is generally more effective personal preference there no signs uh I like the eyes being covered getting into this dark quiet sort of area and then just breathing through your nose in a structured Cadence there's a lot of different things you can try an easy example is just box breathing so and you can imagine box having four squares so what you're going to do is inhale for somewhere between like 3 to 8 seconds and then whatever number you choose you keep that same tempo and so let's say you chose to do a 5-second inhale that's going to take you up vertically and then horizontally for your box is a 5-second hold and then a 5-second exhale and then a 5-sec hold and you just need to repeat that for the time domain I typically honestly don't use a timer you'll actually notice a lot of people will like fall asleep or get really close to falling asleep in this period you could do a triangle version of that where you do an inhale hold exhale and then go right back into your inhale or there's a bunch of different tricks you can try here you need to play around and see what actually works best for you 10 minutes is probably better but if you can just at least give me three that'll work if you're really really resistant you can actually do that just in the shower and so if you're going to finish your workout get in the shower again just close your eyes in the shower give me three minutes of focused relaxation breathing and that will accelerate the recovery process I love it and I particularly love it because my laboratory works on stress and respiration AK breathing and the interactions between the two and I'll just mention a result that was just accepted for publication so should be out by time this episode SS uh thank you uh this is the beautiful work of uh not me directly although it took place in my lab but as we know it's the students of posto really do the heavy lifting of um Dr maliss U balbon uh in my lab it's a phenomenal researcher that showed that a short period of 5 minutes of box breathing of exactly the type that you described or uh cyclic sign so two inhales followed by an extended exhale to lungs empty ideally the inhales are done through the nose the exhales are done uh through the mouth although it could all be done through the nose um or the mouth for that matter but probably nose nose for inhale inhale mouth for exhale or um uh in inhales through the nose and and xhl through the nose cyclic sing as we refer to it done for 5 minutes both of those produce very significant uh decreases in resting heart rate the over time will increase things like heart rate variability and so on and so forth um so provided that there are extended exhales it seems like the calming response and the reduction in overall stress occurs the only thing that really sends things in the other direction would be something like cyclic hyperventilation I'm sure you've observed that um and interestingly uh when we had people just do 5 minutes of u meditation which during which of course they are breathing but they're just allowing their breathing to progress however it happens to be in that moment um or moments across the five minutes uh there were reductions in the same sorts of markers of stress that I described but not as significant as breathing so I love the Box breathing tool post-workout um and there's some other Alternatives there too that I just mentioned but I think people greatly underestimate the potency of breathing for shifting one's nervous system function away from stress or if one wants toward more alertness and stress I actually have a couple questions for you on that sure I think the audience would appreciate this um how long were those boxes was it just user selected great question so we use the carbon dioxide tolerance test amazing in order for people to determine how long the different sides of the Box should be and you cover carbon dioxide tolerance test in previous episode and we can provide a link to that clip um in the show note captions but as you point out it involves a long extended exhale to lungs empty um and of course people could sit with lungs empty but uh they have to accurately Faithfully as we say report how long it took them to empty their lungs we use that as a as a gauge typically if it takes if people go to lungs empty in 20 seconds or less I believe I have to go back to the paper and look but I believe that the um duration for each of the sides of the box boxes as it were was somewhere between um two and 3 seconds if they had a uh CO2 discard time of anywhere from uh 20 seconds up to about 40 45 seconds we used a the sides of the Box were I believe um between four and six seconds and then for people longer than a who could discard their erir over a period of a minute um or more we used a uh box duration that is inhale hold exhale hold duration of somewhere between I believe it was um seven or maybe it was eight and um as long as 11 or 12 seconds you get your kind of free diver types who can really do this um who are really well trained for this sort of thing the don't quote me exactly on those numbers but that that was approximate those line up exactly with what what we've done so I I believe it's it's going to be close within seconds of non-important Distinction is it's going to be close you know so that's great and that was uh it took them what six weeks before they uh so this study was done over the period of a month and then when they were swapped into a new pattern of breathing um condition or meditation condition and this was all done in in the natural world as we say um they were wearing woot bands that we were getting heart rate heart rate variability sleep data subjective data about mood Etc so there were a lot of measures but this was um more than 100 subjects out in the wild of life um and we tried as best we could to track life stress events and exercise and things like that that was harder to control outside the laboratory really all those results speak to exactly what you're describing here which is that deliberate respiration that involves controlled holds and exhales really has a dramatic and very immediate impact on reducing our levels of stress that that's wonderful I'm not surprised at all uh with your findings and what's really interesting about that is you mentioned how the exhalation portion is primarily responsible for the down regulation and that's actually goes back to our previous endurance conversation which is that in general at rest at non- altitude increases in CO2 are the primary driver for ventilation and so what that generally means is inhales are associated with an uptick and sympathetic State and exhales are associated with a uptick of parasympathetic State uh this is generally why folks will do things like exhale and finish that exhale right before they perform a very high Precision neurological task so if you're going to say aim at a Target and shoot you're going to Exhale fully and then almost always execute that movement at the end of the exhale because that's when you're in your highest parasympathetic State and lowest drive for ventilation I have to say I'm not surprised at all that you guys found that there's actually other data that point to individuals particularly after endurance training that can get backed down to Baseline heart rate is going to be correlated with who gets the most actual results of the training said that if you take a bunch of individuals and put them through an endurance training program and if you measure how quickly they can get back down to Baseline after each workout in general those folks that are better at that are going to see greater improvements in performance at the end of your say four six or eight week training block and so there's a little bit of causation and correlation there that we have to untie but I think it's enough to say hey if you invest these three and in your case your your study was 5 minutes it's only going to enhance recovery you have a likelihood of increasing the results from your training and now we also have additional benefits like being able to transition more appropriately into our next task going to work going to see family whatever the thing is and it's it's a nice close to I asked you to be in a high sympathetic State body and I asked you to perform and to be under stress I gave you recovery and now we're ready to transition in our next thing so that we don't take that exercise energy if you will into our next task which may or may not want me in a sympathetic Drive state so if somebody is sore following a workout either locally sore in a muscle group or group of muscles maybe in their legs or chest or torso or maybe their whole body is sore as it sometimes is the case what are some tools that they can Implement in order to to accelerate the I want to call it moving out of that soreness but it's really uh as we know the alleviation of the soreness through a bunch of different processes what are the most effective tools to push back on that soreness and dissipate it yeah absolutely first of all it's not lactate that's is a really important thing that we still hear people talk about is you know you're sore 24 hours later you got to do this thing to get the lactate out of there as we talked about in the metabolism uh conversation and episode that that is not the cause of fatigue and it's certainly not the cause of soreness so not an actionable tip there but just a pet peeve of mine when I hear people say that that I get irritated so we can maybe in that conversation um strategies tools here's what you can do you can actually wear compression gear that will help a little bit there's a decent amount of evidence suggesting if you just were to you know put some tighter fitting clothes on Leisure wear or compression gear if you have it that that can actually prevent a little bit of soreness from occurring so if you're in the case of poor Natasha and you realize you just done way way way too much or you went and hung out with your bow hunting friend and you trained way too hard and you realize oh my goodness I'm going to be very sore here you can immediately put on compression gear and wear that really for as long as possible what are some examples of compression gear I've seen people on the plane with those high high socks um I mean anything that you wear compression gear for what you do for exercise so whether these are just uh you know compression panss and leggings the tight fitting leggings uh whether this is a long sleeve shirt that's like a rashgard you would wear in you know Jiu-Jitsu or surfing or something like that as long as it's tight fitting it doesn't have to be much more than that you can wear I suppose you could get the socks would be great but um we generally just tell our athletes um they would put on long sleeve compression shirts that they would wear for their training and then long compression leggings and that'd be fine can people apply these compression um Garb after training and still get some of the positive effects yeah I have not seen any evidence to suggest that that would block adaptation that may be the case I I am not aware of those studies if that happens but um I certainly know that the information suggests it canh hands a little bit of Muscle Recovery but ideally one knows if they are about to do a workout that could trigger a lot of soreness and then wears compression gear of some sort to offset that and if so does it have to be local to the muscle groups that you're working on the reason I asked about the sock is my understanding the socks that the compression socks people wear on the plane is that it's going to shift the patterns of blood flow not just in the lower legs but all over the body yeah you're probably going to want to focus it on the actual exercising tissue though actually that's a really good question I don't know the answer of whether or not you did an upper body workout only or lower body compression gear if that would actually help that's a great question that may have been done I don't know but I don't know the answer to that in general we just tell people like we wear the whole thing as much as you can um I actually am not concerned that you're wearing it during your workout it is something you could put on afterwards or even wear just a little bit of compression the other day um we've actually did a really fun study uh I collaborated with um Bill Kramer who's uh you know Sports scientist of the Year award is the bill Kramer award if that gives you an indication out of uh University of Connecticut as well as with Lee Brown so two Lifetime Achievement Award winners and we we put people on a a plane in stores Connecticut and flew them to Cal State Fullerton so a cross Country flight and some of them got to wear compression gear during the flight and others did not and then they landed in California did a training bout put them back on the plane went back to stores and I think they did another training about when they got back there there was a lot of data that came out of that paper but one of the things that was clear is the compression group was effective um at handling some of the blood related coagulation and other issues associated with uh long flights and particularly athletic performance so that's actually a sneaky little Insider trick that I'll use a lot with people particularly with athletes that are traveling is just wear that compression gear on the plane so you you talked about that and that sort of rung that study to mind that it's another effective strategy so compression gear in general as well as particularly on a plane um basically the tighter you can get it the better without obviously making your hands purple and being uncomfortable and things like that so it doesn't have to be overly tight uh anything will work and probably help so I'm also doing that personally anytime I'm taking a flight like that as much as I can just feel a little better when I get there so what are some other methods that we can use to alleviate acute soreness well if we continue down this same theme which is saying okay we use some sort of pressure manipulation to enhance recovery if compression is one strategy you can also use things like um compression boots or garments and these are pneumatic devices that will you know pump uh air outside you and compress back and forth there's any number of devices that will do this um you can also use the physical hand so this would be massage and body work um they're all really working as best we can tell on the same mechanisms uh which are effectively moving fluid in and out of the tissue as well as potentially enhancing blood flow uh increasing capillarization and which is going to only get nutrients in and waste products out so you can kind of pick and choose based upon your budget uh preferences availability timing things like that so those are all effective strategy outside of that really is the next largest category which is now thermal and uh and so far in this discussion we've mentioned cold water immersion and I talked about in the hypert section how you would not want to do that immediately post exercise which would be getting into cold water or an ice bath if you're trying to grow muscle mass having said that there is good evidence showing that cold water immersion specifically is effective at reducing muscle soreness so so it is a fair consideration and it's a classic example of how there are no free passes in physiology nothing is always good or always bad it's always about what are you willing to give up and versus what you're willing to get and in the case of like cold water immersion you may be thinking yeah I might blunt some of the hypertrophic adaptations but if you're in that phase of training where you're actually trying to push more towards optimization in that moment rather than long-term adaptation then a an ice maath might be a great choice in addition if you fall into a scenario like Natasha did and you realize like I'm just so unbelievably sore this might cost me three or four or five or six days of training it might be worth it for you to accelerate that recovery process by a couple of days so that you don't miss so much training so it's it's just a it's an algorithm it's an equation what am I looking for again if I'm in season or trying to compete or if I have just done way way way too much exercise and I'm really in significant pain you would probably be willing to give up some small percentage of eventual muscle growth after a single session to get out of pain so um of the cold strategies cold water immersion is clearly the best approach rather than cold air or some other tactics so a cold shower is probably not enough here you really do uh want to be either in moderately cold this is maybe 40 to 50 degree water uh for probably north of 15 minutes or you can be in sub40 for as little as maybe 5 minutes to get some of the effect and there's been a number of studies um so I'm sort of summarizing a bunch of that kind of into one rather than going through them Point by point the numbers you just threw out U which I'm assuming are um uh Fahrenheit um seem seem really cold to me right uncomfortably cold absolutely so I always recommend that people ease into it as a protocol overall that they not immediately go to 35 degree uh cold water if they've never done it before uh that said once people are comfortable being uncomfortable because I always answer the question how cold should it be exactly would you agree that it should be very very cold so much so that you really really want to get out but that you're able to stay in safely whatever that value happens to be you absolutely need to be safe having said that we have actually in our xpt Retreats put dozens if not hundreds of people at this point uh immediately into the sub35 degree water their first time ever and done you know 3 minutes multiple rounds uh in a session so they can handle it but you don't need to go that crazy if you don't want you kind of have to play a game right do you want to be really really cold for a short amount of time or do you want to be like kind of cold for a longer amount of time I really the only mistake you can make is doing something like you know 65 degree water which for most people is not very comfortable and doing you know five or 10 minutes it's just not going to be effective it's probably not going to be effective so if you're like man 35 is is absolutely crazy and you want to do 55 degree water and there's literature in that area but it's going to say you need to probably be there you know somewhere almost surely north of 10 minutes and some of it will actually show you need to be in there like well north of 20 to 30 minutes so for my money I would rather go really really cold and get it down in five minutes but um personal preference on this one you can also make it a little bit easier on yourself there is not nearly as much evidence but there is some on contrast stuff so uh this is when you go cold hot and sort of back and forth there are no really good rules in terms of how much should you go how many rounds how long and cold how long and hot again there have been a couple of studies but and obviously those studies use numbers but that doesn't mean those have been tested to see what what are optimal which is a very big difference so um you can really just kind of play that by feel hot is good for Recovery you just have to be careful because you are going to put more blood flow in the area and so you you may walk out of there with some additional acute swelling which is then going to put greater pressure on there so you have to kind of play with that I personally really like hot uh for Recovery I will feel maybe not great in that moment but the next day I tend to feel really really good in addition if I wake up the next morning and I'm really really hurting and and I'm super stiff a hot bath will will help that um quite a bit so you can play with some of those protocols again you don't have to do ice there's absolutely no requirement to do so it is just an option if you're interested yeah the studies of Dr Susanna soberg um sure yeah are not directly aimed at alleviating soreness or recovery they're more about increasing thermal capacity by a storage of uh Brown adapost tissue not the blubbery fat but the stuff around the clavicles and around the heart that help you generate body heat at rest and metabolism and so on and the numbers there that um she's come up with again have not been tested against all the possible derivations just like with breathing we did five minute sessions but who knows maybe a minute would have been equally effective we just there are constraints on these sorts of studies but the values that she's come up with which seem to be good thresholds for making sure that an adaptation response is triggered by heat and cold is it ends up being 57 minutes per week total of uncomfortable but safe heat in that case sauna and that can be all in one session or breaking it up into a couple of sessions on the same day or or different days and then 11 minutes per week of cold either in one single session or multiple sessions again one could do more um one could break that up over you know multiple days or do it all in one day or do it all in one you know an hour in the sauna and then 11 minutes in the cold or vice versa although that seems a little bit extreme especially for the uninitiated but those are the numbers that have been studied but as you point out there are not a lot of really thorough studies examining different cold protocols according to temperature by time requirements so there is a bit of subjective feel required to establish a routine and I would actually say this is another time to re-emphasize something we talked about at the beginning of our convers which is that pain itself is not a defined outcome it's heavily influenced by your perception and so if you don't feel like they work for you they won't work if you feel like they work fantastic they do so it's a challenging field to get really objective data on so there's always going to be a little bit of subjective nature to some of these things I can tell you anecdotally we've used hot and cold contrasts for a long time with athletes um some love it some don't care for it and everything in between so it's one of those things where I never mandated of course I can't mandate anything for anyone I work with but I'm never you know like hey are you interested great you're struggling in this area you want to try this you did and you liked it great you're struggling in this area and you tried it you didn't love it okay fine I'm not we we'll find other routes as we we'll get into there's a lot of ways to enhance recovery um this is only one and it hasn't even really come down to stopping the problem in the first place we're not we're just treating symptoms which is first line of defense but you really need to go back and figure out why it's happening to begin with as a solution these are just different again acute symptom management tactics one final point about uh deliberate cold exposure I think worth mentioning is one of the reasons the shower is effective but not nearly as effective as cold water immersion or immersion in ice up to the neck is simply because of the reason you stated before which is that most showers are not going to get that cold you're not going to get down you know into the sub 40s um also cold showers haven't really been studied that much they have but not nearly as much as immersion and people always ask why I just think about the challenges of studying cold water uh exposure in the shower where you can't really control for how much of the body is covered whether or not the head stays under different Siz bodies Etc whereas when people come into a laboratory they can get into a cold water tank we know where the neck is know where the chin is and we can make sure that people's arms and um legs are underneath but with cold shower sure you can make everyone face away or toward the shower but it's really tricky and um for all the variations that that were described that said would you agree that if one wants to use deliberate cold exposure that cold shower is better than nothing and cold immersion in circulating cold water or ice bath is better than um than cold shower yeah what I would actually say if you're looking for recovery for muscle soreness I would say cold shower is probably doing very little U because you're not going to be able to get enough cold water onto any muscle besides basically your head um so maybe you could try a cold bath uh and so you at least get some surface area coverage but yeah if you want to use cold shower for all the other awesome reasons cold shower that's totally great but if you're trying to use that to recover your low back and glutes from being sore from training in a good way it's probably not going to do much the the immersion would be there you actually also hit sneaky other point which is if you can't get your water super cold just make the water move so if you have Jets and stuff you can turn on and anyone who's tried this and you're like okay I can do a 40 Dee bath awesome uh try 60 when the water's moving right because you break up the thermal layer normally you have a little thin layer of water that you're heating up you break that up it's a whole new world yeah absolutely so being very still in the cold water is actually the weaker way to go correct that you can make your face stoic but make your body circulate some water around you as long as we're on this maybe just one more point about heat uh I've certainly used sauna wet sauna dry sauna steam sa saunas excuse me jacuzzi can work pretty well y um uh males if you are looking to conceive in the 60 days following uh following sauna or um hot tub do realize that it that both those approaches do severely limit the number of motile sperm um substantially so for people that are not trying to conceive don't think that this works reliably enough that you could use as a form of contraception yeah but but for people that are trying to conceive it really is detrimental to to sperm Health right and so for that reason some people bring an ice pack and put it on the groin or near the groin uh when they go in but um which is harder to do in a hot tub than a sauna so here we're getting into the fine points um or crude points if you will pun intended but um but the idea is that we we wouldn't want anyone to approach these techniques and compromise their other life goals was not allowed anywhere near these things when uh we were at that stage of life I I'll just say Natasha put an x on me hanging out with lared so going going in no for those reasons she's like you're not going in you're not going none of the stuff and I just had to wait right he um heat and sperm have a have a relationship but it's not one that's positive for the sperm I'd like to take a brief break to acknowledge our sponsor insid tracker insid tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health and well-being can only be analyzed from a quality blood test one issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there however is that you get information back about various levels of lipids and hormones and metabolic factors Etc but you don't know what to do with that information inside tracker makes knowing what to do with all that information exceedingly easy they have a personalized platform that lets you see what your spefic numbers are of course but then also what sorts of Behavioral dos and don'ts what sorts of nutritional changes what sorts of supplementation would allow you to bring those levels into the ranges that are optimal for you if you'd like to try insid tracker you can visit insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off any of insid tracker's plans again that's insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off are there ways to combine uh the various types of um stimula that you described for inducing recovery you talked about breathing based tools um which while they could adjust and indeed do adjust oxygen and carbon dioxide ratios and Etc I'm guessing the major effect of those on recovery is going to be neural it's going to be deliberate calming of the nervous system more sympathetic based uh you mentioned yeah most definitely and then you talked about some movement based and touchbased approaches um which will uh movement cly certainly will circulate blood but also will generate contractions of the muscles yep right which maybe if indeed again it's still speculation if indeed some of the soreness is due to excessive stretch or swelling at the stretch ends of the of the muscles that would make sense so movement and touch and then thermal are there ways to to combine these um that are more effective or maybe even synergistic yeah I suppose you could throw on uh some compression garment put on a Pneumatic compression device and sit in the sauna while you down regulate your breath like that that would be fine quite honestly though you probably don't need to maximize all of them we were joking uh you could probably go for a light swim while regulating your breathing in cold water uh you get the compression from the cold water and and you'd be in a good spot so you can certainly do that the reality of it is I generally look for some physical approach and then some uh holistic approach of the breath work basically so I want breath and then something else if you knock those two things out you're in a good spot so that could be breath while you're in thermal stress so just controlling and doing the UN regulation stuff you have to also remember ice is a stressor and I'll actually show you some data here in a second about how that actually can enhance um systemic recovery although it won't happen in the in the acute minutes in fact it's going to take at least 30 to 60 minutes and then you'll eventually see a rebound effect but acutely it's going to make you actually more sympathetic which is going the other direction heat can do the opposite opposite or it can actually drive you up so it's a little bit dependent upon how you respond what time of day um and how you're using so in general I guess uh combining them is if you need it um depending on what you have what's available so perhaps you don't have a sauna but you can take a hot bath great maybe you have some percussion device some tool and you can use that but you don't have u a sauna amazing don't have ice bath these things so I think rather than thinking about an optimal combination of them I would say just use a couple of the tactics based on what you have and what is easily available um in your situation I'd love for you to teach us about some of the methods for longer form recovery as it relates to overreaching and overtraining sure you want to think about this in a couple of phases phase one is to try to prevent it from happening in the first place uh in terms of training load you're going to just go back to our previous episodes where we talk give you specific instructions for how much to increase your volume and intensity per week Etc the other thing you can do then is do some monitoring and I'll I'll go over some different tools some cost-free ones as well as some some higher techologically demanding ones uh to monitor to see if it's actually happening and then the third approach here is what if this is already occurred I figured out I'm so how do I get back out of that hole so I would like to just sort of tackle these one by one in order and and talk about what's happening what tools you can use and why they're going to work all right so anytime we're talking about fatigue management here most people are aware of these terms because if you have any sort of Technology uh you're probably getting some sort of Readiness score or recovery score or strain depending on which app or watch or Tech you have you have a little bit of vacular change if you're in the sport performance world you might be looking at things again like load or GPS tracking and monitoring and really all of it is is doing the same thing it's trying to either one predict a problem is going to happen in the future and then placing restrictions upon you so that you don't run into that situation the other thing is possibly doing is identifying a drop in physiology or performance and then saying we need to get you out of this hole that's really what's happening and so when we think of the first one just imagine uh a scenario like a mileage limitation uh pitch count in baseball and what has happened there is is you know individuals in those fields have looked and said hey what we notice is people who throw say more than a 100 pitches in a game tend to start losing Effectiveness and increased injury rate therefore we're predicting the next time you go to play if you cross that threshold we start having an increased risk of negative consequences so therefore we're going to cap your in this case pitching volume at that 100 pitches per game or whatever the case same thing with running etc etc so you could just simply do that and there's actually really cool data coming out now on sport performance stuff looking at things like Imus and GPS trackers and trying to identify even position by position specific uh recommendations for how much distance you should cover in a practice in a training session um so that you can say hey these positions don't cross this threshold these positions don't cross this threshold in basketball and tennis and and all kinds of things like that that's not probably extremely applicable to many of the listeners right now but it is still conveying the idea that that if we understand where we break then we can stop ourselves from getting there in the first place the functional example uh here is just thinking about basic things like where do I start my training program and then how do I progress it and we've already covered those numbers in either case though you want to have three markers that you're paying attention to if you're concerned you're getting into an overreaching phase or potentially going to lead to overtraining or you want to get out it's three unique things number one we're going to look for some sort of performance metric right so this could be um your times are going down your your squat numbers your your power is going down any of these things so it's got to be an actual performance number two some sort of physiology and so I want to see something happening with resting heart rate some biomarker is moving uh heart rate variability some other measure that is not influenced by you and the beauty of using biological markers are if we contrast that to like performance and I said okay here's our performance test every day you come in you're going to do a vertical jump and if one day you come in all a sudden your vertical jump is super low I might think oh man maybe we're starting to overreach you also could be feeling lazy that day and just not have jumped very high on purpose because you didn't want to work out the beauty of biomarkers are you don't get to manipulate them like that they don't care there's a downside to it which is maybe they're just indirect markers right and so I'm not telling you biological markers are better than performance markers what I'm saying is you want to look at both all right in fact you want to look at our third category as well which is some sort of symptomology and so am I am I having a symptom of overreaching am I seeing a performance decrement and then am I seeing a biological marker as well if you see all three of these popping up you have reason to believe you've reached some overreaching now what you have not identified yet is if that is functional overreaching non-functional overreaching or true overt trining and remember you shouldn't be feeling great after every training session you're trying to cause adaptation and until you back off maybe even weeks or months later to actualize the adaptation and get that super compensation and performance increase you're going to have to invest a little bit so you're going to go in the hole um any sport performance coach is going to look at numbers throughout the year and say yeah yeah when we first start training and preparation for this the season we are going to see a drop in performance that day that week that's part of the plan though right that's the stress you're trying to accumulate so you want to see all three of those markers you just want to pay attention to a couple of things how long are they down for a day three days 7even Days 15 days Etc if you're seeing a performance drop in a day and I am far away from from performance uh so the day that I want to peek for I'm not going to do anything different if I see two days in a row drop performance I'm not worried if I see more than probably in my opinion five days in a row of decrement then I might start paying attention if you're in season though or close to competition or whatever that thing means to you and you see more than a couple of days in a row of dropping then you might actually want to take some some steps to mitigate that so it really is important you understand again what are we trying to do are we trying to cause adaptation are we trying trying to cause adaptation and I I have a very specific example of all this we can run through uh here in a second and then of course a bunch of tools to to pull you out of those phases but that's that's fundamentally what we're trying to do here uh I would encourage you again don't be too reactive and responsive to any one measure I'm going to cover a whole bunch of them in a second but you can get lost in in different things because they all have pros and cons and so I know it's simple to just look at one score on your watch and make your decisions because of that or check your app but you really want to be careful of doing that you're going to probably lead yourself in the wrong direction more often than you're going to help yourself I'm curious as to why when we overreach too much or too often or we are overtraining that performance is diminished because on the face of it it's kind of obvious you're overreaching you're overtraining so performance has diminished but that's completely circular you hear about things like adrenal fatigue and adrenal burnout well it turns out adrenal burnout doesn't even really exist absolutely not there is such a thing as adrenal insufficiency syndrome but course you know these phrases like burnout adrenal burnout overtraining um they're thrown around you know as much as words like gaslighting and obsessive compulsive you know are without any real clinical definition um or there are clinical definitions but people aren't obeying them when they use the language I do want to acknowledge however what is absolutely true which is that over reaching too much too often overtraining these can degrade performance but mechanistically speaking what's going on because I think if once we understand what's going on mechanistically then I think um we can all look at tools whether or not it's breathing movement compression thermal psychological um motivational Etc and have a much clearer sense as to what's going to work best and what likely won't work I love this question so much because as I mentioned at the beginning I I was fortunate to spend my uh some of my graduate work in Andy fries Lab at the University of Memphis and we we did a lot in this area and so we in fact this is how I learned how to do assays and run Western blots and measure signaling proteins and things like this so this stuff is near and dear to my heart we also did a bunch of really wild studies and he had done some before I got there so I'm going to combine kind of Andy his entire career uh and just highlight some of the big pictures of what he found there um he was very interested in exercise particularly strength training and trying to figure out this entire question right which is like why is this actually happening when I work out too much when I lift too much that all of a sudden I can't sleep what's happening like why is my energy down why is my mood my motivation reduced if I squat too much so we did a whole series of studies across his career and again I'll just sort of highlight some of the the some of the themes that ran through them so the first one that jumps out to mind is early in his career he did this really awesome protocol um where he had people squat 100% of their back squat Max every day for two weeks so you come into the gym and and I think this first one was on a machine and you did a one rep max and then you came back in every single day for two weeks so these are what we would generally call kind of like that short to moderate range overreaching and by definition some of them ended up actually being true over training because it would take the individuals sometimes two to up to eight weeks to return back to their one rep max at the end of these protocols um so some of them were non-functional overreaching or some combination of that well along with that he took uh a lot of blood samples as well as muscle biopsies to try to look at what's happening endocrinologically um neurologically muscle physiology wise to pay attention What's happen so a couple of things that jump out there um one of his initial studies actually I think the very first one he did did um when they ran that first uh squat everyday protocol what they found was camine levels changed quite significantly um and depending on kind of what you wanted to pay attention to there whether it was epinephrine or nor epinephrine um or even uh some other markers they basically increased by somewhere between two to three fold and so a little bit of understanding of sleep physiology if adrenaline is extremely high epinephrine you're going to have a hard time sleeping so that alone was was first indication this is like wait a minute something's actually happening here that's just beyond muscle soreness there's some sort of systemic fatigue happening and as you rightfully pointed out is not the adrenal glands becoming fatigued that's sort of a bit of tongue and cheek and pedantics it is cortisol disregulation and general stress syndrome um but it's really can be noted in in blood in terms of epinephrine and norepinephrine another study he had done of a similar realm was over the the course of seven and a half days people came in and did 15 training sessions so it was really cool these are these really short BS of just ridiculous training and they said okay like something's happening with with epinephrine and norepinephrine something HP something's happening with testosterone what's it look like inside the cell so now muscle biopsies came on board and they started looking at things like map kinases which are these signaling proteins that are tend to be associated with an anabolic response they upregulate muscle protein synthesis and they do many other things but that's like a big factor of them um they looked at various androgens and gluc cortic cord receptors and they wanted to see like well maybe receptor density or Andor sensitivity is changing and in fact surprise surprise that's exactly what they found so they found both Androgen and gluc cortico receptor concentrations were reduced and so you can start to see a picture forming which is like hm very similar to the insulin type 2 diabetes story where you've you've really put yourself in a very high stress situation so presumably epinephrine Etc testosterone releases are extremely high in response to that to try to reach back to some level of homeostasis you start downregulating the receptors for them and so it's like the signal can only get so high if you're going to keep that gas on we're going to pull back the throttle and the receptor so that the total signal stays the same if that makes a little bit of sense well that becomes obviously problematic um so then like a final follow-up study here that that is it's important to not is they did another protocol which was really really cool and they said the first ones weren't enough so how about this we're going to come in every day for two weeks and we're going to do 10 sets of a one rep max every day so they were coming in and they would do 10 one rep Maxes every day for two weeks and what what's really cool about that study if they didn't complete any of the repetitions they had to repeat it until they had 10 successful one rep Maxes on that given day um absolutely brutal brutal protocol I wasn't there at the time um they had finished that right before I got on campus but I was actually able to be around when they were doing some of the final analyses there of the tissue um what they want to look at in this particular study was beta adrenergic receptors which are those receptors where that are going to be epine and such are going to be binding for so again similar story here um perhaps are we losing overall sensitivity because of this extreme sympathetic stimulation now actually thinking back what would have been pretty cool is if they had another group that did it and then did some down regulation breathing post to see if that can urate some of the problems but of course this was 20 plus years ago or something like that so um couple of things that happened is the one rep Maxes dropped by I think around like8 kilos by the end of the two weeks uh if I remember right like the group average was something in the neighborhood of 151 kilos so these were pretty well- trained individuals and it went from rather I think actually it was about 160 kilos and they dropped to like 150 2 kilos something close to that what was more significant though was their power dropped by 35% which is really really interesting because if if you pay attention to declines in physical performance over time and I mean that like through aging what you'll see is people can hold on to muscle mass pretty well um it will go down by about you know 1% or so after the age of 40 however strength will go down at like 2 to 4% and then Power by 8 to 10% and if you look at actually World Records across strength Sports by age you'll see that they will decline by age but not that much however if you look at Speed Sports by age they fall off the planet so it's very challenging to preserve fast Through Time whether this is fatigue or because of uh age that's really important because that'll then tell you hey a little bit of a in the coal mine is not necessarily your strength but your speed and so a lot of different techniques that we use to measure performance remember that's our Triad right symptomology physiology and performance um you're generally better looking at speed based performance tests rather than strength-based performance tests to get an earlier indication of potential uh overreaching or overtraining so anyways back to the the individual study there um in that same group again we we had the same problem where it took some of them 2 to eight weeks to come back so what they had to do is I can't remember the exact time frame I probably should have thought through this but they they had to come back something like every week or every couple of days even after the study finished until they got back to their Baseline one rep max and some of them it took them up to eight weeks before they finally got back so they probably were in a classic overtraining State at that point which is was done in as little as two weeks and this is also another point that people always ask like how uh like how long does it take is this something that has to happen over the course of months or or like if I were to go do two days or this intense training camp for two or three weeks could I actually cause over training and the answer is if it is actually truly enough volume and enough intensity you probably can do some significant damage in as little as two weeks probably doesn't happen that often most likely you you're probably going to be reaching a state of nonfunctional overreaching but you may actually be able to put yourself in a position where it might take three or four weeks or more to get back to Baseline after a truly intense and again think about this protocol it's like totally unrealistic for the most part 10 sets of one of a one rep max squat every day for two straight weeks um some folks if you're extremely highly trained weightlifter you might do something like that when you're very close to say World Championships but outside of that really specific scenario it's a totally absurd training protocol but that was the point right we were trying to ensure uh ensure that overtraining was met or close it's similar to when we've done we've actually done I think three studies in the center for sport performance on Dom's muscle soreness and in all those cases you do just like ridiculous leg extension protocols because you're just trying to ensure you cause super soreness if you don't then you have nothing to study so um absurd training Pro protocols but but that's the point so nonetheless um as a result sure enough the beta adrenergic receptors uh were regulated by something like 37% um what's probably even more significant though was the sensitivity in those receptors was reduced by like two and a half fold and so it's like okay wait a minute we're becoming desensitized to this timei and we're also actually now starting to reduce our total concentration similar which is actually an interesting was a very sneaky smart thing to do is they looked at nocturnal urinary epinephrine and guess what that was also up by like 50% 1515 5 Z 5 zero yeah and so now you're seeing this tie-in where it's like I'm seeing response at the tissue level I'm seeing a response probably although they didn't actually look at a pituitary anything like that I'm seeing adrenal and other endocrinological problems and then I'm also seeing this increase in concentration of vrine when I'm supposed to be sleeping and surprise surprise I'm having a hard time sleeping um symptomology well that's uh a very interesting finding about nocturnal epinephrine epinephrine of course is adrenaline it's released from the adrenals no surprise there but also from this brain area called Locus culus in the brain and the Brain tends to be called epinephrine in the body adrenaline just to complicate everyone's um understanding but that nclat did not come from us so don't blame us the point is that rapid eye movement sleep so called REM sleep is more abundant in the second half of the night we know that the dreams associated with rapid eye movement sleep are more emotionally Laden and that those dreams and those emotional states are actually important for discarding the emotional load of previous days experiences it's a sort of a uh natural trauma therapy if you will because in the normal healthy State those dreams are associated with an inability to release epinephrine at night so for me what you just described first of all it's the first time I've ever heard of it um uh but it ties together something really uh quite clear from the Sleep Neuroscience literature which is that when people are stressed they tend to get less rapid eye movement sleep that rapid eye movement sleep normally is associated with low levels of epinephrine so whether or not it's causal or not isn't clear um but sort of doesn't matter for sake of this discussion but what I'm wondering and I suppose one could test for but maybe observed is whether or not people who are over in overtraining too much overreaching too much because of this elevated nocturnal epinephrine diminished REM sleep whether not their emotional state is also um disrupted because one thing we know for sure is if you want to disrupt somebody's emotional state you deprive them of sleep and rapid eye movement sleep in particular the one caveat to that is for those of you out there that have heard that rapid eye movement sleep deprivation deliberate rapid eye movement sleep deprivation is a treatment for depression that is true but it's coupled with a next night enhanced rapid eye movement sleep so one of the major takeaways from all of this uh that I'm realizing is that no surprise daytime activities impact nighttime endocrine function impact quality of sleep impact daytime activities yeah actually there's there's so many fun things I want to do here now um this is actually why measuring eye movement is a very fantastic tool for understanding total stress load and you can actually differentiate different types of stress so caffeine use versus alcohol use versus sleep deprivation by actually measuring eye movements that's actually what we do in our absolute rest sleep company is in addition to getting a a full PSD sleep study done in your bedroom you're going to get an eye tracking assessment which we're going to be able to figure out why you're getting there so um nonetheless yeah if you actually look at the classic signs and symptoms of overtraining or overtraining syndrome it's going to be everything from performance decrements like we talked about um resting heart rate is going to increase uh you're going to see things like HRV drop by generally 20 or so percent that would be a very large disruption in HRV um decreased body weight and then all the stuff Andrew y just talked about so motivation adherence appetite mood um all of this stuff are are classically known associations with with overtraining and that's for the exact reasons you're talking about sleep disturbances and disruptions um wanting to train motivation all of this stuff uh goes part and parcel with non-functional overreaching and or overtraining um you can actually tie this back in a little bit more to some other biomarkers and this is this is great because this is the stuff we look for this is the the physiology stuff we look for um you've probably talked about shbg before um which is the sex hormone binding globulin so it's this protein that that'll float in your body that's going to bind up sex hormones in particular testosterone so what happens with um overt training is you can actually take this serly like week by week and you will actually see this number rise and so if you see this like say you're using a a a service like inside tracker and you're getting your your blood measured every so often and you see this numers start ticking up this is actually associated with that because what's actually happening is it's binding up all your free testosterone and that's just leading back to the circle we're talking about and you can actually see the same thing happen with calorie restriction U just not eating enough calories but in this particular case because it actually happens in both scenarios you know it's not an issue simply of being underc calori it's clearly an issue of the training load being too high so just to give another little tool there's uh I can get the link for it but there's a a website that um was created by uh which Journal oh slipping but I'll get it to you you can link it up where you can actually go in and plug in a number of values from blood chemistry so if you got your blood work done and you can plug in your pre number and your post number so say you got it done and then maybe 10 weeks later you got it done again and you're wondering and you notice hey my free testosterone's down or my shbg is up is it actually a meaningful number and you it will actually tell you whether or not the change prepos is physiologically Meaningful or not or just within the error margin of the measure um and you can actually change like like right there on the website you can change your confidence interval so it's really really cool if if you know if you just have your own blood and you want to know like hey I had any level this year and now it's you know here over there it's just a totally free resource um created gone through peer review all that stuff um and I'll give the link to that so that's a pretty cool um measure in addition to that like probably one of the more powerful and easy metrics uh biologically is to take your cortisol and dhaa ratio so this is known to be associated with a lot of things um you want to be really careful you don't want this number to be too high or too low something like 0.09 is about cortisol to DHEA DHEA to cortisol ratio yeah DHEA to cortisol I'd love to tell you I said it backwards on purpose just to make sure everyone understood but I got it backwards yeah I mean this ratio has been associated with so many things um you have to do you do have to be careful with Association right not being causation but everything from risk of infections some metabolic health and and like other disease States as well as more what we're talking about which is hey am I am I am I getting sort of cortisol this regulation which is what a lot of folks would call you know again adrenal fatigue and know that's not really what's happening but if adrenaline and epinephrine are off and testosterone cortisol is going to be along the right and so you can also look at things like testosterone to cortisol ratios um so there's a lot of things you can glean here to give you some insights into where you're going if that um if that ratio is too high that's going to be associated with metabolic syndrome and a bunch of other stuff if it's too low that's going to be associated with a lot of cognitive problems like um aggression and mood and and a bunch of things like that so again you want to keep it right around that 0.09 ratio and and most of the time actually in some blood chemistry stuff you'll get a you'll get a report of that or you can calculate it pretty quickly I'm sure we'll get into this in the episode that comes next on uh nutrition and supplementation totally what about compounds that lower cortisol such as ashwagandha um I can see now based on the L you're spelling out that during phases of a lot of intense overreaching or frequent overreaching given that those compounds can indeed lower cortisol rodol rolia rosacea Rola Rola Rosa um fun word to say um two words but the first one more fun to say Rola Roda Rola Rosa riola Rosa folks and ashwag gandha um I've been uh trying riola recently um and mainly as a buffer to uh output um it does seem to have some good data attached to it related to lowering uh one's perceived threshold of how hard they're working so in other words you can work harder um and not feel as if you're working really hard which allows you to do more work that's sort of the subjective description of how it works but you told me that it um Can blunt cortisol and and ashonda we know blunts cortisol both of these things of course can do other things but are these um compounds that you sometimes will incorporate into uh a training regimen uh I I've been using rodea for probably six or more years like pretty consistently not personally but uh using it with the individual we work with you do need to be a little bit careful uh I wouldn't say that it blunts cortisol it is probably more appropriately described as a cortisol modulator uh which means sort of if it gets too high or too low it'll it'll help kind of keep it within normative range um there's also there it is important to note there have been a handful of studies two of I know specifically showed that riola use can enhance strength gains however it may reduce muscular endurance so um we need more human data on this stuff and it may turn out that's not a concern it may also turn out to be a concern so nothing is nothing is perfect and free there's no supplement that is a Panacea and um I have used again rodol in a lot of situations because the other thing you kind of have to pay attention to the cortisol is is you have it's supposed to be modulated throughout the day it's not supposed to be at this normal value in fact if you look at normative values um it's typically uh described in um uh micrograms per deciliter and depending on literally what company you used to draw your blood if you're getting it through the blood uh depending on what which method they use to analyze it the normative values are like frankly embarrassingly all over the place um they're mostly going to be like 5 to 25 as a quote unquote normative value but that's outrageous we also know those numbers vary massively by age by sex um and throughout the day and so if you only are taking a single point let's assume you're doing a fasted blood draw which is what most folks do it's really only going to tell you a lot about what's happening in that moment we need to know well like maybe let's say my cortisol was if I'm a say 38-year-old woman and my 7 A.M cortisol was you know 15 milligram per decer that's pretty good but if it's 15 milligrams per deciliter at 3 p.m. oh boy I'm I'm probably having some issues right so there's a change throughout the day and you need to be able to plot that curve so you can actually well pretty standard practice that we do is we look at cortisol throughout the day we're going to take multiple markers because I don't want to just see your Baseline cortisol I want to see this curve throughout the day that's going to tell me a ton about U again is your sleep being caused by this regulation um is it your training is it something else so I would like take a single Baseline blood marker of cortisol with a lot of grain of salt we we typically measure it at least three times throughout the day so something like 6:00 to 9:00 a.m. 12: to 3 and then something like closer to the evening oftentimes we do much more we'll do like seven points or something like that throughout the day depending on the situation so you want to be careful of that um just since we're here you can also get cortisol in uh through saliva and now there's sort of pros and cons to that because the the pro of doing it in your blood is it's it it's much more stable um saliva is extremely responsive to whatever happened these seconds before you took that test the upside of it though is you can do a bunch of real world life experiments so for example we will do this sometimes if we want to see how an individual is responding to a given stressor let's take it right let's take the take it in the you know spit into a tube we're going to take it and then we're going to go do this workout or this cold exposure whatever we're going to do take it at thean we know that it's responsive to what just happened but that's the point um so you can actually there's sort of pros and cons so you'll use the appropriate measure for the appropriate uh question you're trying to answer yeah a couple of points and Reflections about cortisol my first uh laboratory Duty as an undergraduate was in a was actually in a biopsychology lab at the time they didn't have the field of Neuroscience as it's now called it was called biopsychology or psychobiology I didn't know that no there was used to be neurochemistry neurobiology they had all collapsed into what we now called Neuroscience which was only some years ago but my job was to collect cortisol samples which means I I was collecting um spit which means I was collecting saliva and the an advantage of saliva based cortisol it's free cortisol it's the active form as you mentioned it's reflective of what happened in the seconds or minutes um just prior a couple of things about the regular cortisol pattern across the day because I realized that while it wonderful for everybody to get their cortisol measured in detail multiple times and blood and and saliva and so on some people just won't do that uh for whatever reason or can't do that yeah and the basic Contour of a healthy pattern of cortisol secretion is uh to have highest levels of cortisol in the morning um is actually part of the mechanism that's associated with waking you up viewing bright light ideally from sunlight but other forms of bright light early in the day actually can lead to a 50% % increase in that qu cortisol Spike which is a good thing people here elevated cortisol oh no this sets in motion a Cascade of things related to enhanced mood and alertness immune system function Etc what I think it can be useful for people to understand is that many things will Spike cortisol throughout the day stress cold water exercise but the idea is that it comes down to baseline or near Baseline um rather quickly one of the worst situations as you pointed out is when the highest level of cortisol is consistently shifted to the afternoon period in fact that's a um pretty reliable signature of certain forms of depression this is worked by U my colleague David Spiegel at um Stanford Psychiatry and the the great Bob spolski Robert spolski of uh why zebras don't get ulcers y behave Etc and fame lots of lots of popular books there um I think that if people are trying to regulate their cortisol and they're just under and they just understand that basic Contour that the Baseline should be uh you know rise pretty quickly after one rise in the morning so it's easy to remember rise rise um rise out of bed and Rise cortisol with light um bright light with exercise um with caffeine these things will all increase cortisol and then across the day it's normal for cortisol to spike but then to use some of the down regulation methods that you described in particular the breathing methods and exercise itself as the case may be but then to really pay attention to how much psychological and physical stress is occurring in the six hours or so or eight hours prior to sleep um does that seem like a a good sort of broad Contour of how to have a healthy pattern of cortisol released because you actually want the cortisol to reduce inflammation and initiate or participate in the recovery process you will not see any progress from exercise training without a large spike in cortisol it is critically important when we think of phrases like cortisol inflammation stress this is not bad right physiology is not personified right there the things don't like hate you in the body right it is all is not good and bad they just are um the more you try to suppress cortisol the more you suppress adaptation what you want is exactly what you mentioned large spikes meant with large quick recovery and you want to do that throughout the day and get that hor medic stressor this is so to going back to your ashwagandha and Rola issue um it I think it would be very shortsighted for people that do that as this is a prophylactic okay because you if you blunt cortisol you're going to cause immunosuppression especially early in the day totally taking on to before going to train is is counterproductive yeah we do not just this is not a baseline part of our foundational package right if you go look at the um athlete foundations or the athlete resilience protocols that put together you're not going to see these things in there for that specific reason um any form of cortisol regulation needs to be done strategically if you are excessively high and we're bringing you back down to normative values at the right time then great if you're normal though then taking you down lower than that is actually problematic that's the same thing is actually true since we're here for oxidative stress forign inflammation antioxidant use um we mentioned I think earlier about taking vitamin C and vitamin E post exercise will actually blunt adaptations or at least has the potential to do so same thing right if you're modulating this response just because and you have not done so because of actually biological testing that indicated you needed to do such then you actually may be making things worse and so um we we see constantly with people who take a number of supplements and substances for sleep and then they wake up the next morning groggy and your your cortisol suppressed okay great so then they take something for stimulation and then the rest of the day they're trying to reduce and then you're this nasty cycle instead of just getting out of the way and letting cortisol do what it's supposed to do U and then making sure again you're teaching it so this is actually a coachable response you can coach your own body to go down in the later part of the day and go up in the earlier part of the day you want to make sure that you are driving that train with intent and so again to reiterate if you don't need that you shouldn't do it right if you don't need to lower cortisol you shouldn't walk around doing it you're just going to suppress the state even far and this is what's need this is needed for anabolic responses so you're not going to grow muscle if cortisol is not spiked it's it's going to compromise it rather so you want to be intentional with these practices uh especially in the form of of supplementation be very very intentional I've heard it said that carbohydrates in particular starchy carbohydrates definely can inhibit cortisol definitely and uh this could be through the uh tryptophan amino acid related pathway that ratchets up to uh serotonin release probably some other things too I mean the idea that carbohydrates just stimulate serotonin is is a little bit uh overly simp cellular mechanisms amk going up and immediately turning on there yeah right so um you know I think we've all experienced this uh you know we're stressed we're stressed we uh doesn't necessarily even have to be highly processed you know uh fat assoc you know fatty carbohydrates um you know like potato chips and and potato chips and dip or these kinds of things it can also be a bowl of rice a bowl of oatmeal a bowl of pasta um which here I'm not trying to demonize um carbohydrates I I do ingest carbohydrates um minimally or non-processed carbohydrates um most of the time but not all the time and they have a a fairly potent uh effect on on lowering stress and perceived stress and even quality of sleep which is not to say that somebody has to load up on them like crazy unless their glycogen is really depleted talked a lot about this in the endurance episode I know we'll touch on it more in the nutrition supplementation episode but um in thinking about the relationship between carbohydrates and cortisol and what we've just been talking about terms of cortisol as being vitally important for the adaptation Trigger or triggering adaptation it's probably a better way to put it but that it can blunt cortisol taken post training or um maybe in the evening before sleep what are some of the basic ways that one can think about and maybe use carbohydrates in specific ways in order to let's say control cortisol rather than uh quash cortisol uh you actually have alluded to a number of times already so we often times will give people a lot of carbohydrates at night for some of these reasons you're going to feel fantastic a lot of people that helps you sleep um both get to sleep and stay asleep Sleep Quality you talked about specifically remember think about it this way cortisol at its core is an energy signaling molecule it says we are in the need for energy great um epinephrine the same you you'll start seeing for example cortisol will liberate uh free fatty acids put them in the bloodstream getting you prepared to do something the problem is if it's continually elevated throughout the day with no down regulation we start running into issues right so again this is the differentiation between oh my cortisol is slightly elevated all day versus I had a really big big spike after training I had a really big spike after breath protocol Etc and then it went back down so that being said if you then ingest carbohydrates you are telling it is quick to see the sign all we have nutrients we have energy again specifically carbohydrates therefore cortisol can sort of go back down we don't need to be liberating free fatty acids and preparing uh the need for fuel so you can help yourself go to sleep for many as you pointed out many mechanisms actually of why carbohydrates will help you sleep at night for some not all people but some that would be one of the relationships it has with cortisol great I look forward to hearing more about how the various macronutrients and micronutrients and so-called adaptogens this very mysterious group of compounds you know the word adapt gets thrown around so much nowadays um but as long as we're talking about adaptation I think uh that'll be fair play for the uh discussion in the next episode about nutrition and supplementation in my laboratory when we study stress we use a number of different markers subjective reports of how stressed people feel uh heart rate mning heart rate heart rate variability cortisol free cortisol and on and on what are some of the other markers of stress as it relates to exercise adaptations and Recovery because once again I think we're seeing a lot of parallels between the study of psychological stress and the study of physical stress as it relates to exercise adaptation remember in terms of physiology stress is stress this is why we have this cool term of alistic load or allostasis so it's that it really doesn't matter which system you test for it will reflect overall stress uh you you mentioned several of them we've got done talking about some biomarkers HRV and heart rate are another great example because what you're trying to do is this when we were talking about the muscle soreness thing what we were really getting at was a marker of how do I fix the overuse in that particular muscle now we've really transitioned into Global markers of overuse and why these are problematic or important to pay attention to rather is again these are the indicators that you didn't just work a muscle out too hard but you have actually done something where you've compromised all of your physiology to a level where you've influenced a circulating catacol amine or something that's going to influence multiple markers now like your sleep and your mood and your behavior so that's why these things are problematic that said you could look at resting heart rate not a bad thing to do however that does have multiple downsides uh one thing we do know is your resting heart rate will Elevate with excessive stress load this actually doesn't matter if it is physical stress or psychological stress or a combination so you will see that number drift up over time here's the downside though it's not tremendously sensitive to smaller stressors uh in other words if you were to do something like alcohol is a very good example you will see your resting heart rate Elevate with alcohol use um excessive tobacco use and psychological stress however if you do something smaller like a hard training sessions resting heart rate is not sensitive enough to pick that up it will actually probably stay the same so for those reasons we don't actually use resting heart rate that much we will take it but it's not our primary indicator that being said HRV is a better use so just really quickly for those that are not familiar uh your heart rate uh let's say for example you your resting heart rate is 60 beats per minute that means every second it's beating it doesn't actually happen on a consistent Rhythm such that it would beat on second one beat on second two beat on second three Etc the rate is more variable so it might go beat beat beat beat beat be there's a variation in the heart rate and at the end of that 60 seconds in this example you would have still completed 60 beats they just aren't on the exact same pattern well one thing that's actually quite interesting is the amount of variation in your heart rate is actually associated with your overall sympathetic or parasympathetic State such that a large variation so an arhythmic pattern is generally more representative of being more rested and recovered and being more parasympathetic and you'll notice during times of extremely high stress uh you will be very rhythmic beat beat beat beat beat and so this is a little bit of a of a confusing idea but a high HRV is there indicated of a lot of variation meaning you're pretty recovered a low HRV meaning there's not a lot of variation means you're probably pretty stressed and wire so it's it's uh related to heart rate but in my opinion it is a significantly better marker of that now one thing you want to pay attention to if you do this a couple of things there are some accuracy issues with many of the devices basically everybody at this point probably has some device uh that's telling them their HRV what you do not want to do is simply compare your number to somebody else for a lot of reasons not all of these Technologies are actually even measuring the same thing um again some of them are actually combining with other metrics and calling it your overall Readiness or your recovery and so now we've what we've actually done is made a couple of assumptions and then stacked them on a whole host of other assumptions and then gave you a number and you don't know what that sort of black box score actually even represents so I would caution one against taking too much uh information from that if you are actually measuring HRV even within that there's a lots of ways to calculate it that are not important here so don't necessarily worry about the score compare it to yourself but not to others what you will see is if you use similar devices and techniques it's hard to find data here but in general people that are uh overweight um might have a little bit of a of a lower score as in a worse score um we need more information on that to be clear so in large part the best way to use something like HRV is to measure it under the exact same circumstances every day so whether you're going to use um just a device uh on your watch or your phone or your bed or anything else or you're going to buy a special HRV on it's fine just take that measure at the same time um mostly this means first thing in the morning so you wake up you go to the bathroom you come back down take your measure or something like that you don't uh wait sometimes you took it before food then after or look at your phone like all these other things that can influence stress so so take it it usually takes somewhere between seconds and minutes to record so you want to pay attention to that now one of the things you'll notice is there is a natural change in your HRV that just happens and so what you kind of really want to pay attention to is I guess answering the question of well how much of a change in HRV has to happen before I should care and it's hard to answer right so let's just say your HRV was 100 I just made that number up what if you wake up tomorrow it's 99 what's that mean well I don't know if you wake up tomorrow when it's 20 that's probably a bad thing well where's that line it's hard one thing I would recommend doing is taking your HRV for at least a month before you start using that value to make any changes and you recommend taking it first thing in the morning yep always at roughly the same time basically under the same circumstances it doesn't have to be technically in the morning but because your day will change on most days what you get into um that's the most stable thing in your life so I would take it then and I would collect it for at least a day at least a month rather maybe even six weeks and then give yourself basically a running average so what we quite honestly do is uh we will actually track it for forever and then what we always look at is what does it look like today relative to the last week on average and then what does that look like to our historical average and we always compare those things um and you also want to make sure you compare like to like so in other words I generally I'm not going to worry about today's HRV score relative to tomorrow's what I want to look at is today's relative to this exact same day last week um not for athletes but for non-athletes this is very important so imagine don't worry about the difference between hrb score and Monday compared to Tuesday pay attention to Monday compared to last Monday and the Monday before that that's because you typically have the same sort of weekly schedule and what you don't want to do is is say look at Monday's HRV score which is a reflection of what happen Sunday and compare that to Tuesdays which is actually a reflection of what happened Monday you probably didn't do the same stressors on Sunday as Monday so you're not actually comparing the same thing but if you have a General weekly schedule you're likely to compare this Monday's or to the last Mondays because they're both comparing what happened on the previous days see did that sort of Distinction make sense absolutely I do the same thing with body weight by the way if you're trying to track body mass gain or fat loss or something compare like the like you can look at the daily changes but you need to pay attention to what that normal distribution is so if you kind of do that you know Monday to Monday thing that'll give you a rough area of saying okay my normal weekly variation is say five so my average is 100 but I will fluctuate between 95 to 105 that's my standard deviation is sort of a science dorks would call that um if you start very uh changing more than 5% outside of your normal standard deviation then I'm going to start paying attention a little bit and I'm going to actually run a little bit of an algorithm on this one and so here is my thinking process when I get HRV really any metric but HRV is is the example we're using First Step did I collect good data and what that I mean again did I measure it the same way I measured every single day or did I get up and look at my phone first and I realized oh crap I forgot to take my HRV and then I went back and got there so say I had a 15% derivation from my normal number and then I realized oh yeah that's right I was up super late last night doing whatever okay great I'm going to consider that bad data you didn't good if it's bad data then I'm not doing anything ignore it's bad data and you throw it out you don't use it if you decide for the most part let's assume it was good data okay great then I'm going on to my next question which is is is it acute in other words is it just today right or is it chronic in words this is a is this pattern been happening for more than five days or at least three out of the last four or something like that three minimum is what I like honestly I generally look at five or more days that's a very big distinction if it is something that just happened today then the next question I'm going to ask myself is and I in that adaptation phase am I trying to be in a phase where I'm trying to cause insult to the body that it needs to respond with if that is the case I'm just going to ignore it right in fact it's almost sometimes a good sign hey we are stressing the body and it is stressed what we're doing is working amazing in fact if you don't see that it's sort of like maybe we're not doing enough to push the pace all right so great if the answer is no we're in a peaking phase then we're actually going to use what I call acute State shifters so this is a whole host of little tricks that I have that can change HRV or any recovery metric Within seconds again these are not chronic fixes this is just I'm having a bad day today I feel like crap can I make myself feel better right now and so I kind of call these parlor tricks a lot of the times and there's a thousand of them we are certainly not going to go over them but I'll give you some examples um you can pull out first of all physical movement we'll do it you you'd be stunned how just doing some yoga moving around doing some jumping jacks starting your workout I mean you probably experienced this it's sort of cliche in our world at this point but um if you ever do any serious lifting over a serious amount of time there will be days when which you walk into the gym and you feel awful and somehow that day you said a lifetime PR yeah that's a strange strange phenomenon yeah I uh I I've experienced that more than a few times um it's rare the inverse is rare however you feel great you have a horrible workout it happens yeah um and it can happen for any number of different reasons but yeah I think the the former when when isn't feeling very good and then somehow it's a terrific workout does set a kind of a seed of Doubt as to how good our subjective assessments really are and which I guess is why we were talking about um objective assessments yep like HRV and remember if it's a single day here uh you can even do hard training uh people sort of have this idea like well if you get up and your recovery score is down do a lighter day that's probably like I'm probably never making that choice to be honest not in this situation remember this is one bad day and we are in a phase of even trying to improve performance right now like we're probably still training hard you will again often see I felt terrible then I trained super hard and it totally changed my day around this all can happen so exercise is my first love here um absolutely breathing um any sort of up regulation breathing so we talked a lot about down regulation breathing just do the opposite right and so this is when hyperventilation strategies can work uh instead of accentuating the exhale you accentuate the inhale or you restrict the exhale this is working in the exact opposite situation you can also play little this is where things like music motivational quotes um if you're the type that follows people on Instagram that motivates you or can work with these things um coaching tactics these can be things like um finding out or talking about that person's why um you sort of shared something that a mantra you use um when you're training hard to keep you go better I'm not going to ask you to share that now but some people have this sometimes right or you may have this conversation with your athlete we call this finding out your why right so finding out like why are you really here what are we doing here and a lot of times you'll hear things like it's because I grew up poor and I don't ever want to be poor again okay great well this is for my children or like any number of things and you can pull that out on these days you need to be really careful this is why I call these parlor tricks because when you play that card too often it starts to lose effect right and you can only dig to a hole so often before it's sort of like a um the same thing is with music right if you every time you go to the weight room it's blasting death metal at level 10 well eventually it's not it's no longer motivating right it's no longer helpful so um you want to deploy these things strategically yeah the the phrase that comes to mind is signal to noise you know the nervous system especially the dopamine system and the adrenaline system which are part of this larger system called the catacol amine system so that's dopamine epinephrine norepinephrine the the get up and go focus on external goals um movement Associated it's and on and on that that system responds best to high signal relative to noise so if you're as you pointed out um listening to music every time drinking a ton of caffeine energy drinks pre-workout New Tropics and then you know stacking all those things uh sometimes refer this as dopamine stacking informally referred to as dopamine stacking you're doing all those things then you first of all then you're wondering why later that afternoon or the next day you're feeling like you're you're under a cloud well it's obvious your your cacing system crashed but it's also that um you don't necessarily become dependent on it it's just that you start to wonder whether or not you have the internal mechanisms and motivation to train without those things and so one tends to use them more and more and then they have a diminishing effect over time um the rule that I've been um sort of applying has been I never do two workouts in a row where I'm stacking in um stimulants loud music and any kind of uh sort of high potency inspiration however every set in the gym or when I run I really try and be diligent about form and attention to what I'm doing the one exception would be the long duration endurance work part of the reason I do that work is to let my mind go into states of drifting uh not trying to think in complete sentences or even close to it just let my my brain kind of idle at at a low hum uh and for that reason generally listen to something that's more of a story or don't listen to anything at all and just let my thoughts kind of spool through anyway I don't want to take us too far off track but I think this um idea of signal to noise will resonate with the engineers out there but since most people are likely not Engineers it is the way that the nervous system works um evidenced by the fact that whatever area of your body right now is in contact with a chair or um any other surface that's been in contact with for more more than a few seconds you forget that it's in contact with it because there's low signal to noise at that point a similar note you actually mentioned stimulants basically there whether you're talking caffeine or any other stimulant any other cortisol modulators or adaptogens any of these things fall in the category if you're not using them consistently and you're having a rough day and all of a sudden you throw down 200 milligrams of caffeine uh it's going to change real fast the equ strong performance enhancing effect yeah absolutely and for these reasons right um so we mentioned a couple of them breath work um food more calories just eating some food uh sometimes we'll give people like what we call Comfort Foods so this is just like hey you're uh you know you're from Georgia and we know you love grits so we're having grits for breakfast oh my great like just something to change your mood acute State shifters um to alter it the other couple of Tricks here are light so if we know that maybe say multiple people are struggling that day maybe we'll put on the lights extra bright we'll bring in some extra things and just get it more light in the area not that do even count actually going outside and seeing the Sun but perhaps we'll do that um and then other little tricks that I've learned over the years is one particular thing I love is literally drawing a line a physical line in the ground and you look at that line and you say like I'm going to train today and I'm going to accomplish this effort uh I'm not going to walk past this line and into that training space until I'm ready to give that effort and that may take a minute or 10 or whatever but it it's the physical barrier is very important to saying like I'm not just going to get through it I'm going to actually perform the way I want to perform or I'm not going to do it and I'm not going to cross this line until I'm ready to make that happen all right I really like that tool it also brings to mind the importance of at least thinking about how your relationship with your phone during training um Can perhaps help but also impede workout motivation and performance in an earlier episode you mentioned that if people are using their phone to play music during their workout that they establish the complete playlist prior to initiating the workout and then not deviate from that playlist as opposed to changing it in the middle because there's just too much of a uh of an Impulse to also check social media check email check text messages I mean the way I think about the phone actually is it's a bunch of little um brain areas it's got a memory system for you it's got lookup tables for lookup tables it's got websites to look things up on the Internet it's got photos I mean it is so rich with sensory data and it's so closely linked to our own brain architecture the algorithms are designed for those to be that way that I always think about it as bringing in a second person with me but that person is a my twin that um has severe attention issues and for those that already have attention issues just think about this as a twin that would then compound You by tapping on your shoulders talking to you all the time interrupting you uh somebody that you like a lot but that frankly is um is a little bit irritating in that they're they're interrupting your ability to really show up and also your ability to show up for them so I started to think about the phone as um an entire individual and that it represents me and and certainly not the better version of me exactly you actually mentioned something else that we use uh occasionally which what we call Brain Games or puzzles whether this is a crossword puzzle or something where you actually lose your thought of self for a second and your brain gets engaged in a task that you weren't regretting or even thinking about these can be stupid little games uh it could be little challenges especially if you're in like a group or a team setting right like we're going to play one round of vge ball or we're going to play one round of of Thumb Wars so you do encourage this yeah I see so you would play like a thing instead of warming up like all right get in and everyone get going we're going to you know get your foam roller your D whatever things just like all right everyone line up and we're going to play thumb roll to see who wins right just like whatever right and all a sudden you've snapped into a new mental shift um or literally playing brain games playing Tetris on your phone like any of these things um can work in this acute setting C can I ask you a question it's not directly related to recovery uh per se but I think it's worth mentioning um or asking about rather which is the use of mirrors or no mirrors while training um you know the experience of seeing oneself and observing one's form in the mirror I suppose has some utility you can get some sense of progress that you might trigger um here I'm almost specifically referring to uh resistance training I suppose it could be cardio if you're running on a treadmill or pushing a sled or something but um you can see form um you can get a sense of um what your face looks like when you Grimace uh but in all seriousness um you are without question a person not you Andy but um one is in a interceptive mode when looking at themselves in the mirror so exception perception of things beyond the confines of our skin even if it's a picture of us interoception perception of everything from the skin inward um and so if we're looking at ourselves we're diverting some allocation of our attention let's say there's a hundred these are arbitrary units and you can think put 50% of your attention on the feeling in your body or the muscles you're training um and 50% on how it appears in the mirror or it could be 100% on the mirror 100% internally which you best accomplish probably by closing your eyes so obviously there are constraints here certain movements you wouldn't want to close your eyes Etc in general what are your thoughts on mirrors or no mirrors for resistance training specifically it depends on the metric that you find most important and what I mean by this is if you're training for say muscle hypertrophy there's emerging evidence that suggests uh actually looking at yourself in the mirror and even flexing in between sets um can actually be advantageous or it can augment muscle gains oh my there's uh support for all the the the uh mirror flexers absolutely not not making fun of you I just uh it is is sort of interesting to be on the observing side of of that but Hey listen results are what people are after yeah having said that if you're trying to enhance um movement learning then it may be detrimental so if you're doing an exercise that is explosive and fast it's probably not the best thing to be looking into a mirror um if you were to walk into any Olympic weightlifting Arena and you had any thoughts of using a mirror you would probably run out of the gym very very quickly you can't see yourself in time to make an adjustment with the movement that's happening that fast and also we'll do exactly what you mentioned which is it will remove your ability to understand and feel the movement and so this is a big component to using technology for exercise at all is you have to make sure that the end point is you understanding you and your physiology more not less when you Outsource learning to technology in this case even if the technology is the mirror you remove your ability to gain and truly understand that learning process so you need to be very very careful whether you're using a mirror or whether you're using any number of apps where you can record say a movement and then watch it afterwards and it will give you a breakdown if your hand was in the right spot or foot was in the right spot spot these are all great but you need to then take the next step which is to say I need to be able to feel that position all right so in the case of performance if you can imagine trying to learn a new technique say running technique and you have to be able to watch yourself in the mirror to understand your stride in the right position if you don't take the next step of saying okay now I don't have to look in the mirror and I can feel when I'm getting out of rhythm or whatever the cas is then you'll never be able to actually then use that in your race and so it's very very important that people again pay attention to what is the dependent variable that you're actually interested in doing if you're trying to get better at something the tech is okay as a starting place it just cannot be the finishing place thank you for those Reflections I'm curious as to what happens or what one should do if their HRV is reduced for maybe three or four or more days in a row absolutely the next question that I'm going to ask is and am I in that adaptation phase if so I'm going to still ignore it just like I did if it was a single bad day but I'm going to start watching it very carefully I may actually now introduce some other tests so I may use a performance test uh we may look at something else maybe ask questions maybe have some communication either with myself or somebody else so I'm going to start paying more attention but I'm still really not going to take much action until that crosses more than seven days of consistent problems um if it does do that or we're in a peing phase then I'm going to go to another set of solutions that are truly going to pull me out of the hole rather than just be uh those acute State shifters these are more what I call chronic state shifters now some of these are actually very similar to the ones we've used before uh for example thermal stress so I can promise you if your recovery score is in the tanks and you walk outside and you jump in your 35 degree water and you get back out what's going to happen is your HRV score immediately afterwards I'm I'm talking Within seconds is going to be significantly compromised right in other words think about that remember a low HRV means High sympathetic I promise you cold water will put you in a high sympathetic Drive however and we've tested this pretty extensively um looking at HRV zero 15 30 60 90 all the way up to 180 minutes post and on average you will see your HRV score continue to rise after that and so well you have this immediate sympathetic response you will immediately then respond you know about 30 minutes on most people depends on the person though and that score will be improved for several hours afterwards so um heat can kind of have a similar effect um that actually again is a it's sort of an acute fix but over time as we've described earlier that can also have a little bit of a chronic effect um we can also then get into areas like sleep and so now we're going to start playing and exploring why uh are you sleeping poor as well or was your sleep score fine but your HRV was low that's a little bit of a different answer if your sleep is getting compromised then we're going to start going into and making sure we're improving our sleep um in terms of like brain stuff instead of maybe playing a game or having music or some of those other tricks those aren't going to really have a chronic effect but you can do things like work on social connection that's actually been shown to improve recovery over time you can do things like journaling or meditation and those have an acute effect as well as a chronic effect so again if you go Journal right now you probably feel better but also we know that over time that will gradually improve things so um adaptogens and things like that also can have a chronic effect so can things like electrolytes or food or hydration if those things were were off so we're going to go to a whole number of areas but those are the primary ones outstanding of all that of course it may be simply a time to go back and reassess our training program that's truly the case so uh that's where we're at if so we're probably going to either completely remove training um or drop it to like 50% or so uh until we start rebounding back to Baseline and that's generally the numbers we use for many people who are not training for a competitive Sport and maybe aren't pushing themselves really hard you know maybe uh they're they consider themselves somebody who exercises in order to maintain Health um and Aesthetics and um longevity Etc uh and they never really finish any workout completely exhausted they're sleeping okay their appetite's okay can we assume that they are recovering well um or maybe they're not creating enough of a adaptation response like there's no Progressive overreaching and so there's really no stimulus for Recovery what I'm saying here is on the the face of it I think is obvious right if you don't train hard there's nothing to recover from what I'm really saying is is the ability to recover itself something that we need to train in other words can we get better at recovering and the uh analogy here would be something like focus in order to uh perform work of any kind but certainly mental work and physical work we need to be able to focus the ability to focus is the reflection of a bunch of neural circuits and chemicals and hormones Etc but we know roughly what those are and we know that if you are poor at focusing for every small bit of time that you can focus a little bit longer even if it's a matter of seconds those circuits themselves get better at focusing and so on and so forth so in other words is the recovery system however Broad neurotransmitter hormones neural muscular immune-based Etc can that system or set of systems become better can we get better at recovering can we meaning can it become faster and uh more effective um can we think of the recovery system is kind of a blade that gets sharper by engaging recovery because if so then there's strong reason for people who are not pushing really hard to push at least a little bit harder than is comfortable for them every once in a while to make sure that system doesn't start to slide back remember physiology is listening to everything you do and it is always responding so the analogy that I will meet your analogy with that I use here is the bowling alley so you've probably been bowling before and you've used the bumper Lanes right the bumper Lanes I've gone bowling before and I've spent time in the gutter and I've spent time on the pins okay um it's been a while we used to have a bowling alley in the town where I went to and um it was fun we used to slide around on the Sho and like all the kids would hang out there and I feel like do they still have bowling alleys I don't even know it feels like something that may have gone the the way of the the mid 2000s I don't care if no one bills anymore you're not going to ruin my good analogy okay well well my intent wasn't to ruin your analogy um okay tell us about bowling all the bowlers are going to come after me with with um bowling balls or something you're going to get blasted with all the stats on elevations don't hurt me sorry cool so if would one were to go bowling and they didn't want to put their ball in the gutter yeah you could put these little bumpers in those Lanes all right and these little foam pads that go in the gutter that if your ball is going towards the gutter it hits those and bounces off and goes back in the lane right okay so in this entire conversation and this is actually true of a lot of the way people approach their fitness and health people are very concerned often times with optimizing meaning I want to make sure I don't go in the gutter I don't want to hit the walls so therefore I'm going to try to improve the accuracy in which I throw the ball so I want to make sure that I'm throwing it down the center of the lane more often and I want to get my my standard deviation Tighter and Tighter so that I don't get anywhere close to hitting the wall however what they're not realizing is if you do that the body will start shrinking the size of the lane because what it basically says is huh we haven't had a ball touch Us in years we don't need to be this wide let's get smaller and smaller and smaller so it's not that you actually are having a reduced ability to recover but you start becoming incredibly sensitive to that so your two strategies for enhancing recovery are to practice getting closer of throwing that ball down the middle lane or to widen to widen the alley and that's exactly what you're referring to and you absolutely should do that and so what happens is you don't have to be so precise with what you're doing because your ability to handle so many things things is widen so if you're off now by four or five in to the right no problem because you've just tripled the size of your alley that's exactly what you want to do so paying attention to two things number one is getting better at accuracy maybe staying really tight with your progressions um using nutrition and sleep to optimize your recovery and push your resilience is what we call this in fact there's actually a biological way to measure resilience we we do that in all of our folks um this is scientifically validated stuff and didn't just make it up you can actually measure resilience and there's more and more coming out on this but that's exactly what that term me so how well can you handle and bang things off the stress so when you see a reduction in say 10% of your HRV today for you that may make you feel terrible for me I might not feel anything because I'm well adapted to large fluctuations and therefore I'm okay the less and less you do that the more and more responsive you will be to those slight deviations so that is exactly the Target and that's kind of what I allude to when I say you got to understand what are we optimizing for we optimizing for making sure I don't feel any different today are we optimizing to make sure when I do feel different I still am able to perform um so this is why you want to do things like maybe use some caffeine today and feel great but if I have to use it every day all I'm doing is shrinking my sensitivity there so now if I have to go a day without it I can't train at all right caffeine is the easy example because people understand how that whole system works but this is really true of everything else so yeah you need to practice this and the way to do that is to give yourself more stress to continue to bring in the stress from nutrition from training from breath work um you mentioned earlier about Focus the exact same thing right it's not just about getting better right now it's about training a system and you can clearly train that right um we will often say breath work is a practice that's exactly what we're talking about right so you're practicing getting better at these things you're practicing returning your focus you're practicing recovering and quite literally physiologically you can upregulate whether we're talking enzymes whether we're talking about Regulators these will be upregulated so then the the next time that insult comes in it's not as big as it's not as damaging so yeah absolutely you can and you should strive for that throughout all the episodes where we've been talking about exercise at the core of that is this word adaptations and I love that you mentioned that breath work can also create adaptations the way I'm visualizing all of this now is that resistance training with weights machines body weight otherwise cardiovascular training running jogging sprinting jumping and so on thermal training exposure to heat exposure to cold in a dedicated way and deliberate respiration AKA breathing or breath work as a practice all of those can be viewed as ways to trigger adaptations and in the context of recovery the specific adaptations you're trying to engage are opposite to stress in fact with the exception of perhaps deliberate cold exposure maybe deliberate heat exposure because if the sauna is really hot you can get the dorphin release which is kind of uncomfortable but but still in both those cases the rebound from that in other words when you get out you shower you go to bed the next morning you do have this kind of blist out feeling we know why that is that is the rebound to that uncomfortable situation so it seems it doesn't really matter whether or not you're using resistance you're doing cardiovascular training you're using thermal approaches or you're using respiration based approaches all of these are really ways of both triggering adaptations and if applied properly to actually help you recover from the stress and create the the literal result that you're that you're trying to achieve for some people that might have been obvious but I think for many people including myself this set of conversations that we've been having over the series these episodes It's really the first time that I've ever thought about exercise in these ways in any event it's just a reflection but it's one that at least for me um is tremendously useful because it has a lot of um Oran organizational logic to it uh which at least appeals to to my brain because the more that things have a logic the more for me that they become simplified and the more that the vast array of tools uh becomes uh becomes visible to me as you said earlier what is it let me make sure I get this right it's um concepts are few methods are many pretty close Okay how would you how remind us how you state it methods are many concepts are few ah okay either way the directionality probably matter it doesn't matter no let's keep it right the the methods are many uh Concepts there a few um galpin's law I in science you're not allowed to name things after yourself um but you can name uh things after other people so uh it's a galpin's law because I'm definitely the one who created that idea so absolutely that was extreme and tremendous sarcasm just so we're Ultra clear regardless uh here we go G galpin's Law there you go one thing that's in my head right now is we've thrown out a lot of options for folks and maybe what we can do is try to simplify a little bit so what I can kind of walk you through is how we uh measure recovery if you will and how often and some tools and what I would recommend people do is not use everything I said you want to pick one or two things per category that are most important to you that are at your cost uh that are at your availability that are interesting and important relevant to you and do that uh the reason I kind of wanted to cover a a large number of things was was to give folks options but again I want to emphasize the point is to not measure all of them in fact you don't need to we um I've ran this before with professional athletes where we've taken blood urine every single day we've done performance measures uh vertical jumps on a force plate a whole bunch of things every day for years on end and what I can tell you is there is tremendous redundancy in physiology right Everything is Everything so you don't need to do them and don't feel like you're missing out if you aren't doing them one or two metrics is probably fine I generally recommend one subjective measure this could be as simple as what's your mood how do you feel today great and one objective measure HRV resting heart rate anything else right so if you even literally just did that you'd probably have pretty good insight as to what you're doing so maybe in fact I I'll go more detail here um maybe I'll give you a couple of examples of things to measure every day some things that you should measure maybe quarterly monthly and then maybe even semiannually and then you can maybe just pick a couple from each of these categories and have yourself a pretty good monitoring system for what to do and I'll include some that are um a little bit of Technology based and then others that are totally cost free and require nothing okay to start off I would recommend taking something like HRV every day or or most days um if you don't have a device like that you could also use honestly the CO2 tolerance test and we've talked about that a number of times and we probably have plenty of resources to go find that uh but that doesn't require anything it typically takes about a minute or so and you can do that under the same circumstances in which HRV in other words do it the same time every day have the same standardization stuff and that is actually been in our coaching experience um while admittedly there is no peer- reviewed research on this yet um just in our experience this tends to track extremely closely with HRV and other metrics of recovery in fact we actually did do a uh a pilot trial in my lab and it uh it tracked decently well with both state and trade anxiety so uh it's a nice metric um not perfect but you you could take that so if you wanted you could do both um but again remember you're trying to capture systemic stress and so you're really just showing you're measuring one thing two ways so you don't necessarily have to have them both I will do both just because like I'm super interested in small differences but globally they're going to tell you basically the same thing so those are two things we we use again basically daily year round or or close to it um if you want to go past that a little bit um you can look at you can use an actual a a pretty old commonly used survey called a daa d l d I forget the exact acronym but it is a fairly lengthy questionnaire and it accounts for things like how do you feel today how do you sleep um any stressors going on in your life how you've been eating and it's this it's like fairly comprehensive lengthy survey um that came out I mean geez it's probably been around for 30 years or something it's it's nothing new and been used extensively uh I you would not want to do that every day if you wanted to take some subjective measures every day we typically stick with like I said mood um motivation something like that um you you could perform this do detesto something more like monthly or at the end of each training phase you know every couple of months and probably worth looking at it's not going to tell you if you're in a bad spot today or tomorrow but you would pick that up with the HRV or suit to tolerance test it would though tell you information especially if you're working with another individual about major life changes and if anything it just facilitates that conversation right I noticed you reported X happening um let's let's talk about that and can I help Etc so another kind of sneaky helpful one is is is simply body fi like I said um non-functional overreaching and overtraining are associated with a number of things like energy um appetite suppression changes in in in body weight or body composition so you can measure that um monthly or even really quarterly uh depending on what kind of athlete or individual you're working at or if you're trying to especially if you're not trying to lose weight or if you're trying to be at maintenance and that'll give you some insights as well so moving past that now actually we're going to move into the realm of things that we call Hidden stressors so those those are all visible stressors um so hidden stressors the most common ones we've sort of mentioned U and I would probably do this um well you're going have to do these ones through serum so this is blood work cortisol like we talked about in testosterone and then of course testosterone to cortisol ratio and then the other ones I mentioned um you can do those quarterly it's not bad there are some blood markers that there's really no sense to do them that soon and there are other markers I mean in our system our individuals are getting pretty extensive blood work saliva work urine and stool and there so there's plenty of those things you just do not need to measure you know every 10 weeks or so uh in this case you know cortisol as you know sort of changes rapidly um testosterone can change pretty quickly um but if you're really trying to notice a large Trend you know certainly quarterly or so is is an appropriate time frame um doing it every four or five weeks is probably unnecessary so you can save yourself some money and do that um other stuff you can look at actually more like semiannually in um plasma like glutamine and glutamine to glutamate ratio and you can maybe save the why you want to look at those for another conversation but those are important um we always look at something from the oxidative stress thing so this could be something like tnf alpha or inter Lucan 6 something like that again we're looking at that in serum and we're looking at that you know like semiannually and then another sneaky actually one um that I love to look at is uh the nutrifil the lymphocytolysis uh that number starts to get really high certainly like more than 9 to1 you got a pretty good Insight that something gnarly is going on with your immune system so um we will actually take action much lower than that number but that's like a nice cut off you'll see is like that's a very very high number so um those are some things you can use uh most folks have the ability hopefully to get some basic blood work done get a basic what's called a CBC and CMP um if you have a great physician and you can get insurance to cover that and you just go on and ask for a CBC and CMP they'll what that means you can Google that and they'll order it you'll get all the information typically that I just described or close enough and you'll get some insights and then again you can just use uh that free service I mentioned earlier to check to see whether or not the changes are um just a matter of testing quality or actually physiologically relevant what you just described is an amazingly powerful array of tools I'm hoping that you can also mention a few tools that are either lower cost truly low cost or zero cost that while they may not have the accuracy or um give the complete picture that some of the biomarkers and other tools that you mentioned do that they can still provide reasonably reliable metrics that people can use in order to assess their level of recovery absolutely the CO2 tolerance test would be the first one um and you can just take that metric anytime you'd like the other ones we've talked about so far are things like your mood uh we haven't me mentioned libido but that's another assessment that people also tend to have a pretty good grip on and they know what feels normal so when things go out of whack it tends to be a pretty good signal that people will recognize yeah and one note about that um so something that came up in an episode on uh on hormones both for male and female Health um that at some point will Air um which is that you know there's no objective measure for people in terms of libido across the board meaning people people vary tremendously um age life circumstances um uh and on and on and so um this is one of those subjective measures that I think people need to uh have some sense of what their quote unquote Baseline really is and I'm guessing that the time to assess that might best be uh when initiating or Midway through a relatively low intensity training phase um maybe during the time of year in which all the other factors um that can influence libido are not um at their maximum so if you think about you know light and dopamine and the relationship between those and the testosterone estrogen systems we know that libido uh testosterone estrogen men and women um tends to peak in the summer months so if that's your Baseline that you're comparing to I don't know that that's as reliable as um piing something like the the fall or the spring um and so anyway this again is very subjective but would just encourage people to uh recognize that there's no standard numbers for this no lookup table there's no equivalent of the libido BMI LMI um no dis respect to the acronym that probably is LMI um so I think that it's just something to keep in mind as people um do comparisons or subjective comparisons is don't pick a comparison to an extreme try and pick a comparison to a average as you know it to be that actually sort of reminding me one issue that we have seen a lot lately is people if they're having libido issues or just even slightly noticing uh drop they just assume that then therefore means their testosterone is crashing and those things are certainly connected but that is not necessarily the case and where that becomes a problem is then people then go uh on things like trt Etc with no true oversight and then all kinds of other problems so make sure that if you're going to take that step that you actually get testosterone measured and you're working with the quality ified person to guide you through that process don't just assume because you're having low energy or your libido is a little bit down it could be simply training related it could be sleep related could be any number of things um so that's just like a little bit of a word of caution there two quick points along the lines of what you just said one interesting thing that I learned when researching our episode on testosterone and estrogen optimization this was an episode that we've done some time ago but is still available in our hberman lab.com all formats Etc is that many many people actually increase their libido and even their levels of testosterone and estrogen as they progress from their 20s into their 40s if they take excellent care of themselves including the correct exercise adaptations correct body fat to lean um lean muscle uh ratios but of course it can go the other way too A lot of people can be training to achieve such low body fat stores that libido can suffer so it it you know the age depend uh age related declines in libido um are not necessarily um written into the script of life in fact there are some data points from a really interesting paper I talk about in that um episode of uh individuals this was a study focused on males in their 80s and 90s who maintained total and free testosterone as high as uh individuals in their 20s but then when you look at the lifestyle factors of those people in their 80s and 90s they were doing a lot to create that that scenario the second point is one related to what you just said um which is very true which is people generally tend to assume that a drop in libido is related to a drop in testosterone um and then assume that they need to increase their testosterone and in some cases that is true absolutely but it's also often the case that people who take estrogen or aromatase blockers that is enzyme um Inhibitors that prevent the conversion of testosterone to estrogen experience severe deficits in libido because of estrogen being too low so estrogen blockers are as much an issue here as um low testosterone then the final point is also one that um many people now men and women are um I think need to be aware of which is that dihydrotestosterone DHT is among the more powerful androgens for um Power output physical power output but also for libido and DHT is strongly inhibited by certain things like turmeric so a lot of people who are taking high doses of turmeric uh can experience drops in libido so there and um who are taking um uh various compounds to prevent hair loss y things like finasteride so there's a whole catalog of things that can reduce libido that are not directly in the testosterone pathway it can be DHD related or estrogen related and this I think points to the importance of yes take a subjective measure of your libido pay attention essentially be aware don't you know don't obsess but be be aware and try and figure out what factors um are involved for you but don't immediately assume that it what's needed is more testosterone and often times um the opposite is the case yeah you yeah try to put on a lot of muscle with no estrogen good luck right and and indeed a lot of um athletes in particular uh you know competitive bodybuilders that have that you know Saran Wrap thin skin if you get to know some of those people and you talk to them they they can um look like the sort of comic book archetype of what um someone might might want to be I mean that's not what this discussion or these episodes have been about but often times they can have um serious liido issues I mentioned earlier and I will emphasize it once more you need to be very cautious when you're taking antioxidants anti-inflammatories cortisol reducers for all those reasons right I didn't really sort of get in examples but you just nailed another fantastic reason of it um we do not give those things prophylactically I I I strongly discourage people from just walking around taking supplementation of antio oxidant um especially powerful ones for no reason if you have done some testing um and you have a good reason to do so I'm fine or if you're in a very specific say training phase or something like that cool um but if you're just walking around doing that you are often times not always but you're often times causing problems that then you then try to solve by taking more of those anti-inflammatories I feel terrible low energy low libido blah blah blah blah blah I'm too inflamed Etc so yeah antioxidants in the form of food are fantastic almost no issue there is a good evidence actually there so don't worry about man I shouldn't eat High antioxidant-rich Foods you're going to be fine what we're talking about here is Pharmaceuticals and supplementation where you can take orders of magnitude higher dosages very quickly than you could in the presence of food so that distinction is also very important antioxidant-rich foods are generally fine and that's cons consumed in totally absurd concentrations supplementations powders creams drugs Etc is where you can get into problem so yeah you want to be very careful of doing that unless you have a reason we don't do that unless uh we we see a reason to do so in someone's markers yeah and herbal compounds despite the fact that their herbal can be quite potent modulators of of hormones um ashwagandha being uh an example uh two herbal compounds that we've talked a lot about on our podcast before and repeatedly uh including in that test off asteron optimization uh episode uh Tonga ali um and fogia grus um Tonga Ali is now taken by a large number of men and women um Tonga Ali and fedoa typically men I'm not sure that there are any good studies about the effects of fedia in women those are herbal compounds that can have potent effects in increasing testosterone and glutin ising hormone uh do they work yeah they work to varying degrees in in most everybody not certainly not in everybody um but they do work but they they work because they're potent they have effects so the idea that herbal compounds are not powerful um is wrong and it's important to remember that that can cut both ways hence my mention of this uh observation related to turmeric which is not to say that some people can't take turmeric and feel perfectly fine maintain or even increase their liido that sure that can happen it's just that for people that are very DHT sensitive this tends to be an issue so so unfortunately for many of these compounds the only way to find out is really to try them or to just completely avoid them and decide you don't want to try them is fine too but there really aren't ways to predict who will respond who won't and who will be hyperresponders and um in that case it's a bit of a it's a little bit of a wild west I'm also sort of remembering what the point of this conversation was supposed to be and maybe I'll I'll return back to that which were some cost free or low cost metrics um that was a very fun tangent but nonetheless uh another couple of ones you can do are uh grip strength testing so if you can buy a you know fairly cheap handgrip dynamometer uh on any number of places these are typically able to be purchased for 20 to $40 or something like that range um you can actually just test that every day I've done that uh in a number of athletes for a decent amount of time uh admittedly I don't do it anymore that's not because I disagree with it but because we just we're getting the information already and it was just too redundant but if that's the only option it is a great one to do I mentioned Also earlier how I actually like speed tests over strength tests as an earlier indication of overreaching and so because of that I like a vertical jump test um if you have access to a force plate that's great and then you can get uh more in-depth characteristics of the force velocity curve and acceleration and things like that um used a lot in high performance situations if not simply looking at you know your performance and so you can kind of go back to one of our earlier episodes when I described coloring my fingertips with highlighters earlier in my life you could do the same thing and go out in your garage and every day jump up and touch uh that marker and see where you're at um so a system like that could be done you can also use tools like uh Force transducer and do a standard movement against say a vertical jump or a high Pole or something like that and measure the velocity and just compare that dayto day of a standard load right so you do it every single time with the same load um same similar thing could be done with like a a medicine ball throw um so you have the same ball you throw the same thing and just sort of where you're at today you want to do a little bit of warmup but not excessive here you want to kind of get an idea of where your Baseline is and you don't want to influence it by the veracity uh of the warm up every single day because that alone can change it same thing with stretching uh acute static stretching directly influences power production so you don't want to go out there and one day do a 20- minute stretch before and then then the other day you didn't stretch at all because that alone will will cause uh deviations in your performance so try to keep everything you can think of standardized and that'll give you a little bit better data remembering all of these values the biom markers the performance stuff they have normal variations you just want to figure out first and foremost what those normal variations are for you so you have your normal number you have your standard deviation when you start getting outside of that standard deviation you start paying attention and so that's kind of like what we we typically call that the gray Zone and so if is in the gry zone we're fine we're not adjusting but if it's outside of that whatever that is for you recognizing that the gry zone is smaller for some folks and larger for others but what is normal for you and your situation and then you can make your decisions outside of that when you see numbers that are consistently or more than 3 to 5 days and in a row or close four the last 5 days four the last six something like that then you may have some cause for Action well that was an incredible description of the various tools and modes for recovery and I realized I jumped the gun a bit during our discussion about food and supplements but I like to think that it serves as a nice uh precursor to the next episode which is going to be all about nutrition and supplementation if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for us or comments or suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover or guests you'd like me to include on the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube we do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and during today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast I'd also like to inform you about the hubman Lab podcast free newsletter it's called the neural network newsletter and each month the neural network newsletter is sent out and it contains summaries of podcast episodes specific protocols discussed on the hman Lab podcast all in Fairly concise format and all completely zero cost you can sign up for the neural network newsletter by going to huberman lab.com go to the menu and click on newsletter you provide us your email we do not share it with anybody and as I mentioned before it's completely zero cost by going to hubman lab.com you can also go into the menu Tab and go to newsletter and see some example newsletters from months past thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion about fitness exercise and performance with Dr Andy Galpin and as always thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 225 ---
Video ID: BMTt8gSl13s
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BMTt8gSl13s
Title: Dr. Gina Poe: Use Sleep to Enhance Learning, Memory & Emotional State | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-02-13 13:00:07 UTC
Description:
My guest this episode is Gina Poe, PhD, a professor in the department of integrative biology & physiology at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). We discuss her research exploring how sleep impacts learning, memory, hormones and emotions. She discusses tools to enhance your quality of sleep, increase deep sleep, rapid eye movement sleep and growth hormone release-- a key hormone for health, immune function and vitality. Dr. Poe explains how a specific brain area, the locus coeruleus, facilitates the processing of emotions, helps relieve traumas and how to maximize locus coeruleus function. She also explains sleep’s vital role in opiate addiction recovery and how anyone can determine their optimal sleep timing and duration. This episode is rich with basic science information and zero-cost tools to enhance quality and effectiveness of sleep for sake of mental health, physical health and performance.

#HubermanLab #Sleep #Science

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Gina Poe 
UCLA Academic Profile: https://bri.ucla.edu/people/gina-poe-ph-d
UCLA Integrative Biology & Physiology Profile: https://www.ibp.ucla.edu/faculty/gina-poe
Sleep Lab: https://poe-sleeplab.weebly.com 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/doctorpoe 
TED talk: https://www.ted.com/talks/gina_poe_your_brain_s_work_during_sleep 

Articles
Recurrent Hippocampo-neocortical sleep-state divergence in humans: https://bit.ly/40JTJMB
Locus coeruleus: a new look at the blue spot: https://go.nature.com/3xj4DLI
Why are women so vulnerable to anxiety, trauma-related and stress-related disorders? The potential role of sex hormones: https://bit.ly/3lwGkr5
Enhancing imagery rehearsal therapy for nightmares with targeted memory reactivation: https://bit.ly/3xi8Tek

Other Resources
NDSR: https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLPNW_gerXa4P6-7EC4twzLBjR22rQYk3u

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Gina Poe
00:02:52 LMNT, Helix Sleep, Eight Sleep, Momentous
00:06:58 Sleep Phases, Perfect Night’s Sleep
00:10:32 Can You Oversleep?
00:14:50 Sleep Cycles, Sleep Spindles, “Falling” Asleep, Dreams & Memories
00:19:01 Tool: Growth Hormone Release & Sleep
00:22:05 Adolescence; Early Sleep, Alcohol & Sleep Spindles
00:24:55 Middle Sleep States & REM, Schema, Waking at Night
00:30:33 Deep Sleep, Dreams & Senses
00:33:22 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:34:37 Later Sleep, Paralysis, Sleepwalking, Sleep Talking 
00:36:47 Alarm Clock & Grogginess; Sleep Trackers, Brain & Sleep
00:43:19 Early Slow Wave Sleep & “Washout”, Normal Sleep Cycle & Night Owls
00:54:30 Locus Coeruleus, Learning & REM Sleep
01:01:46 Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), Locus Coeruleus & Sleep
01:06:13 InsideTracker
01:07:31 Locus Coeruleus, Trauma & Sleep, Antidepressants, Norepinephrine
01:12:29 Locus Coeruleus, Bedtime & Novelty, Estrogen & Trauma
01:16:22 Sex Differences & Sleep
01:19:12 Tool: Non-Sleep Deep Rest (NSDR), Insomnia, Meditation, Prayer
01:27:42 Sleep Spindles, Learning & Creativity, P Waves & Dreaming
01:34:51 Lucid Dreams, Reoccurring Dreams, Trauma
01:44:11 Trauma Recovery, Locus Coeruleus & Norepinephrine, REM Sleep 
01:52:15 Opiates, Addiction, Relapse & Sleep
02:02:45 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Sponsors, Momentous, Neural Network Newsletter, Social Media

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of nNeurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Dr. Gina Poe. Dr. Gina Poe is a professor in the Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology at the University of California Los Angeles. Her laboratory and research focuses on the relationship between sleep and learning, in particular how specific patterns of brain activity that are present during specific phases of sleep impact our ability to learn and remember specific types of information. For instance, procedural information-- that is how to perform specific cognitive or physical tasks, as well as encoding of emotional memories and discarding emotional memories. Indeed, her research focuses on how specific phases of sleep can act as its own form of trauma therapy, discarding the emotional tones of memories. In addition, her laboratory focuses on how specific phases of sleep impact things like the release of growth hormone. Growth hormone, of course, plays critical roles in metabolism and tissue repair, including brain tissue repair, and therefore has critical roles in vitality and longevity. Today you will learn many things about the relationship between sleep, learning, emotionality, and growth hormone. One basic but very important takeaway that you'll learn about today, which was news to me, is that it's not just the duration and depth of your sleep that matter, but actually getting to sleep at relatively the same time each night ensures that you get adequate growth hormone release in the first hours of sleep. In fact, if you require, let's say, eight hours of sleep per night, but you go to sleep two hours later than your typical bedtime on any given night, you actually miss the window for growth hormone release. That's right. Getting growth hormone release in sleep, which is absolutely critical to our immediate and long term health, is not a prerequisite of getting sleep, even if we are getting enough sleep. As Dr. Poe explains, there are critical brain circuits and endocrine, that is hormone, circuits that regulate not just the duration and depth and quality and timing of sleep, but when we place our bout of sleep, that is when we go to sleep each night, plus or minus about a half hour or so, strongly dictates whether or not we will experience all the health promoting, including mind promoting, benefits of sleep. Today's episode covers that and a lot more in substantial detail. You will learn, for instance, how to use sleep in order to optimize learning, as well as forgetting, for those things that you would like to forget. So during today's episode, Dr. Gina Poe shares critical information about not just neuroscience, but physiology and the hormone systems of the brain and body that strongly inform mental health, physical health, and performance. So by the end of today's episode, you'll be far more informed about sleep and how it works, the different roles it performs, and you'll have several new actionable steps that you can take in order to improve your mental health, physical health, and performance. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means plenty of salt, magnesium, and potassium, the so-called electrolytes, and no sugar. The electrolytes are critical to the function of every cell in your body, in particular, the neurons, the nerve cells. So I've talked about before on this podcast, neurons, nerve cells, require adequate sodium and potassium, as well as magnesium, in order to fire action potentials, which are the electrical signals that allow neurons to do everything from generate focus and attention, allow you to learn, and generate neuromuscular connection, and allow you to exercise or train or do any kind of skilled activity with a high degree of output. I take LMNT about two or three times per day, typically once in the morning and again after or during my bout of exercise each day and sometimes an additional one if I've sat in a hot sauna and sweat a lot or if the weather is very hot. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt.com/huberman to claim a free LMNT sample pack with your purchase. Again, that's drinklmnt.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are of the absolute highest quality. Now, sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. When we are sleeping well, all of those things excel, and when we are not sleeping well, all of those things suffer. Now, the surface that you sleep on, that is the mattress that you sleep on, is critical, and Helix understands that everybody has slightly different sleep needs. So if you were to go to the Helix site, which I invite you to do, and take their brief two minute quiz, it will match your body type and sleep preferences to the perfect mattress for you. It will ask you questions. For instance, do you sleep on your back or your side or your stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold during the night? Or maybe you don't know the answers to those questions. I went and took the sleep quiz at Helix, and it matched me to the so-called Dusk Mattress-- D-U-S-K. I started sleeping on Dusk Mattress over a year ago, and it's the best sleep that I've ever had. It's completely transformed the depth and duration and quality of my sleep in ways that make me feel far better during the daytime. If you're interested in upgrading your mattress, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their two minute sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress. And you'll get up to $350 off any mattress order and two free pillows. Again, if interested, go to helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $350 off and two free pillows. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. Now, again, sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. But what many people don't realize is that in order to fall and stay asleep, your core body temperature has to drop by about one to three degrees. Conversely, in order to wake up each morning and feel refreshed, your body temperature actually has to increase by one to three degrees. Therefore, controlling the temperature of your sleeping environment is absolutely key. With Eight Sleep, that's very easy to do. Depending on whether or not you typically run too cold or too hot during the night, you can program your sleep mattress cover so that it's the optimal temperature not just for you, but for each phase-- the early, middle, and late phase of your sleep-- and for waking up in the morning. In fact, you can even control the temperature of your sleep mattress cover differentially across the mattress if you're sleeping alongside somebody else. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman and check out their Pod Pro cover and save $150 at checkout. Eight Sleep currently ships in the USA, Canada, UK, and select countries in the EU and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 at checkout. The Huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements. To find the supplements we discuss on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman. And I should just mentioned that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. And now for my discussion with Dr. Gina Poe. Dr. Gina Poe, welcome. GINA POE: Thank you. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I've really been looking forward to this conversation because I'm familiar with your work, and I know that many people are going to be excited to learn about your work as it relates to sleep, as it relates to problem solving, creativity, addiction and craving, relapse, and a number of other important topics. So to start things off, I would love for you to educate us a bit about this thing that we are all familiar with and yet very few of us understand, which is sleep. And if you would, could you describe the various phases of sleep that exist? What distinguish them? And perhaps frame this within the context of what would a perfect night's sleep look like? GINA POE: OK. ANDREW HUBERMAN: How long would it last, more or less, and what would the biology look like? What is a perfect night's sleep? GINA POE: Yeah, that's a great question. All right. So sleep is really different from wakefulness, and in fact can't be replaced by any state of wakefulness that we've been able to come up with so far. Our brain chemistry is completely different. And in the different stages of sleep, which there is non-REM and REM are the two major states of sleep, and every animal we've studied so far seems to have both of those states. Anyway, those two states are entirely different from one another, too. And even within non-REM, there are three states. Stage one, which is what you slip into when you first falling asleep-- it's dozing. There's kind of an interesting rhythm that goes on in the brain. It's kind of a fast, gamma rhythm. And then there's stage two, which is a really cool state we sort of used to ignore, sleep researchers, because it was a transient state between wakefulness and the deep stage three, slow wave sleep, which is the most impressively different. And between that and REM sleep. So stage two, I'll talk a little bit more about. And then the deep, slow wave sleep state, which is when big, slow waves sweep through our brain. And now we realize that it cleans our brain. One of the things that those big, slow waves do is cleans our brain and does other really important things to restore us from a day of wakefulness. And then REM sleep, which is the most popular because that's where we have the most active dreams. And when you wake up someone out of REM sleep, they'll almost always report having dreamed something really bizarre. That's called REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep. So those are the four states of sleep, of human sleep, and we cycle through them every 90 minutes or so. When we go to sleep, say 10:30, 11:00, our first REM sleep period comes about 105 minutes after we fall asleep and lasts about 20 minutes. Actually, it comes about 95 minutes and lasts 10 or 15 minutes. And then we start over again. And we have about five of those per night for a perfect night's sleep-- four or five, something like that. So a perfect night's sleep is seven and a half, eight hours. There was a really great study that put people in a semi-darkened room with nothing but the bed for 12 hours every day for a month. And what people did initially, because we're in a sleep deprived nation, is that they slept a lot more than usual, like 10 or 11 hours of the 12. And then they leveled off after a week or two to about eight hours and 15 minutes of sleep. So you actually can't oversleep. I mean, they had nothing else to do but sleep, and they would round off to an average eight hours and 15 minutes a night and then spend the rest of the time twiddling their thumbs, humming tunes-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Interesting. GINA POE: --daydreaming. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I want to get back to the contour of a perfect night's sleep, but I'm intrigued by this idea that people can't oversleep. I'm often asked whether or not we can get too much sleep and whether or not sleeping too long can make us groggy the next day. Is there anything to that? And how does one determine how long they should sleep on average? GINA POE: On average, yeah. Well, that's interesting because different people seem to need different amounts of sleep, but we don't really even know exactly what sleep is for. So what they need is kind of-- it's murky. So we do know a lot of things that sleep does now for us, but we don't know how long those things take. So how long we need to sleep is also just a big question mark. But some people don't feel rested until they've slept nine hours. Some people don't feel rested after three or four and a half. But most people, if they consistently deprive themselves of sleep so that they're only sleeping for four and a half hours a night, build up a cognitive deficit that just builds up over time. The more nights you have with sleep deprivation, the more cognitive deficit you have. And so you need sleep, again, to sleep more to recover. Now, the question you had about um-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Can you oversleep-- GINA POE: Can you oversleep, right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Can you sleep to the point where it's too much? You know, growing up, when I was in high school, my girlfriend's dad had this belief that no one should sleep in past 6:00 AM. So he would wake all the-- there were two children in the home. He would wake up the kids in that house. He had this thing against oversleeping, regardless of when people went to sleep, and I always thought that was an interesting mentality. GINA POE: Yeah. It's not terrible, actually, because what that will do is it will make you sleepier the next night to get to bed on time. So it'll build up your homeostatic need if you wake up too early. But so I don't think you can oversleep. But people who sleep a lot, like people who sleep over nine hours, it's probably indicative of some other problem because in fact, if you have a lot of different conditions, it will cause you to sleep a lot more. Probably because what it does is it interferes with your efficient sleep, the efficiency of your sleep. So if you find yourself sleeping consistently nine hours plus every night, then you might want to consult a doctor about maybe what else it might be. It could be cancer. It could be sleep apnea, which affects a lot of people. It could be that your sleep is super inefficient because you're snoring a lot more than you know, or you're waking up a lot more than you know every night. So you might want a sleep study just to see how your sleep is, and then see what else might be causing you to sleep so much. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And that wouldn't be if somebody is sleeping nine or 10 hours every once in a while. You mean if they're consistently sleeping for more than nine hours. GINA POE: If they feel like they need it in order to function cognitively the next day, it might be that your sleep is just not efficient, and you might want to look into why that's the case. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Interesting. Forgive me for the anecdote, but I can't resist. Years ago I went to an acupuncturist, and he gave me these red pills, of which I don't know what they contained. GINA POE: Uh-oh. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But I took them because he told me they would help with my sleep. GINA POE: OK. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And I would fall asleep about 30 minutes after taking them, and I would have incredibly vivid dreams. And I'd wake up four or five hours after having gone to sleep feeling completely rested, something that I've never really experienced on a consistent basis. I want to do mass spec on these pills. I still have no idea what was in them, whatsoever. GINA POE: I want to do mass spec on those pills, too. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, exactly. Some people thought perhaps they had GHB, gamma hydroxybutyrate, which is, by the way, an illegal drug. It can kill you. It's not something you want to take. GINA POE: No, that's not good. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But anyway, if ever someone can figure out what the red pills were, I'll be very-- GINA POE: That's really great. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And this is not a red pill of the other sort red pill. This is just the red sleep pills. GINA POE: Interesting. I mean, it could have been even a placebo effect because placebo is extremely strong. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Although, I don't know. There was really something to these red pills. So shout out to the acupuncturists in Eastern medicine. But to return this to this idea of the architecture of a perfect night's sleep. So you said we fall asleep. The first 90 minutes of sleep. REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep, will arrive at about 95 minutes in. Does that mean that the rest of that 90 minutes is consumed with slow wave sleep? GINA POE: Yeah, non-REM sleep. ANDREW HUBERMAN: OK. And what about the sleep where we are lightly asleep, and we might have a dream that has us somehow thinking about movement or that we jolt ourselves awake? That often happens early in the night, right? GINA POE: Yeah, that's the first stage-- stage one and stage two of sleep. And stage two sleep is really cool because that has something called sleep spindles and K-complexes. And what sleep spindles are are a little bit of activity that's 10 to 15 hertz in frequency. It's a conversation between the thalamus and the cortex. The thalamus is the gateway to consciousness, and the neocortex processes all our cognition. And so it's these spindles. They're called sleep spindles. And if you wake up out of that state, you will often report a dream, like a hallucination style dream. It won't be a long dream report like you have out of REM sleep, but it will be some hallucination state. And while we're falling asleep, one of the reasons we call it falling asleep is because in stage one and stage two our muscles are relaxing. And if there's part of our brain that's conscious enough to sort of recognize that relaxation, we'll feel like we're falling, and we'll jerk awake. So often that hallucination-- it's called hypnagogic hallucination-- will feel like-- it'll include some falling aspect that we'll wake up out of. ANDREW HUBERMAN: That's really interesting to me. I've long felt that sensation of almost, like, dropping back into my head. So much so that if I elevate my feet just slightly and I tilt my head back just slightly in order to go to sleep, I find that I fall asleep much faster. GINA POE: Interesting. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But it does feel as if I'm going to fall, like, almost going to do a backward somersault. I actually really like the sensation and usually because it precedes falling deeply asleep. GINA POE: Yeah, that's really interesting. Somebody has to do a study of elevated feet and-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, there's a little bit on body position and sleep in some of the washout that we'll talk about. So early in the night you've got these lighter stages of sleep, less rapid eye movement sleep. What can we say about the dreams that occur during the, say, first and second 90-minute cycles of sleep. Are they quite different than the patterns of sleep and dreaming that occur later in the night or toward morning? GINA POE: Well, OK, that's an interesting question, and there's a lot of facets to it. There is some evidence that the first four hours of sleep are very important for memory processing. And in fact, if you've learned something new that day or have experienced a new sensory motor experience, then your early sleep dreams will incorporate that experience much more than the later sleep dreams. Later, as that memory gets consolidated from the early structures, which are the hippocampus deep in the temporal lobe to the cortex in a distributed fashion, that memory seems to move from that hippocampus to the cortex. And also the dreams that incorporate that memory also move later in the night. So nobody knows why, but it does. There was a great study by Siddhartha Ribeiro who studied the consolidation of memories from the hippocampus to the cortex in a rat across the period of a full day's sleep because rats sleep in the daytime. And he found that each subsequent REM sleep period moved that memory from the hippocampus to the first area that projects to it, and then the second area, and then the third area. And you can see the memory moving throughout the sleep period. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Cool. Very cool. I have to read that study. So there's a number of different hormones associated with the different stages of sleep. We know that melatonin is a hormone-- GINA POE: Of nighttime. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --of nighttime that makes us sleepy. What about growth hormone release? When does that occur during sleep? GINA POE: So growth hormone release happens all day long and all night long, but the deep, slow wave sleep that you get the very first sleep cycle is when you get a big bolus of growth hormone release, in men and women equally. And if you miss that first deep, slow wave sleep period, you also miss that big bolus of growth hormone release. And you might get, ultimately across the day, just as much overall growth hormone release, but endocrinologists will tell you that big boluses do different things than a little bit eked out over time. So that is what we know. There's also a big push to synthesize proteins. So that's when the protein synthesis part that builds memories, for example, in our brain happens in that first cycle of sleep. So you don't want to miss that, especially if you've learned something really big and needs more synaptic space to encode it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: How would somebody miss that first 90 minutes? GINA POE: Sleep depriving themselves. Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So let's say I normally go to sleep at 10:00 PM. And then from 10:00 to 11:30 would be this first phase of sleep, and that's when the big bolus of growth hormone would be released. Does that mean that if I go to sleep instead at 11:30 or midnight that I missed that first phase of sleep? Why is it not the case that I get that first phase of sleep just simply starting later? GINA POE: It is a beautiful clock that we have in our body that knows when things should happen. And it's-- every cell in our body has a clock. And all of those clocks are normally synchronized. And those circadian clocks are synchronized. And so our cells are ready to respond to that growth hormone release at a particular time. And if we miss it-- and it's a time in relation to melatonin also-- so if you miss it, yeah, you might get some growth hormone release. But it's occurring at a time when your clock has already moved to the next phase. And so it's just a clock thing. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. I don't think we can overstate the importance of what you just described. And to be honest, despite knowing a bit about the sleep research in circadian biology, this is the very first time that I've ever heard this that if you normally go to sleep at a particular time and growth hormone is released in that first phase of sleep, that you can't simply initiate your sleep out later and expect to capture that first phase of sleep. GINA POE: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: That's incredible and I think important and as many listeners are probably realizing also highly actionable. So what this means is that we should have fairly consistent bedtimes in addition to fairly consistent wake times. Is that right? GINA POE: Exactly. And in fact, one of the best markers of good neurological health when we get older is consistent bedtimes. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Wow. OK. I don't want to backtrack. But I did write down something that I think is important for me to resolve or for you to resolve. So I'm going to ask this people that sleep nine hours or more perhaps that reflecting an issue-- some underlying issue, perhaps, is being a teenager or an adolescent and undergoing a stage of development where there's a lot of bodily and brain growth and exception to that, because-- GINA POE: Yes. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --I don't recall sleeping a ton when I was a teenager. I had a ton of energy. But I know a few teenagers. And they sleep a lot. GINA POE: Yeah ANDREW HUBERMAN: Like they'll just sleep, and sleep, and sleep, and sleep. Should we let them sleep, and sleep, and sleep? GINA POE: Let them sleep. ANDREW HUBERMAN: OK. So that's the one exception. What about-- GINA POE: Just like babies. ANDREW HUBERMAN: OK. GINA POE: When you're developing something in your brain or the rest of your body, you really need sleep to help organize that. Sleep is doing really hard work in organizing our brains and making it develop right. And if we deprive ourselves of sleep, we will-- actually, also just like I said, we have a daily clock. We also have a developmental clock. And we can miss a developmental window if we don't let ourselves sleep extra like we need to. ANDREW HUBERMAN: What other things inhibit growth hormone release or other components of this first stage of sleep? In other words, if I go to sleep religiously every night at 10:00 PM, are there things that I, perhaps, do in the preceding hours of the preceding day like ingest caffeine or alcohol that can make that first stage of sleep less effective even if I'm going to sleep at the same time? GINA POE: Alcohol definitely will do that because alcohol is a REM sleep suppressant. And it even suppresses some of that stage two transition to REM with those sleep spindles. And those sleep spindles, we didn't talk about their function yet, but they're really important for moving memories to our cortex. It's a unique time when our hippocampus, like the RAM of our brains, writes it to a hard disk which is the cortex. And it's a unique time when they're connected. So if you don't want to miss that, you don't want to miss REM sleep when it's also a part of the consolidation process and schema changing process, and alcohol in there before we go to sleep will do that. Until we've metabolized alcohol and put it out of our bodies, it will affect our sleep badly. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So probably fair to say no ingestion of alcohol within the four to six hours preceding sleep? GINA POE: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Given the half life? GINA POE: Given the half-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Or at all-- or at all would be better. But I know some people refuse to go that way. GINA POE: And maybe a little bit is OK. I don't know what the dose response is. But there are studies out there you can look at. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Great. GINA POE: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So we're still in the first stage of sleep. And I apologize for slowing us down. But it sounds like it's an incredibly important, first phase of sleep. What about the second and third 90-minute blocks of sleep? Is there anything that makes those unique? What is their signature besides the fact that they come second and third in the night? GINA POE: There's more and more REM sleep the later the night we get. There's also a change in hormones. The growth hormone and melatonin levels are starting to decline. But other hormones are picking up. So it is a really different stage that you also don't want to shortchange yourself on. And I think that's the stage many studies are showing that those are the times in sleep when the most creativity can happen. That's when our dreams can incorporate and put together old and new things together into a new way. And our schema are built during that time. So yeah, we can change our minds best during those phases of sleep. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Could you elaborate a little bit more on schema? GINA POE: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: No one-- I don't think anyone on this podcast has ever discussed schema. I'm a little bit familiar with schema from my courses on psychology. But it's been a while. So maybe you could just refresh mind and everyone-- GINA POE: Well, it's still a concept. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Sure. GINA POE: Schema-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: How do you-- how do you define schema? GINA POE: Right. I think of schema as-- like we have a schema of Christmas, right? We have all kinds of ideas that were so together and called Christmas, a holiday season. In the northern hemisphere, it's cold. We have Santa Claus, and reindeer, and jingle bells, and even things that are false but we normally associate with Christmas presents, family gathering when it is. All of this stuff is sewn together into one-- there's a thread linking them all. And we can just give ourselves a list of words, and none of them contain the word Christmas. And then ask people later, give them another list of words and include the word Christmas. And they'll say, oh, yeah, that word was there, because in their minds they brought up that word, Christmas, because it's part of that whole schema. So that's what-- it's sort of a related-- lot of related concepts, I guess. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I think about the desktop of my computer would scare some people. But it's just a ton of folders. GINA POE: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But each of the folder names mean something very clear and specific to me. GINA POE: Right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And inside of those folders are collections of things that make sense in terms of how they're batch. Is that one way to think about-- GINA POE: No, that's a great way to think of it. And when you're in REM sleep in the later parts of the night and that transition to REM, that's when your computer of your brain is opening folders and comparing documents, seeing if-- is there anything the same? These two documents look very much the same, but there's a little bit of difference. And it can link those conceptually. So that's probably one of the origins of creativity is finding things that are related, maybe just linked a little bit. And you can find that link and strengthen it if it makes your schema interesting and different. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, very interesting. Many people, including myself tend to wake up maybe once during the middle of the night to use the restroom. I've tried to drink less fluid before going to sleep. I've heard also that the impulse to urinate, forgive the topic, but a lot of people deal with this, so the impulse to urinate is also dictated by how quickly you drink fluid, not just the total volume. So I've switched to sipping fluids more slowly from my last beverage of the day which seems to help. But the point here is that I think a lot of people wake up once in the middle of the night oftentimes to use the restroom but oftentimes just around 3:00 AM and might be up for a few minutes, hopefully not on their phone or viewing any bright light which can cause more wakefulness, but then go back to sleep. Is there any known detriment to this middle of the night waking or should we consider it a normal feature for some people's sleep architecture? GINA POE: Yeah. I think we shouldn't worry about it actually. I think sleep is really incredibly well homeostatically regulated. And so really, don't worry about how much you're sleeping, as long as you're not intentionally depriving yourself of sleep by doing something really rewarding and exciting because even that is stressful to your body and deprives you of a lot of things we're talking about. So don't worry about it. It's absolutely normal to wake up at least once in the middle of the night to go to the bathroom. And as long as you can get back to sleep in a reasonable amount of time or even if it takes you an hour, don't worry about it, as long as you have a lifestyle that allows you to then make up that sleep either the next morning or the next night or going to bed a little earlier. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So if I understand correctly, there's a little bit of asymmetry to sleep that catching that first phase of sleep it's like you either get it or you don't. And you have to get it by going to sleep essentially the same time each night, maybe plus or minus 15 minutes or so. GINA POE: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But then if I wake up in the middle of the night and go back to sleep I cannot catch up, but I can gather all the sleep that I would have gotten had I just slept the whole way through the night. Is that right? GINA POE: Yeah, yeah, yeah. And we don't know actually the answer to whether or not the sleep in the middle between that early sleep and the late sleep is, in fact, different for another reason. And whether depriving yourself of sleep from say, 1:00 to 2:30 in the morning is bad in a different way, we don't know. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Well, I suppose I am the experiment in that case, because I do tend to wake up once per night. And I've come to recognize it as part of my normal sleep architecture. I don't obsess over it. I do notice that when I go back to sleep and especially toward morning that my sleep is incredibly deep. My dreams are incredibly vivid. GINA POE: That's great. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I don't always remember them. But what is unique, perhaps, about the architecture of dreams and sleep in the, let's say the last third of the night or the second half of the night? GINA POE: Right, yeah. In the second half of the night, we have longer REM sleep periods. And those are considered the deepest sleep, even though slow wave sleep, big slow wave is considered deep. It is deep. ANDREW HUBERMAN: They call slow wave sleep deep sleep and REM sleep rapid. But now, you're telling me that REM sleep is actually the deeper sleep? OK. There needs to be a new nomenclature of sleep researchers. GINA POE: You really shouldn't call it deeper night. ANDREW HUBERMAN: No, please. GINA POE: The reason why they call slow wave sleep deep sleep is because it's difficult to arouse people out of that state. And when you do arouse them out of that state, they are most often confused and just want to go back into sleep and can go back pretty easily. If you arouse someone out of REM sleep, they're more likely to report something that was really almost like wakefulness. It was so vivid. But in fact, if you give someone a non-threatening kind of stimulation like somebody dropping keys, or a ping, or something like that, instead of waking-- that same volume will wake someone up out of non-REM sleep but out of REM sleep and instead lengthen the amount of time or make it even more dense-- your rapid eye movements more dense. And often people will incorporate that sound into their dreams. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So the body and brain are somehow conscious of the of the sound. And I've heard also smells can even make it into our dreams in REM sleep. But that it doesn't rouse us-- GINA POE: It doesn't arouse us as often, yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Interesting. GINA POE: And maybe one of the reasons why REM sleep is deeper especially in adults and older people, that deep slow wave sleep goes away. So it's not as deep. It's not as big. The slow waves aren't as large which is probably problematic, but we are not sure. And so then REM sleep becomes the deepest stage. Actually in children, it's kind of a toss up, because it's really hard to wake them up out of that deep slow wave sleep. And in fact, fire alarms don't wake them up, even really loud fire alarms out of that state of sleep. So that's why they're trying to change fire alarms so that instead of something that the kids don't associate with anything like the, whatever, they don't associate them, it says their name or something else that may be less loud but more salient to them and will wake them up. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I don't know having carried sleeping children in from the car, I don't know that I want children to start waking up from sleep because that's one of the best things when we get home and the kids are asleep in the backseat. You can literally throw them over your shoulder, gently of course, and put them to sleep. They are completely out. GINA POE: Yeah, it's wonderful. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It is wonderful, one of nature's gifts. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens, now called AG1, is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens, and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or usually twice a day is that it gets me the probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important. It's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long term health. And those probiotics and Athletic Greens are optimal and vital for microbiome health. In addition, Athletic Greens contains a number of adaptogens, vitamins, and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met. And it tastes great. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, et cetera. And they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D-3 K-2. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D-3 K-2. So this enhanced volume or proportion of rapid eye movement sleep in the second half of the night relates to more elaborate dreams. We are paralyzed during REM sleep, correct? GINA POE: Yes, normally paralyzed. And that's really good, because that's the time when we're actively dreaming storyline dreams. And we could hurt ourselves. We're actually really cut off from the outside world in terms of responding to, say, this table, or window, or a door. And so different from sleepwalking which is out of slow wave sleep. And out of slow wave sleep, that sleepwalking is a mixture between sleep and wakefulness. So you actually will respond to the door, or you can cook a full meal, drive your car while you're in deep slow wave sleep. It's scary, because you never know what you're going to do. You don't have voluntary, involuntary control over it. You have no conscious control over it. But you can actually safely navigate some situations in sleepwalking and actually have a conversation. Although, it may not make much sense when you're sleep talking. In REM sleep, you're not processing the outside world. And instead, when you're acting out your dreams, you could be doing things like walking through a plate glass window or falling off of down the stairs, things like that. So you really want your muscles to be inactivated during REM sleep. Otherwise, you will act out those dreams and really hurt yourself or your bed partner. ANDREW HUBERMAN: What about sleep talking or talking in sleep? I don't know how many relationships have been saved by sleep talking. But I'm guessing a few have been destroyed. And I'm guessing that talking in sleep could have meaning or perhaps has no meaning just as dreams could have meaning or no meaning, as we recall them. GINA POE: Yeah. Do not take sleep talking seriously no matter what people say. It doesn't necessarily reflect truth. So it's not like you're being more truthful when you're sleep talking. ANDREW HUBERMAN: You just saved a number of relationships. GINA POE: I hope so. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'm not directing this at anyone in particular. But I guarantee you just did. Noted. So as people start to approach morning or the time when they normally would wake up, I've heard that it's important to, if possible, complete one of these 90-minute cycles prior to waking up. That is if you set your alarm for halfway through one of these 90-minute cycles that come late in the night of sleep, that it can lead to rather groggy patterns of waking. So I'll just ask you directly. Do you use an alarm clock? GINA POE: I do not. Thankfully, I'm in a line of work that doesn't require me normally to do anything at any particular time. I do it when I do it. Unless I have to catch a plane and then I always set my alarm just in case. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Well, as a fellow academic, I can tell you there are plenty of punishing features about being an academic scientist that offset the fact that you don't have to use an alarm clock. But it is nice that you can often set your own schedule. So would you recommend that if possible that people not use an alarm clock? GINA POE: Yeah, absolutely. If you can just listen to your body and wake up when you need to wake up, that would be great. But one of the reasons why we have such a grogginess, it's called sleep inertia when we wake up out of the wrong state which is deep slow wave sleep, is because-- I liken it to like a washing machine cycle. This 90-minute cycle is like a washing machine cycle. And the first part is to add water, right? And then your clothes are soaking wet. You don't want to open the washing machine and try and function, put them on, and wear them around while they're soaking wet and full of soap. So you have to wait until the cycle is through before you can, well, actually, let's put it in the dryer, too, before you want to wear them. So yeah, you can function. It just takes a little while for those clothes, that brain to dry out, so you can actually function well. But it's better to wait through the whole cycle is complete. And so that's why you want to set that 90-minute, alarm clock. And again, that's around 90 minutes because the first stage of sleep, the first cycle of sleep is actually a little longer, more like 105, 110, minutes. But then the second ones and third ones, they get shorter and shorter as the night goes on. And in the last few cycles, you're just doing the end to REM sleep cycle which takes less time. And if you wake up out of REM sleep, there's usually no problem cognitively. You're good to go. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Are you a fan of sleep trackers? GINA POE: Sure, yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Do you use one? GINA POE: I have one on. I don't take-- I don't live my life by them, because they are-- the best ones right now are about 70% effective at staging your sleep. So 70%, it's OK, it's OK. But take it with a grain of salt is what I'm saying. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. I've tried various ones. And I compare the mattress based one to-- actually wear it on my ankle instead of my wrist. And I do find it informative. But a colleague of mine at Stanford, Ali Crum, who works on mindset and belief effects talked to me about a study they did where people often will bias their sense of daytime wakefulness based on their sleep score more than their subjective score. In other words, if they were told they got a poor night's sleep, even if they got a great night's sleep-- and this was of course measured in the sleep lab so they were able to compare-- people report feeling more groggy. And the opposite is also true that if it says 100% or 90% on your sleep score, then people go, oh, I feel great, even though they might not have slept well. So this speaks to the, I don't want to say placebo effect, but the belief effects that are woven in with a score. GINA POE: Yeah. That's right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So it seems to me that combining subjective and objective data is probably best. GINA POE: And I do believe that you should trust your own physiology and the way that your body is telling you to feel because in fact, it used to be that people with insomnia weren't-- were often not believed because you put them in a sleep lab, and they look like they slept great. And you wake them up in the morning, they say, oh, I didn't sleep very well at all. And that's because probably we just came out with a paper that shows that subcortical structures can be in a completely different sleep state than cortical structures which is what we measure in the sleep lab what the cortex is doing. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Interesting. GINA POE: So it might be that people who say, I did not sleep all night long even though the cortex is saying, oh, no, you had great sleep, was because they're monitoring their subcortical, hypothalamus, hippocampus, thalamus, other structures that the sleep lab just can't access unless you have depth electrodes which nobody really wants. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Right. Because that requires holes in the skull and wires. Wow. So does that mean that the last 50 plus years of sleep science is potentially flawed in some way, because they're only recording from-- I guess this would be the analogy would be-- it's like recording from the surface of the ocean as opposed to the depth of the ocean. GINA POE: Right. And trying to ascertain the life moving down deep in the depth-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Brace yourselves colleagues at Stanford sleep lab and elsewhere. But please just tell us because I think scientists want to know the truth. GINA POE: Yeah. It's not for nothing that you want to know what the cortex is doing. The cortex is really important for a lot of things. But it doesn't necessarily tell you what a lot of other really important parts of the brain are doing in terms of sleep. But there's hope, because in fact, it would be great. I think that's possible, from the paper if you look at it, it's in PNAS this year, that you could detect subtle changes in the cortical EEG that might be able to tell you what the subcortical structures are doing. Things like the absolute power in that sleep spindle band, that sigma band would change if the hippocampus is in REM sleep and the cortex is in that sleep spindle state and vise versa. So there is some hope that we can gain from people with depth electrodes or animals with depth electrodes that we could backwards machine learn what the cortex might be able to tell us about subcortical structures from the cortical EEG, so. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Interesting. This is going to be a stimu-- yes, stay tuned. It's going to be a stimulus for development of new technology which is always going to assist in scientific discovery. There is one more thing I wanted to ask about the architecture of the night sleep in terms of early part of the night. Earlier, you mentioned the washout of debris and the so-called lymphatic system, I think is what you're referring to. Could you tell us a little bit more about the washout that occurs in the brain during sleep, what that is, and what roles it's thought to serve, and perhaps if there are any ways to ensure that it happens or to ensure that it doesn't happen, and obviously we want this to happen? GINA POE: Yeah. All right, great question. We talked about the circadian clock and how certain things happen at certain times. Well, one of the things that happens when we're awake and talking to each other is that there's a lot of plasticity. There's something that I'm learning from you today. And you're learning from me. And that changes our synapses, and it changes the way our proteins are going to be folded and changed during sleep. It unfolds. This process actually uses a lot of ATP, the power structure the fuel of the brain. And it unfolds also proteins while we're doing this, while we're using them. And so during that first part of the night, when we first fall asleep in the first 20 minutes or so, we're building that adenosine back into ATP. And that's probably why power naps are called power naps, because we're actually rebuilding the power. And then we're also cleaning out through the deep slow waves of slow wave sleep. We're cleaning out all those misfolded proteins, unfolded proteins, and other things that get broken down and need to be rebuilt when we're asleep because of its use during wakefulness. So I liken that to having a big party during wakefulness. And you need all those partygoers to leave in order to do the cleanup. And so what I think the mechanism is, and this is still something to be tested, is actually slow waves themselves which is bad news for us as we get older. And those slow waves get smaller. And so your sleep goes away. So what happens when a neuron is firing is that it expands, the membrane expands a little bit, becomes more translucent. That's how we know-- one of the ways we know that neurons expand when they fire. And so every action potential, the membrane expands a little bit, as sodium brings water into the cell. And then when they're silent, they contract. And so during slow waves, the cool thing is that the reason why you can measure them is that all the neurons at the same time-- not all of them but a good portion of them-- are firing at the same time and silent at the same time. And so you think about that as contracting and expanding all at the same time. It's like a bilge pump of the brain. So that can pump out-- glia are also really important for this in terms of cleaning up debris and transferring it to where it needs to go. So I think of it actually as a bilge pump cleaning out our brain. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Interesting. I've heard about the lymphatic system and lymphatic wash out. I've never thought about the mechanical aspects of it before. I always thought that for some reason that now it's obvious to me, there had to be something mechanical but only now that you've educated me about this. I thought that for some reason the cerebral spinal fluid just starts washing through. But here, you're talking about literally an expansion and a contraction of the neurons in unison and pushing the fluid through, cleaning out any misfolded proteins or debris that might occur on the basis of these metabolic pathways. And the consequence of that is to, what, to leave the brain in a state of more pristine action for the next day. is? That right? GINA POE: Yeah you think of it, again, like a party. And if you don't clean up after that party and you try and hold another one the next day, it's going to get more clogged. People have a harder time moving around and enjoying themselves. And if that builds up day after day, it's going to be cognition. That would be the partygoers moving around becomes hard, yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And so this bilge pump that you describe is associated with the big slow waves of deep-- well, of slow wave sleep. So this is going to occur more or less in the first third of the night, is that right? GINA POE: That's right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And are there things that inhibit this process and are there things that facilitate this process? GINA POE: Yeah. So well, one thing to inhibit is not to get it but-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Right. And here, too-- sorry to interrupt but-- and is this similar to the case with growth hormone where if you go to sleep later than you would normally, you miss the washout? GINA POE: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's not you don't delay it. You miss-- you missed the washout. GINA POE: That's right. That's right. So if you go to sleep at 1:00 or 2:00 in the morning, your sleep is still going to be dominated by N2, NREM sleep not by slow wave sleep. So you need to-- you need to get that first bit of sleep. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Would a caveat to that be if somebody normally goes to sleep at 1:00 or 2:00 AM and wakes up at 10:00 AM if that's their normal sleep cycle-- GINA POE: Yeah. That should be OK. It should be OK. You would probably want to do-- somebody would want to do a sleep study with people who do that normally and see if also the melatonin release is later and the corticosterone rise that happens normally in the morning also happens later. So if everything shifted, good. ANDREW HUBERMAN: OK. Yeah. There are a few studies I've come across that really do argue for the fact that waking up circa sunrise, that doesn't mean at sunrise but within an hour or two, maybe three hours of sunrise and going to sleep within four hours after sunset or so is actually better for the health of all human beings than is being a night owl. And the night owl, there's almost like a night owl posse out there, especially on social media. They get very upset when you say that you should see morning sunlight that after 10:00 AM, you kind of miss the boat. They get very upset, because I think there are about 20% or 30% of people perhaps who really feel like they function better staying up late and waking up late. And they function much less well waking up early and going to bed early. But the data on health metrics suggests that, sorry night owls, that they are wrong. GINA POE: Yeah, sorry me because I'm a night owl. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Oh, boy. OK. Well, then I'm apologizing directly. Here, I'm not a really early morning person. I'm more typical. I wake up naturally around 6:30, somewhere between 6:30 and 7:30 AM, go to sleep somewhere between 10:00 and 11:00 PM. These are averages. But I do notice that when I force myself to get up a little earlier and go to sleep a little earlier, that my mood and alertness and just overall productivity is much higher. And there could be other variables to that, too. GINA POE: You're absolutely right. I'm a night owl. I love staying up late at night doing you know, writing grants, writing papers, watching movies, whatever it is. I love it. But like you and like every human being on earth would do better if I go to bed earlier and wake up earlier. So one good thing for night owls is to have a child, because they will wake you up. Their circadian rhythms are so strong. They will wake up. And even if you deprive them of sleep in the first half of the night they will still wake up like clockwork, because their circadian rhythms are so strong at 6:00 AM. And so what you've-- you haven't done anything good for your kid. You haven't moved their cycle to later and be more in line with yours. In fact, you've just sleep deprived them and made them miss a window and made them cranky the next day and made your life more miserable. So go to bed soon after your kids go to bed and wake up with them. That's the way to do it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Great. The child alarm clock, another reason to have children. GINA POE: Yes. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I got a dog, a puppy, and then that became a dog, specifically, well, for many reasons. But one reason was I wanted to be one of those early morning rides, 5:30 AM every morning. But I ended up getting a bulldog that would literally sleep 16 hours if he could. A nuclear bomb could go off, and he wouldn't wake up. But what I started to learn was that Bulldogs actually have sleep apnea. As far as I know, they're the only species that has a genetically-- they're essentially an inbred sleep defect. And so I actually don't encourage people to get bulldogs because it's kind of a cruel breed. They suffer a lot in that body that they're born into. Anyway, a dog can accomplish some of this. But get the breed of dog that is going to wake up early. So in other words, don't get a bulldog or a mastiff. GINA POE: Well, interestingly, all predatory animals like dogs, and cats, and lions, and us-- well, more dogs, cats, and lions, then us, well, can sleep 16 hours a day. Ferrets are predatory. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I had a pet ferret. I used to-- and sadly, I also used to work on ferrets, published a number of papers, delightful animals. GINA POE: Yeah. And great because you can study development. It's really cool, because they're born very artricial like we are with brains that are not very well developed. And so you can see what happens through development and how important these different phases of development really are. But yes, yeah, maybe we're not as much predators as we think because in fact, our sleep is somewhere between the prey and the predators in terms of the amount of sleep that we usually need a night. But those predators can sleep 16 hours, napping all day long. And they're more crepuscular, perhaps, like their prey are, more-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: So dawn and dusk active. GINA POE: Yeah, dawn and dusk active. Yeah. But anyway, yes, children and dogs-- actually, there was a poll done by the National Sleep Foundation to see what the number one thing is that wakes people up at night. And number two is going to the bathroom. Number three is children, because-- when your children are young. But that only lasts a few years that they'll wake you up when they're babies. But the number one thing is pets. And pets needing to go out or cats wanting to curl up with you or whatever it is, pets' needs will wake you up more in the middle of the night than anything else. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Another reason to not get a nocturnal pet. People who get hamsters, pretty quickly realize that they are nocturnal, and they want to run on their wheel around. GINA POE: Yeah, you got to put them in the living room away from where you sleep. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I vote fish tank, folks, freshwater fish tank. There are all sorts of reasons to not get a salt water fish tank or a child. [LAUGHS] I appreciate that vote. And I appreciate you mentioning ferrets. And by the way, folks, they are carnivores. They are not rodents. And they are-- they have very elaborate brain structures. They're very smart, in the same family as the honey badgers and the other mustelids. Anyway, I shouldn't geek out too much on the mustelids or else I'll take the remainder of all our time. I'd love for you to tell us about REM sleep and the sleep later in the night as it relates to dreams and emotionality. And this is probably the appropriate time for you to introduce us to this incredible structure in the brain, which is the locus coeruleus a difficult structure to spell but a beautiful-- a beautifully named structure. I find locus coeruleus to be just fascinating. And I know a small fraction of what it does. And I'm hoping you're going to educate me and our audience more about what it does and hopefully tell us a little bit about its relationship to epinephrine a.k.a. adrenaline. GINA POE: Yeah. I am so glad you brought this up, because I can totally geek out on the locus coeruleus. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Please do. GINA POE: Locus, meaning spot or place and coeruleus, meaning blue so you could just call it the blue spot. That's the easiest. Every animal with a brain has a blue spot and-- yeah, and I mean, every other animal with a brain because of course, there are animals with nervous systems that are not centralized like jellyfish. But anyway, we're digressing there. So the local coeruleus is filled with neurons that have in them norepinephrine which is the brain's version of epinephrine or adrenaline, is also called noradrenaline. And what it does is, just like adrenaline and the rest of our bodies, it helps prime us to respond to our environment. So when locus coeruleus neurons fire and fire in a burst, we can switch our attention. And they will fire in a burst if, for example, a loud noise happens in the middle of your concentrating on something. So you can-- it helps-- it fires. And it helps you switch your attention to that thing and then learn quickly from it. So it's really important in a stress response. It helps us do quick one trial learning. And then tonic activity during the day when you're just doing normal going about your normal concentration activities is really good for sustained attention. It works with the cholinergic system of our basal forebrain which is really important for learning and memory also to help us learn about things and put things together. But just tonic levels are signature of wakefulness and alertness. So too much is panic with a locus coeruleus activity. A burst is switching attention. And then tonic levels are sustained constant attention. And then when we go to sleep, the locus coeruleus slows and goes from about on average two Hertz to about one Hertz, one cycle per second, tonically. And then when we go into REM sleep, it's the only time when it shuts off completely. And it appears that, that complete silence is really, really important for a number of things. And the main thing that I think it's important for is the ability to erase and break down synapses that are no longer working for us. So they encode things that are false now, or they are encoding things that we learned in the novelty, encoding pathway of our brain that have now been consolidated to other pathways. And so we need to now erase them from the novelty encoding pathway. And that is really, really important for being able to continue to learn things all of our lives, so like erasing that REM or that-- what you call those, disks that you stick into computers that-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Hard drive-- no, thumb drives. GINA POE: Yeah, erasing your thumb drive. So that thumb drive is what you carry around all day long. And then during sleep, you write that thumb drive to the cortex, to the long term memory structures. And you need to refresh that thumb drive. And that's what happens during REM sleep when the locus coeruleus is off, because whenever it's on and noradrenaline is there, it helps us to put things together. It helps us to learn and strengthen synapses. But it does not allow us to actually weaken synapses that are also a really important part for life-- important part of lifelong learning. Yeah, so much more I could say about that. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, locus coeruleus sounds fascinating. So it's connected to the basal forebrain cholinergic system. The neurons in locus coeruleus, if I'm not mistaken, release norepinephrine, perhaps epinephrine as well? GINA POE: Well, no, the brain's version of epinephrine is norepinephrine. The other thing it also-- the precursor to norepinephrine is dopamine. And so the source of dopamine in the hippocampus seems to be the locus coeruleus. And it's still a mystery is under what conditions the locus coeruleus also releases dopamine. But it's really important when we're learning something new to also release dopamine or to at least activate the dopaminergic receptors in our hippocampus. So yeah, so dopamine, norepinephrine, and then there's also galanin which is important for releasing when we're stressed. And it helps also without rapid learning. It works in concert with norepinephrine and in doing what it needs to do to strengthen synapses so that we learn really quickly. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I love that there are multiple molecules involved, because that signals us to a principle which is that even if people can't remember all the names, that rarely in biology is something handled by just one molecule or pathway. That redundancy is the rule because signaling attention to specific events is so important. So that-- I'm going to use that as just a story. I always say I wasn't consulted at the design phase. But it makes sense to me as to why redundancy would exist in this system. GINA POE: Absolutely. And in fact, when we form a hypothesis about the brain, we are always wrong. And the reason why we're always wrong is because it's more complicated than we'd like to think. And because in our brains when we're forming hypotheses, it's we fail to account for all of the factors that are involved, the glia, the neuropeptides, the neurotransmitters, the physical structure of synapses. And so when I was going through grad school 35 years ago, we-- the dogma was that every neuron contains one neurotransmitter and releases one neurotransmitter. And you had excitatory neurotransmitters, and inhibitory neurotransmitters, and neuro-- modulatory neurotransmitters. But that's as complicated as it's got. And then we started talking about neuropeptides. And people said, oh, no, please don't complicate it. And then we started talking about how neurons contain both neuropeptides and neurotransmitters and maybe more than one neurotransmitter-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Maybe even hormones, too. GINA POE: And hormones and-- oh, Lord, it's just so complicated. But I've got to admit that's why it works, right? And every time the brain teaches us something new about itself that we didn't hypothesize, we say, oh, of course, that wouldn't work if the way I hypothesized it-- with it. We actually need redundancy. We need all of these systems to work together. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. It's daunting sometimes, but it also insures many careers in science and neuroscience in particular. So note that aspiring scientists, there's plenty of room for discovery. GINA POE: Do you want me to talk about norepinephrine-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. So what-- GINA POE: Emotion and-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yes. Well, what I'd love-- what I'd love for you to tell us about is what role this lack of norepinephrine release during rapid eye movement sleep is thought to achieve? And maybe you can also review some of your work, describing conditions under which norepinephrine invades-- GINA POE: Yeah, invade sleep. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Rapid eye movement sleep and other patterns of sleep and how that can be detrimental. GINA POE: Yeah. So a lot of this is hypothetical but based on a lot of good evidence that we're sewing together into a schema from which these hypotheses come, so a model schema from which the hypotheses come. But one thing that happens to people with post-traumatic stress disorder is that there is a lot of evidence that the locus coeruleus doesn't stop firing in REM sleep. So-- whereas their levels of norepinephrine might be similar to people without PTSD during the day and even during the first part of the night, during the wee hours of the morning. And when you measure norepinephrine levels from metabolites in the blood or the cerebrospinal fluid, you see that people with PTSD, it's during the wee hours of the morning when you have the most REM sleep that they have their norepinephrine levels differentiate most from those that don't have PTSD. And so that's evidence that the locus coeruleus is not shutting down during REM sleep like it should. Other evidence is heart rate variability. When our locus coeruleus is firing, our heart rates are generally a little higher. And they don't vary as much as they do when the locus coeruleus is not firing. So during slow wave sleep, normally, have this big, juicy variability in heart rate with every breath in and breath out because our noradrenergic levels or norepinephrine levels are lower during REM sleep that goes away entirely. And our heart rate is dominated by parasympathetic rather than sympathetic activity and also what our brain is driving, what our dreaming about. For example, if we're dreaming we're running, our heart rates will go up. But norepinephrine levels still should be low or off. So people with PTSD that noradrenergic's we're studying these in rats, too, is it true that our locus coeruleus doesn't shut off when we have post-traumatic stress disorder? And the preliminary evidence is yes, it's true that it doesn't shut off. So what that would do is norepinephrine would act at synapses to prevent that weakening that you really need for example of novelty encoding structures. And it keeps memories in that novelty encoding structure even once it's consolidated to the rest of the brain. So in the hippocampus which is important for remembering things throughout our lives and it's that thumb drive, we need it to be erased so that we can learn new things once it's been consolidated to the hard drive of our cortex. And so if we're not able to do that, we fill up that RAM really quickly or that thumb drive really quickly, and we're not able to learn new things. So for example, after a trauma, I talked about the locus coeruleus responding in stressful situations. That's great. It's very adaptive. But then you need it to stop. Once you've learned what you need to learn from it and you want to go to sleep, you need the locus coeruleus to calm down. And during REM sleep, you want it to stop, because then when you consolidated that traumatic memory to the cortex, you need to erase it from the novelty encoding structures, for example, in the hippocampus so that then when you're in the context of safety, you can learn those new things, those new contexts and stop responding to those same stimuli as though you're in that original situation. So if you're not able to erase that thumb drive, you will always feel like that trauma happened that same day, earlier that same day and respond as you would to an early-- a recent trauma which is with beating heart and all of that. So even memories that are years past, if you're never able to downscale that novelty encoding structure and purge it from that traumatic memory, it will stay fresh, and new, and then become maladaptive. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'd like to just take a brief moment and thank one of our podcast sponsors which is Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that blood work is the only way that you can monitor the markers such as hormone markers, lipids, metabolic factors, et cetera. The impact, your immediate and long term health. One major challenge with blood work, however, is that most of the time it does not come back with any information about what to do in order to move the values for hormones, metabolic factors, lipids, et cetera into the ranges that you want. With Inside Tracker, changing those values becomes very straightforward because it has a personalized dashboard that you can use to address the nutrition based, behavior based, supplement based approaches that you can use in order to move those values into the ranges that are optimal for you, your vitality, and your longevity. Inside Tracker now includes a measurement of apolipoprotein B, so-called ApoB, and their ultimate plan. ApoB is a key marker of cardiovascular health. And therefore, there's extreme value to knowing your ApoB levels. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of Inside Trackers plans. Again, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. What approaches are you aware of that can turn down the output of locus coeruleus during these phases of sleep? And for that matter, what things can cause ramping up of locus coeruleus during this phase of sleep? We've had a couple of podcast episodes, solo episodes and with guests talking about trauma. We had Dr. Paul Conti who's a Stanford trained, Harvard trained psychiatrist who talked a lot about trauma wrote an excellent book on trauma and certainly sleep was emphasized as a key thing like get enough sleep. But here, you're saying even if somebody with trauma gets enough sleep, if locus coeruleus is hyperactive during sleep, those traumas are going to persist. And most of the trauma treatments that I'm aware of are everything ranging from cognitive behavioral therapy, talk therapy, drug therapy, EMDR, hypnosis. Nowadays, there's a lot of interest and attention on clinical studies on exploring psychedelics, high dose psilocybin, and MDMA. So it's a vast landscape, none of which, as far as I know, is really focused on sleep specifically. GINA POE: No, they're not. And they should be, because actually, psychedelics is a sleep like state. And it's a REM sleep like state. Although of course, there are some major differences. So yeah, so much to talk about here. So antidepressants are often noradrenergic or serotonergic reuptake inhibitors. So they leave norepinephrine actually out there in the synapses. And what that does is it inhibits REM sleep. And if you're able to get REM sleep, it would probably be REM sleep with some noradrenergic activity. So actually, I think-- anyway, I'm not a physician-- that antidepressants are counter indicated. You don't want to take them if you've experienced a trauma and you're experiencing PTSD, because if anything, it's going to make it worse or at least prevent the type of adaptive REM sleep that you really need in order to resolve those emotions and move on. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Is that statement specific to antidepressants that tickle the noradrenergic pathway? So the one that comes to mind is-- can never pronounce it, buproprion, which is what-- I think brand name is Wellbutrin. It's a dopaminergic and noradrenergic agonist. So that's the net effect as opposed to the Prozac, Zoloft variety which are SSRIs. GINA POE: Yes, yes. But SSRIs themselves also are problematic, because-- we didn't talk about it yet, but the dorsal raphe nucleus which produces serotonin which specific serotonin-- specific serotonin reuptake inhibitors block from being reuptake and leaves too much serotonin out there. And what serotonin also is another noradrenergic-- sorry, another neurotransmitter that's downregulated during REM sleep. That's specifically off during REM sleep. And what serotonin does is it weights all of our cognition to being able to recognize novelty again. So it weights our brain away from a sense of familiarity and toward novelty. And it might be one reason why it's an effective antidepressant because it makes the world feel fresh and new again, right? But you-- when you have too much, you're holding a novel traumatic memory in your novelty encoding structure too strongly already, you don't want to, again, weight things toward novelty. You need that absence of serotonin also to help you get that sense of familiarity and to start erasing the novelty encoding structures. So you need both to be absent. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's really interesting. We hear a lot about serotonin. And it's not often discussed in terms of its features related to novelty enough I think. And what you just described cues me to something that Dr. Paul Conti and others have said in terms of trauma. And here, I'm paraphrasing, so my apologies to them for not getting this exactly right, that an effective treatment for trauma does not erase the traumatic memory. But it causes a transition of what once was disturbing, and invasive, and maladaptive to eventually just become a boring old story that has a fuzzy texture to it as opposed to this sharp high friction texture that invades our thinking and obviously, our sleeping states as well. So again, and I appreciate the disclaimer, the caveats around not being a clinician, et cetera. But I do think that there's a lot of interest now in whether or not antidepressants are effective for trauma or not. And I think these aspects of neuromodulation as they relate to, let's call it, erasing traumas or changing the emotional load of traumas during sleep is something important to take note. We also have a lot of clinicians that listen to this podcast. So they should also take note, please. So if I want to reduce the amount of norepinephrine released from locus coeruleus during rapid eye movement sleep to eliminate the troubling or maybe even traumatic memories and allow late stages of sleep each night to have their maximum positive effect, is there anything that I can do besides avoiding-- avoiding traumas, avoiding serotonergic or noradrenergic compounds? GINA POE: Well, I would also avoid anything just prior to going to sleep that might excite those systems, so a lot of novelty, a lot of the exciting stress inducing video games. Try and enter sleep with as much calm as you can, so maybe deep breathing exercises. That's a beautiful way to calm your sympathetic fight or flight system is deep breathing. And we haven't been able to test this with rats because we can't ask them to do a deep breathing exercise. There might be a way we can do that. But I haven't found out or figured it out yet. But if there's a way you can make your sympathetic system, nervous system calm down before you go to sleep, might free for you meditation, or deep breathing exercises might be for some, a warm bath, or a comforting book, nothing too exciting but also nothing too boring, perhaps, just something right in the middle which makes you feel happy and calm is what you should do. And if you instead go to sleep while you're anxious or you're hyped up, then your sleep could become maladaptive. Another thing that happens in rats that we have yet to know if it happens in women is that female rats have three phases of their estrus cycle that their locus coeruleus doesn't seem to calm down during REM sleep as much. And we don't know why, but during the high estrogen phases of their estrus cycle, the locus coeruleus shuts down just like it does in male rats. But in the other three phases, it doesn't. So one thing that might work and in fact, there are a few studies that show it could work really well is giving women after a trauma event, something that contains estrogen, because estrogen somehow is protective against PTSD. And they know that through a retrospective studies, where they gave women in emergency room either a pill with estrogen and/or without. And those that had the pill with estrogen in it were much less likely to get PTSD from that trauma as measured a year later than those that had the pill without. So there's really good studies by Bronwyn Graham-- she's out of Australia-- to really hone in on how much estrogen do you need and also testosterone just so you know, gets converted to estrogen in the brain. So testosterone also can be protective, because it gets converted to estrogen. But there's something about estrogen that's really helpful and protective about from the high locus coeruleus firing. And this is, again, preliminary data that we don't have full-- we don't have all the answers yet. And we are looking into it actively right now. But it's really important. The other thing about women is that we are two to four times more susceptible to anxiety related mental health disorders including post-traumatic stress disorder. So if we could figure out what's happening to locus coeruleus during sleep in women and then figure out a way to normalize that so the locus coeruleus is silent when it needs to be silent, I think we could go a long way in helping women be more resilient to stress related disorders. ANDREW HUBERMAN: What are some other sex differences as they relate to sleep? GINA POE: Yeah. That's a really good question. There have been very few studies, unfortunately, of women and sleep, women and estrus cycle or menstrual cycle and sleep. But what we have found which actually largely replicated a study in 1960 is that women or females rather at high estrogen, high hormonal phases of their estrus cycle or menstrual cycle sleep a lot less. But that sleep is more efficient. So that sleep is more dense in those sleep spindles, which I haven't gone into what they might do except this connection between the hippocampus and cortex. But those sleep spindles are more dense and more coherent across the brain areas. The theta cycle which is 5 to 10 Hertz in the hippocampus important for one-year learning and also important during REM sleep is also bigger and juicier during the high hormonal phases. So even though there's less sleep, it's more efficient and better. So all of that efficiency seems to be reduced in those other hormonal phases. So even though you might sleep a little more, you might need more sleep, in fact, in order to accomplish the same thing that you can get with that short very efficient sleep of high hormonal phases. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Very interesting. I think there is a growing trend, at least among NIH-funded grants to require that as they refer to it in the grants of biological sex as a variable. And here, we're talking-- nothing here about sex, the verb, although, I'm sure there are studies about that, too. But biological sex is a variable, because there is a dearth of studies exploring sex differences in most everything. There are all sorts of reasons for that. But more importantly that fortunately, the trend is shifting. GINA POE: Yeah. And even when you study males versus females, a lot of people just say include females in their studies but then don't track the estrus cycle or menstrual cycle. And hormones have huge effects on our behavior. Just think about-- when you said sex before our hormones come in, we're not interested in it. And suddenly, that's kind of a main driver of behaviors. Hormones can definitely change who we are and what we do. So we should be studying hormones not just sex. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I always say that puberty is perhaps the most massive transformation and rate of aging that any of us go through in a short amount of time. An individual, their cognition changes. Their worldview changes. And that's largely hormonal-driven. And obviously, neural architectures change, too. I'm very happy that you mentioned-- I'm trying to get into calmer states prior to sleep and some ways to do that. I'm a big fan and I've talked a lot before on this podcast about things like yoga nidra which is a non-movement based practice, sometimes called non-sleep depressed where people actually take some time each day to practice how to go into a more parasympathetic a.k.a relaxed state deliberately, because it's a bit of a skill. GINA POE: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's-- and there there's some good data really, mostly out of a laboratory in Scandinavia showing huge increases in nigrostriatal dopamine when people go-- basically, engage in a practice of deliberate non-movement and that the brain actually enters states of a very shallow sleep. So it's sort of nap-ish. But the idea is to actually stay awake but motionless. And it does seem to restore a certain number of features of neurochemistry. But perhaps more importantly, it teaches people to relax which is something that most people are not very good at. But in any event-- and people who listen to this podcast have heard me say this over and over again, so I sound like a broken record, but this practice as a zero cost practice that doesn't require any pharmacology does seem to really enhance people's ability to fall asleep more quickly and to fall back asleep if they wake up in the middle of the night. So in any event, another plug for NSDR, yoga nidra. GINA POE: Well, I just also want to add to that, that's one of the reasons why insomnia is so insidious is because when people feel like they haven't gotten enough sleep, and they're not getting enough sleep, and they become anxious about getting enough sleep, and then they're anxious before going to sleep, like I'm not going to fall asleep, it's going to be 45 minutes, and then that's a positive feedback loop. So you need to break that loop, say, OK, my body is going to get as much sleep as it needs, I needn't worry about it, and then practice this relaxation to say, hey it's all OK, it's going to be all right, and then concentrate on things that relax you, whether it's concentrating or not concentrating, whatever it is. You mentioned yoga nidra. And that reminded me of transcendental meditation which is something that also hasn't been studied well, largely because we can't ask nonhuman animals to do it. And so we don't know what's happening with our neurochemistry and our brain activity in a deep and meaningful way. But one thing that has been shown in those that can do it really well is that, that theta activity that I said happens when you're learning something or when you're in REM sleep, it's well established and increases during the transcendental meditation. So it might be that some states of meditation could in some ways replace or mimic some functions of, for example, REM sleep. But again, we don't know if all the neurochemistry is right to do, for example, the thing that I was talking about, which is erasing the novelty encoding structures of the brain. That needs an absence of norepinephrine and serotonin, which we don't know if that goes away with transcendental meditation. We just don't know the answer to that yet. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. The studies on yoga nidra and sleep replacement are interesting. It does seem to be the case that nothing can really replace sleep except sleep. But that if one is sleep deprived or is having trouble falling back asleep that these things like-- and I hear it's-- I acknowledge this is essentially like yoga nidra, but we now call it non-sleep deep rest or NSDR, because oftentimes, for names like yoga nidra act as a barrier for what would otherwise be people willing to try a practice. It sounds mystical. GINA POE: --and yoga. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It sounds like flying carpets. And it sounds like you have to go to Esalen. By the way, Esalen is a beautiful place. But it sounds like you have to go there or live in the West Coast to believe in this stuff. But it's simply not the case. These are practices that are really just self-directed relaxation as a practice that allows people to get better and better at directing their brain states towards more relaxation. And most people have an asymmetry. Like for instance, most people can force themselves to stay up later. But they have a hard time going to sleep earlier. And that just speaks to the asymmetry that's probably adaptive in survival-based that we can ramp ourselves up far more easily than we can tend to calm ourselves down. GINA POE: Yeah. And actually to appeal to other Christians like me, prayer can be a wonderful way to calm yourself down, because through prayer you're giving your carries to God and saying-- and then you are relaxed, more relaxed. And I just want to say that because, the same reason that yoga might put some people off. It might put some people off to talk about prayer, but it's the same process of being able to relax, and yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And get outside our own experience a little bit. GINA POE: Yeah. Back out get a world view that might actually also help us to relax. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Well, you might be surprised at how many clinicians and scientists who've come on this podcast have mentioned things like prayer from various perspectives, Christianity, Judaism, Muslim traditions, and others that-- as a parallel to all of these things. And I think what it speaks to is the fact that, ultimately, the biological architectures that we're all contending with are going to be identical, right? And so different ways to tap into them and ones that are congruent with people's beliefs, I think are great. GINA POE: Yeah, because anything, non-congruent with your beliefs is also stressful. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And feels forced. And that's why this idea of calling it non-sleep deep rest in addition to yoga nidra was not to detract from the naming or the history around yoga nidra. But I was finding that it was a barrier. Likewise, yoga nidra tends to include things like intentions whereas NSDR scripts. And by the way, we will provide links to some NSDRs and yoga nidra scripts. But NSDR has no intentions. It's simply a body scan deep relaxation-based. So it's the scientific version of all of this stuff. And actually, we study it in the laboratory and some of the brain states that people go into. But that's a discussion for another time. GINA POE: This is hard not to-- My mother used to tell me when I would complain, I can't go to sleep, she'd say, well, start with your toes and relax. So you would clench your muscles around your toes then relax them and do that all the way from your toes all the way to your head. And I don't know where she got this, it might have been her own common sense or she might have gotten it from this NPR shows called The Mind Can Keep You Well she used to listen to. But that's another intentional relaxation that focuses on the body rather than on your own mental processes, but. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I do a little bit of work with the military. And there's a method within certain communities of Special Operations in the US military, where if they can't sleep or they're having challenges sleeping, they will deliberately try and relax their facial muscles in particular like drape the facial muscles and use long or exhale emphasized breathing does seem to increase the probability of transitioning back into sleep. And those are hallmarks of yoga nidra, non-sleep deep rest, body scans. And so I think all of these things converge on a common theme. As neurobiologist, we can say, all of the things that we are describing certainly move the needle away from locus coeruleus activation. And we haven't done the experiment to really look at that. But it seems all these things are counter to noradrenaline release. GINA POE: Right. Another one is yawning. Yawning in itself is, in fact, kind of tensing of all the muscles in your face and then relaxing them. So it might be why we yawn. We don't know why we yawn yet. But it might also-- it would be really great. Actually, animals yawn, too. ANDREW HUBERMAN: My bulldog was a-- perpetually. If he wasn't sleeping, he was yawning. GINA POE: And it would be interesting to see what yawning does to the locus coeruleus. Does that also calm and switch the locus coeruleus activity, because it's an interesting that facial nerve like trigeminal nerve through the vagus connects indirectly to the locus coeruleus and has a powerful effect on that. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Interesting. A common, I think friend of ours and direct colleague of yours, Jack Feldman was a guest on this podcast telling us about all the amazing structures he and others have discovered in respiration and breathing. It sounds like we have a collaboration brewing the three of us should definitely carry out. I'd love for you to share with us a little bit more about the spindles that have come up a few times. And I don't know if it's relevant to this. So if it's not, let's separate it out. But I'd love for you to tell us a little bit about the role of sleep in problem solving and creativity. And if spindles are involved, then I'll consider myself lucky for batching them in the same question. And if they're not involved, simply feel free to separate them out. GINA POE: I think they could be involved. And the reason why I think they could be involved because we now know a lot more about spindles. First of all, the first thing that we knew-- first of all, we ignored them. Then we thought they had something to do with keeping us asleep. And that was their function is when an external stimulus came, they would keep us asleep because they would arise. But now, we know that the density of our sleep spindles, the number that we produce per minute is well correlated with our intelligence in the first place and that no matter what your intelligence is and no matter what your sleep spindle density is, if you're learning something during the day and increase your sleep spindle density, it's really almost perfectly correlated with our ability to consolidate that information and incorporate it into the schema that we already have in our brain. So if you try and learn something new, even if your sleep spindle density at baseline is great, if you don't increase your sleep spindles that night, you're not going to use sleep to really incorporate. Interestingly, sleep spindles are poor in those with schizophrenia. It's one of the characteristic signatures of sleep is that sleep spindles are very few and far between, which might mean that people with schizophrenia might not be able to incorporate new information into already existing schema. And instead, it flaps in the breeze out there and can be accessed erroneously at times when you don't want it to be involved. So I digress, so sleep spindles and creativity. So one of the things we now through some great studies by Julie Seibt and Anita Lüthi is that sleep spindles are accompanied by an incredible plasticity out in the distal dendrites, the listening branches of our neurons that listen to other cortical areas. So there are proximal dendrites in our neurons that listen to the external world and are conducted through the thalamus. And then there are distal dendrites which listen to an internal conversation that's happening in our brains. It's kind of our internal state, really. And during sleep spindles, that's when those distal dendrites are able to best learn from other cortical areas and from the hippocampus. It is during sleep spindles that the hippocampus and the cortex are best connected and when that incredible plasticity can happen. When I talk about schema, that's a cortical, cortical thing. That's when the image of Santa Claus and presents comes together. It's not through some external thing. Once we learn those things together, it's our cortex that encodes that and brings those images back up together. And that's during sleep spindles when that's happening, when that-- there's big surges of calcium into those distal dendrites, and where plasticity happens in just huge amounts. During that sleep spindle stage of sleep which is N2 stage, there's also another excitatory event that comes all the way from the brainstem and projects everywhere in our cortex which is called PGO waves. That's P for pons, G for geniculo nucleus of the thalamus which is where they're first discovered, and O for occipital area which is our visual area which is, again, where they're first discovered. But in fact, it's now been shown that PGO waves, which we should generalize to P waves because they come from the pons and go to the thalamus and then the cortex, happens all over the brains. And that is where glutamate, which is a major excitatory neurotransmitter involved in learning and plasticity is being released in big amounts, also in those distal dendrites. So P waves and spindles work together to cause plasticity and sew our schema together which could be the origins for insight and creativity. Now, when PGO waves or P waves were first discovered, it was thought to be random, because this small area that generates P waves all over the brain projects all over the thalamus and causes P waves all over. And you don't measure P waves all over the brain at the same time. In fact, it's just seems sporadic and random. So that's probably-- and P waves also happening even more during REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep. So that's why people think that REM dreams are so random is because these P waves are random. And they could generate dreams because they're an internal source of excitation that replaces the outside world during our dream state. And so these P waves, if they are random, could function-- could be the underlying reason why REM sleep dreams are random. And it might also be why creativity can happen there because we're randomly activating-- co-activating different things in our brain that we can then sew together. But it might not be as random as we think. So that's the caveat there. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I just learned a lot from you, because I teach brain stem to medical students. And I talk about the pons. And the pons is like this dense collection of all these different nuclei involved in a bunch of different things. And it's close by a bunch of interesting things. And it's still a mysterious brain area. But when I learned about PGO waves, I thought pons-geniculo-occipital, because occipital is most commonly associated with visual cortex, I thought it was the origin of the visual component of dreams. GINA POE: And probably is. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'm very happy to learn that they should be called P waves, because they include lots of different areas of the brain. And it makes really good sense to me why the pseudo randomness of dreams especially these late night and early morning-- later in sleep I should say and early morning dreams seem to be cobbled together from disparate experiences. You walk through a door and suddenly, it's a completely different context and landscape. GINA POE: Yes, beautiful. beautiful. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I like this idea a lot. It makes intuitive sense it makes biological sense. It also gives me something to talk about to the medical students next quarter when I talk about pons. GINA POE: Right. You want to talk about where in the pons, it's right below the locus coeruleus. It's called the sub coeruleus. They're glutamatergic. It's also called SLD, sub lateral dorsal nucleus, so. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So note to any aspiring neurobiologist, there's a vast landscape of yet to be undiscovered structure and functions in the pons. You want to work on something that is sure to reveal something novel, work on the pons because it's in every textbook. It's clinically very important structure. Sadly, gliomas and other cancers of the brain can sometimes-- can often surface in the pons. But we still know very little about it. I read a paper this last year or-- and I think it was covered in a bit of popular press, that during rapid eye movement sleep, people can solve problems or respond to external stimuli. For instance, they would give them math problems. They'd whisper in their ear while they were in REM sleep, what's 2 plus 2. And then people would say, even though they were paralyzed, apparently they could still move their mouth, because they'd say four or something like that. Or they'd say, what's your name. And people could respond. And so that in REM sleep, perhaps, people-- some elements of cognition are still active. GINA POE: I'm glad you brought that up. ANDREW HUBERMAN: What are you thinking-- and I don't know the authors of that study and-- listen, if ever I say something wrong, it's great on this podcast because someone will tell us in the YouTube comments. It's one of the great uses of YouTube comments. But I'd love to know your thoughts on that study. Is that just kind of an odd feature that or does this have meaning. Should we actually care about this result? GINA POE: There is no just about it. It's really actually intriguing and interesting and might relate to this paper that I talked about where we said different areas of the brain can be in different states at the same time. So lucid dreaming is another thing we can't ask animals to do or can't ask them if they've done it. But we can certainly ask humans to do it. And some people can do it really well. And it would be really interesting to see in those people who could lucid dream really well whether they spend more or less time in this asymmetrical state where one area of the brain is in one state and another area of the brain is in another. And it might be that those people can respond to questions during REM sleep. Best are those that have the most asymmetry or dissimilarity or dissociation between subcortical and cortical structures. Or it might be that they're the ones with the most symmetry, we don't know. I do worry a little bit about lucid dreaming, because people are-- it's a fad. People are really excited about it. And to be able to remember one's dreams is fun often unless there are nightmares. But it's really interesting. Or to be able to direct one's dreams if they are a nightmare is really a wonderful power to have, to be able to redirect a nightmare that has been repeated to something else and then kick yourself out of that. Repetitive nightmare is really nice. But I worry a little bit about it, because we know so little about what's actually going on in the brain. And if this lucid dreaming state is preventing us from, for example, from the locus coeruleus from calming down or the serotonergic system from silencing like it should, and maybe what we're doing during this state is Yeah we're activating the learning and memory structures but in a way that's maladaptive in terms of the erasure that we need to do. So maybe one of the reasons why most people don't remember most of their dreams is for good reason. Your hippocampus is in a state where it's not writing new memories. In fact, it's writing out its-- the memories it learned during the day to the cortex. And it's immune from incoming new information. So maybe lucid dreaming is bad, because you're activating the hippocampus in a way that's writing new memories. And it might be really maladaptive for things like PTSD. On the other hand, let me just argue myself right out of this, when I used to have a repeated nightmare when I was a kid, my mother who was so wise would tell me, well, listen, just-- next time you're in that dream, say, hey, I'm in a dream and then change something about it. So she and I rehearsed what the horrible dream that it was, big monster running after me. And my legs were like mud, and I couldn't run away. And it was just terrifying. And that was a dream I would have time and time again. She said, OK, next time what are you going to do when that monster comes after you? I'm going to run away. No, that's what you do every time. And it's always the same outcome. You can't run. So let's do something different. What could you do that's different? So I came up with all-- I could turn around and punch it in the nose. Yeah, that's great. And so the next time I had that dream-- I did recognize this is that same old dream which means that there's part of my brain that's conscious enough to know that I'm in a dreaming state. And then I didn't have the courage in my dream because I was still terrified to punch or touch the monster in any way. But I did have the courage to turn around and look it in the eye and say no. That was enough. I said no. And that was enough to knock me out of that rut of that dream so that I never had it again. I never had that same dream again. And in fact, it gave me peace about dreaming, because I knew that if ever there was a nightmare that was just too scary, I could probably do something to change it and knock myself out of it. So even though, I don't recommend lucid dreaming on a normal day-to-day basis, if it's enough that can knock you out of a rut-- one thing that happens with people with PTSD is they have the same repeated horrible nightmare which is often a reliving of the days trauma that had. So maybe lucid dreaming can be used on occasion to be a powerful tool, because there's so much plasticity that happens during REM sleep to knock you out of that rut of reliving that event and just change it. And you could probably practice that during wakefulness, rehearse the event that happened that was so traumatic and then just introduce a new element like, now, I'm safe. Now, the sound that was associated with that really traumatic thing, I should now associate with something else. And the next time I have that dream, I'm going to change it so that sound is now this new thing that it should be associated with safety. And that might be enough, maybe, I hope, to knock you out of that repeated nightmare and maybe even start you on the path to recovery, because if you can calm down about those nightmare states of sleep, then maybe your local coeruleus which is involved in stress can also relax. And you can do the erasure parts that need to be done. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I love it. I seem to recall a paper-- and I'll have to find the reference and send it to you, we will also put in the show note captions-- that described a protocol essentially matches this idea. And I think what they had people do was either cue themselves to a particular smell or tone in wakefulness then to try and recall a recurring nightmare. Then during the night sleep, they had the tone playing in the background which would then cue them to the wakeful state-- they're still asleep, mind you, but in the pseudo lucid or lucid state, and then try and change some variable as you're describing. Some either look the predator in the eyes or do something different. And then in the waking state, take a little bit of time to try and script out a different narrative altogether. And it took several nights, as I recall, or more but that they were able to escape this recurring nightmare. GINA POE: It's like a week or something, yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So you're familiar with the study? GINA POE: That's a beautiful study. I loved it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, we will put a reference to that. I need to revisit that study. It was pretty recent, but I need to dive into it again, because I think I didn't go as deep into it as I should have. GINA POE: No, no but the one thing that you-- you said many right things. But one of the things you said is that they were able to cue the dreamer when they knew-- when they were going to REM sleep. And then they played the sound or had the odor. Now, when you're normally asleep alone in your bed, you're not going to be able to cue yourself. But it might be that rehearsal enough before you go to sleep is enough to help cue you to that repeated nightmare, remembering what the nightmare is and then figuring out how to cue yourself to do something different. ANDREW HUBERMAN: For years, I had the same recurring nightmare over, and over, and over again. And it was so salient and so clear. And I'm not going to share what it is, because it's not that it's that disturbing. It was just-- I think it was the emotional load of it and just how salient certain features were, like one person who's a real life person had a particular clothing on. And it's like, and that just served as this cue. And I don't know if I ever did any direct work to try and deal with it. But now, it almost seems silly to describe it. GINA POE: Oh, yeah. Well, dreams are usually silly to describe. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It pretty silly. But it was a pretty violent dream. GINA POE: Yeah. And your emotional system is so geared up during REM sleep which is another thing we could talk about. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, please. I would love to. Yeah, so locus coeruleus is ideally suppressed. So we can't release norepinephrine. We can't act out our dreams during these very emotionally laden thoughts and storylines during sleep. This almost starts to sound like a little bit of a built in while sleeping trauma therapy, because most trauma therapies involved trying to get people into states of counter to what most people think you actually want to get close to the trauma in terms of the narrative or try and suppress the emotional activity of it or-- I guess that's the motivation for ketamine-based therapies for trauma-- or I've also heard, and this is still perplexing to me, that other waking-based trauma therapies involve taking people the other way, making it very cathartic, take them to the peak of the emotional response but then allow that to finally cycle down into a more relaxed response. So please, if there's anything about locus coeruleus and dreams and that can help people basically extinguish traumas or traumatic features to real life events, we definitely want to know about them. GINA POE: Yeah. Well, I think one of the things that people thought might help after a trauma like a school shooting or whatever, car accident, is to talk about it. But in fact that ended up being counterproductive. And I think one of the reasons why it was counterproductive is because it didn't take them back down. It brought them up and continued to reactivate the emotions of it but then didn't emphasize the safety of the fact that it's over or help them work through how they might avoid it again in the future to calm the sympathetic nervous system down again before they went to sleep. And none of these studies has sleep ever been considered. But to me, that's the key part, is bringing down your sympathetic nervous system before you go to sleep so that your sleep can be adaptive, your locus release can shut off like it normally does or should do and then able to erase the novelty of it. The other thing that I just mentioned a minute ago was that the emotional system is highly activated in REM sleep. And that's definitely true. And that might seem counterproductive in terms of the nightmares and how to help REM sleep be a therapeutic thing rather than reinforcing the emotionality of the trauma. And I think the key to that again is the absence of norepinephrine. So even though the emotional system is in high gear, without norepinephrine, you can actually divorce those highly activated emotions from the cognitive parts of the memory that you have just written out in that N2 stage of sleep when the sleep spindles are going. So you've just now consolidated the information that you'll need to survive and to make that adaptive. And now, you need to divorce from that schema and from that semantic parts of memory, the emotional part, because whenever you remember something, it's fine if you remember the being emotional at the time. But you don't want to bring back and sew into that memory all of the same emotional systems. You don't want to bring back the heart rate changes, and the sweating, and all of that. You want to be able to remember all the parts of it and even remember that you were traumatized and that you did cry and that you did have-- your heart was racing. But when you're talking about it years later, you don't want to have to relive all that, otherwise who would ever want to recall a traumatic memory because you're basically putting yourself through the same trauma which is what people with PTSD have. They don't want to recall this traumatic memory, because it's reliving it. Like it's just happening again. So that's what we're thinking is that the emotional parts are no longer-- are not able to be divorced because the norepinephrine system is not downscaled during REM sleep. And so that REM sleep serves to instead reinforce and in fact amplify the emotions because your emotional system is up, locus coeruleus is high, re-sewing in every night the emotionality of those memories and with the memory itself. ANDREW HUBERMAN: You've told us a lot about locus coeruleus and norepinephrine from locus coeruleus. Is there any role for norepinephrine, epinephrine, and cortisol released from the adrenals? My understanding is that norepinephrine and epinephrine will not cross the blood brain barrier which is probably why we have a brain-based noradrenergic system, locus coeruleus, and other neurons. Actually, that's a question I should ask you. Are there other sites in the brain where norepinephrine is released from or is it just locus coeruleus? GINA POE: So there are seven, nine different adrenergic. Yes, there's nine different adrenergic structures. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'm sorry I didn't ask. But it just occurred to me that in some cases like with raphe, there are other sources of serotonergic drive in the brain. But raphe is like the main side. GINA POE: Yeah, that's the one that goes to the cortex and the locus coeruleus is also the one that goes to the cortex. But there are other adrenergic sources, some that-- from the brainstem that descend and help us to ignore pain, for example, when we're stressed and needing to run away from the tiger, right? We don't want to be thinking, oh, my ankle hurts. You want to just be able to ignore it and go do what you need to do. So yeah, so there are lots of other noradrenergic nuclei. But the locus coeruleus is the main one that projects all over the brain. Actually, the only place that doesn't project is the dorsal striatum. You talked about ventral striatum and addiction. The dorsal striatum is the only place the locus coeruleus doesn't project to. And that's involved in procedural learning and motor learning, kinds of learning that take over when your hippocampus, for example, is compromised. Bilateral, if you don't have good hippocampus, you can still do procedural learning and do-- and it's great. It's a redundant system. And so if your locus coeruleus is not working, if you don't have it anymore, you can still do a-- if you don't have a good hippocampus, you can still do learning through this dorsal striatum on the structure. So it might be for those kinds of learning functions, sleep deprivation where you never let the locus coeruleus stop firing is OK, because it doesn't have any receptors for norepinephrine anyway. So yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And what about bodily like adrenals. I often remind people there's no such thing as adrenal burnout, per se, that adrenals don't actually burn out. But some people have adrenal insufficiency syndrome. Other people have adrenals that are just chronically cranking out epinephrine, norepinephrine, and cortisol at the wrong times in particular. GINA POE: Yeah. So that-- those are great questions. And I think the answers to them have yet to be discovered, the connections between our periphery and our central nervous system. But we know that there are beautiful connections. And it's untapped source of being able to manipulate our brains is to work through our bodies. And so our adrenals do great things. They constrict our blood vessels, causing higher blood pressure which helps blood rush out to all the extremities that need blood, our muscles for example, for running away from the lion, or the tiger-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Or meeting a grant deadline or catching a train. GINA POE: Or catching a train, yeah. The adrenals help our hearts pump faster. Our muscles get perfused with the blood it needs. It diverts blood and everything away from our parasympathetic system which is rest and digest. We don't really need to digest that croissant when we're running for a train. We can do that later. So it's doing really important things. What we don't know, because it doesn't cross the blood brain barrier, is how that affects the brain and whether our-- if we can independently activate our adrenals, when a time when our brain thinks that we should be fine and calm and asleep, how our brain detects that. Is it a feedback through heart is racing? And then our brainstem says, what's going on, my heart is racing, and then wakes us up. And then our hearts were racing together with our brain racing. We just don't know the answers to these questions yet. There are some good studies, old studies. But we need a lot more. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I will-- another nod to the fact that there's lots of great work ongoing and still to do. I'd love for you to tell us about some of the work that you're doing more recently on the relationship between sleep and opiate use, withdrawal relapse, and craving, just addiction, generally. I get a lot of questions about people trying to come off benzodiazepines or people's challenges with benzodiazepine and other types of addiction. What is the role of sleep in addiction and recovery from addiction and opiates in particular? GINA POE: Yeah. This is a very young area. And in fact, my laboratory has just started. I have a graduate student who's been in my lab for just one year. She's done amazing work already but completely groundbreaking work. And what she has discovered already-- we don't have the paper out yet, but we're working on it-- is that when animals withdraw from opiates-- and this has been replicated in other ways with other types of things-- our sleep is disturbed. Our sleep is terribly disturbed. And the amount of sleep disturbance predicts relapse behaviors. And you might think, well, of course, you're going to relapse if you can't sleep because opiates calm you down. Well, then one of the reasons why opiates calm you down is because the locus coeruleus, again, the blue spot, is covered with opiate receptors that are normally really responsive to our endogenous opiates. And so what happens when we are pleased, for example, or laughing or whatever, endogenous dodges opiates activate those receptors in the locus coeruleus and calm it down. It actually suppresses locus coeruleus activity. It makes us happy and relaxed. One of the things, reasons why opiates are so addictive is because it also calms us down and makes us relaxed. But the problem with exogenous opiates is that they really strongly bind these receptors on our locus coeruleus. And if you take exogenous opiates again and again like you're recovering from surgery, for example, and take these pain medications is that our locus coeruleus struggles to do what it's supposed to do which is keep us awake, and learning, and concentrating on things. So it will down regulate. It will internalize these receptors that are normally only occupied by endogenous opiates. And it will do this-- it will change our genes that are associated with producing these receptors. So you actually have very many fewer receptors. So the locus coeruleus, at least, during wakefulness can fire and to help us to do these things learn about our environment. And so if you long term reduce the number of receptors out there, then when you withdraw the exogenous opiate, there is not enough of your endogenous opiates to be able to occupy those few receptors that are there. And our locus has nothing to calm it down anymore, no pacifier. And it just fires, and fires, and fires. And that physic and tonic high activity stresses us out, because it's normally associated with stress. And so any exogenous stressor that adds to that and also activates our locus coeruleus, there's nothing to calm it down again. And so it just keeps firing. It disturbs our sleep. And that's why maybe sleep disturbance is an indicator of hyperactive locus coeruleus and such a good predictor of relapse behaviors because nobody likes to live in that high stress state. And they will do anything to get back to normal. So the problem with taking these drugs is that it leaves you excited-- I'm sorry, excited, relaxed and happy. But then when you come off of it, you're worse than when you were at baseline. You take it again. It only brings you up this far, because you have fewer receptors. When you come off it, you're down, even more depressed and anxious and-- depressed is a word I use loosely, and that's not what I-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Certainly, central nervous system depression, sleepier, less motivated, lower mood. GINA POE: Yeah. Our locus coeruleus is actually-- it's a anxiety kind of depression actually, the anxiety related depression. So yeah. So we don't know yet what-- and there's some good research going on right now-- what could restore our own endogenous receptors so that our endogenous opiates can properly calm our locus coeruleus once that they have been tamped down by exogenous opiates. But that would be really one way that you can access the sleep disturbance. So we talked about sleep and the importance of sleep in terms of learning and memory, the importance of the structure of the 90-minute cycle for all of that. So you can imagine if your sleep is disturbed by too much locus coeruleus activity. The structure and the function of those sleep spindles and that theta during REM sleep and the lack of norepinephrine, all of those structures, all those functions for learning something new, like a new behavior that doesn't involve the drugs becomes compromised. And so that's something that Tania Lugo, in collaboration with Pamela Kennedy at UCLA, that we're looking at how is learning and memory affected by the sleep disturbance. If there's a way we can-- in animals that are coming off of opiates. Can we restore their sleep to normal so that then they are less likely to do relapse kinds of behaviors. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Fascinating. And I will certainly have to have you back on to tell us the results of those studies. Meanwhile, I think for anyone who's trying to come off opiates, exogenous opiates and restore these systems, what I'm hearing is that it's going to take some time but that any and all things that people can do to buffer their healthy normal sleep architecture like morning and daytime sunlight, limiting bright light exposure, lowering the temperature at night, a number of things that we've talked about in this podcast-- GINA POE: Breathing exercises, meditation, whatever it is that helps you calm yourself before sleep, yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Right. Would facilitate not just sleep but perhaps even accelerate the recovery and shorten this period of withdrawal, which from the questions I get and from what I hear can be absolutely brutal. GINA POE: Yeah. Oh, I can imagine. I had to take opiates for-- I only took it for three days after giving birth to my first son, I think, second son, one of them. And just-- I just said after three days, this is enough. I'm just going to try Tylenol. And so I weaned myself-- not weaned, I just did a sudden sharp cut off. And even though I felt-- I didn't get the high of opiates when I was taking the Tylenol codeine. When I went off it, boy, it was like PMS times 100. I was so anxious and upset at little things. And thankfully, it only lasted a few hours. But if I had taken it for a week or two weeks, who knows if my endogenous opiate receptors would have been permanently downregulated and I would have been an addict-- or an addict-- I would have been addicted. I shouldn't say an addict. There's negative connotations. It's just a very physiological state. So no judgments at all associated with it. So yeah, They're powerful, powerful painkillers but can also alter your entire brain and rewire it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Well, all the more reason why I and many others are grateful that you're doing this work to figure out ways that people can recover more quickly and more thoroughly. I must say you've taught us a tremendous amount in a relatively short amount of time about the architecture of sleep, the different phases, the relationship between sleep and dreaming and this incredible structure, locus coeruleus. And I'm so happy we also got into the pons. That just delights me, because we rarely talk about the pons on this podcast. It's such an interesting structure. Sex differences that are important in creativity and problem solving and trauma sleep spindles, just such a wealth of information. And much of it that's actionable for people. So first of all, I want to say thank you for taking the time to sit down and have this conversation that so many people are sure to benefit from. I also want to thank you for doing the work you do. Even though I'm a fellow neurobiologist, I think that it's not often that we take a step back and realize that it's really the work of hard-- thinking hard, strongly motivated PIs-- it stands for principal investigator by the way, PIs like yourself, graduate students, and post-docs that really drive the discovery forward and that lead to these new therapeutics. Physicians are wonderful. Clinicians are absolutely wonderful. But clinicians don't develop new treatments. They only implement the ones that researchers discover. So thank you for being a brain explorer with a focus on growing the good in the world. I know I speak for everybody when I say thank you so much. GINA POE: Thank you so much, Andrew. Thank you for being an amazing interviewer. You brought a lot out of me in a coherent fashion that normally I can't do when I'm speaking in public. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I don't know about that. I've heard your lectures, and they're superb. We'll direct people to some of the other ones. GINA POE: Well, thank you. And I also want to put a plug-in for graduate students in general and the key and amazing role that they play in research. I'm a PI, as you said. I used to be a graduate student and a post-doc trainee myself, doing all of this on the ground hands on experimentation. It's so hard to do. It's so hard to do, right? It's so hard to think through all of that. Now, I'm a PI, I get to be an idea person and just say, hey, why don't you do this and hey, what do you think about that. And they, of course, intellectually contributes so much to these planned experiments. But they also do the really hard work. And so I just want to say thank you graduate students. Thank you to my graduate students and all graduate students out there. Thank you post-docs. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --underpaid. And listen, and to the major institutions, Stanford UCLA and all other major institutions, pay them more, please. GINA POE: Yes. ANDREW HUBERMAN: We need them. And they need to have a standard of living. I'm not afraid to say that despite my primary employer. Pay them more. They need it. They deserve it. GINA POE: They deserve it, absolutely. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Great. Well, we will absolutely have you back again if you'll be willing. And meanwhile, we will direct people to where they can learn more about you and your exciting work. And once again, thanks so much. GINA POE: Thank you so much. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Thank you for joining me today for my discussion about sleep, mental health, physical health, and performance with Dr. Gina Poe. I hope you found it to be as informative and as actionable as I did. In fact, I'm already implementing the regularity of bedtime plus or minus half an hour in order to get that growth hormone release. And I can already see both my sleep scores improving and my feelings of daytime vigor and focus and other markers of sleep health improving as well. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can also leave us up to a five-star review. If you have questions for us or comments or suggestions about guests you'd like me to include on the podcast, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. On the Huberman Lab podcast, we often discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing the quality and duration of sleep, for enhancing focus, and for hormone support. The Huberman Lab podcast is proud to announce that we've partnered with Momentous supplements. We've done that for several reasons. First of all, Momentous supplements are of the very highest quality. Second of all, they mainly focus on single ingredient formulations which is absolutely key if you want to develop a supplement regimen that's most biologically and cost effective. It, for instance, allows you to alternate dosages across days to change the dosages of individual ingredients, so on and so forth. In addition, Momentous supplements ship internationally, which we know is important because many of you reside outside of the United States. If you'd like to see the supplements discussed on the Huberman Lab podcast, please go to livmomentous, spelled o-u-s, so that's livmomentous.com/huberman. You can get a 20% discount on any of those supplements. Again, it's a livmomentous.com/huberman. The Huberman Lab podcast has a zero cost newsletter that includes summaries of podcast episodes and toolkits, so checklist of actionable tools that you can use for all aspects of mental health, physical health, and performance. You can access this completely zero cost by going to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu, and scroll down to newsletter. Just put in your email. We do not share your email with anybody. And you will get our monthly newsletter and there are also some examples of previous newsletters also there at hubermanlab.com. You're not already following me on social media, it is Huberman Lab on all platforms, Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And at all of those places, I cover science and science-related tools, some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the Huberman Lab podcast content. Again, that's Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. Thank you again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Gina Poe all about sleep and its relationship to mental health, physical health, and performance. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 226 ---
Video ID: UIy-WQCZd4M
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UIy-WQCZd4M
Title: Dr. Andy Galpin: Optimize Your Training Program for Fitness & Longevity | Huberman Lab Guest Series
Published: 2023-02-08 13:00:30 UTC
Description:
In episode 4 of a 6-part series, Andy Galpin, PhD, explains how to design an effective training program for fitness, health and longevity through a 10-step approach. He covers goal setting, exercise selection, balancing, recovery periods and real-world challenges. He provides a year-long training example that considers sleep, sunlight and social connection. The program is modifiable for personal fitness goals and experience.

#HubermanLab #Fitness #Science 

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Andy Galpin
Academic Profile: http://hhd.fullerton.edu/knes/facultystaff/AndyGalpin.php
Website: https://www.andygalpin.com 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/drandygalpin
Instagram: https://instagram.com/drandygalpin
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCe3R2e3zYxWwIhMKV36Qhkw

Other Resources
Guest Series | Dr. Andy Galpin: How to Assess & Improve All Aspects of Your Fitness:  https://hubermanlab.com/dr-andy-galpin-how-to-assess-improve-all-aspects-of-your-fitness
3-Day Training Program (XPT): https://www.xptlife.com/going-back-to-basics-in-your-training 
Chart of Interference: https://hubermanlab.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/Chart-of-Interference.pdf
10-Step Approach to Designing a Training Program: https://hubermanlab.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/10-Step-Approach-to-Designing-a-Training-Program.pdf

Timestamps
00:00:00 Optimal Fitness Programming
00:07:19 Momentous, Eight Sleep
00:09:53 #1: Plan Fitness Goals, S.M.A.R.T. Goals
00:19:52 Intermediate Goals, Dopamine, Identify Your “Defender”, Goal Timing
00:26:25 Multiple Goals, Synergistic Goals, Interference Effects
00:36:13 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:37:06 Physical Goal “Bins”, Specificity 
00:48:02 Tool: #2: Identify Your “Defender”, Quadrant System, “Drop Everything and…”
01:04:33 InsideTracker
01:05:35 #3: Goal Timeframe & Life Events; #4: Weekly Training Frequency
01:10:33 #5: Exercise Selection, Progression 
01:18:20 #6: Exercise Order, Identify Friction
01:29:20 Exercise Timing & Sleep, Down Regulation, Caffeine
01:36:24 #7: Intensity, #8: Volume, Progressive Overload, “Deloading”
01:43:59 #9: Rest Intervals, #10: “Chaos Management”
01:49:06 Fitness, Health & Longevity Goals, Proprioception & Non-Structured Exercise
01:53:41 Tool: Year-Long Program Example for Overall Fitness 
02:07:58 Tool: Overall Fitness Template by Quarter, Matching Goals & Seasons
02:25:49 Training & Life Challenges: Sleep, Illness 
02:32:10 Tool: Program Flexibility, 3-Day Weekly Training Program
02:37:12 Physical Activity vs. Exercise
02:40:12 Tool:4-Day Weekly Training Program, Muscular Endurance
02:51:15 Tool: 5/6-Day Weekly Training Program, Recovery
02:54:06 Program Modification, Balancing Joy
03:04:47 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab Guest Series, where I and an expert guest discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today's episode marks the fourth in the six episode series on fitness, exercise, and performance. And today's episode is all about optimal fitness programming, that is how to design a fitness and exercise program that can achieve the goals that you want for fitness and for sports performance. Dr. Andy Galpin, great to be back. In previous episodes, you taught us about the various adaptations that occur at the level of cells, at the level of organs, indeed at the level of the entire body that underlie things like improvements and strength and speed, hypertrophy, AKA muscle growth, and the various forms of endurance. And you laid out beautifully the various protocols that one can do in order to achieve each and every one of those adaptations. Today I would love for you to teach us how we can combine different protocols to achieve multiple adaptations in parallel-- for instance, how to improve endurance and strength, how to achieve some level of hypertrophy, perhaps directed hypertrophy at specific muscle groups, while also maintaining endurance and perhaps improving speed, for instance. And if you would, I'd love for you to tell us how we can combine different protocols and vary those across the week, across the month, across the year so that we can make regular progress and perhaps even could give us a window into the ways to make the fastest progress possible. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah, I would love to do that. We've invested a lot of time in the previous episodes covering background and concepts and detail about the physiology so you understood why you're making the choices you're making and why other choices are less effective. In this discussion, I would actually like to jump maybe more directly to the answer and kind of get right into the protocol and maybe a little bit less background. If you're interested in that stuff, I suppose you have to go backwards a little bit and watch some of those previous episodes. But I would love to jump in to just some samples, some case studies, if you will, and kind of walk through different protocols. I know that over the course of my 11 years as a college professor and being in the public space a little bit, probably the most numerous style of question I have gotten is exactly that. So I know the rep range for this, or I know the style of training for that adaptation. But how do I put them together? And I would just like to spend our time today going through those things. And the reason I want to do it is this. Some people listening at home surely just love exercise. They're already bought in. And they're going to train no matter what. And they're interested in just actually being more effective. And so the way that you structure and put your plan together will in large part determine getting more progress for less effort or actually being able to put the same amount of effort in and getting results faster. There's also some folks probably listening who are like, OK, I exercise. I do what I can. I'm bought into the benefits that you've talked so elaborately over the 100 plus episodes you've done about the various benefits of exercise. But you don't like-- you're kind of doing it because you know it's important. But you're not there. So for those folks, it's sort of like, OK, how can we actually make this thing more effective so we can make sure you hit the things you're absolutely have to get for the short and long term benefits to make sure that you're looking the way you want to look, you're performing physically the way you want to perform, and that you can do that across your lifespan? So how can we give you all some structure to where, again, you don't have to turn into an absolute lover of physical fitness and it doesn't have to take over your life but you can still get more results for your same time restrictions, whether that be two days a week or five days a week or only certain access to equipment or experience, whatever the case may be? How can we help those folks as well put together a protocol that will get them closer to their goals with less restrictions? ANDREW HUBERMAN: Fantastic. And I'm hoping that along the way, you'll also point us to how often to take the fitness assessment for each of the adaptations that you referred to in a previous episode. We will also link to that fitness assessment segment in the show note captions for this episode because that fitness assessment for different adaptations, I think, is a really powerful way for people to touch in and see how much long endurance do they have, how much anaerobic capacity do they have, how much strength do they really have. And then perhaps you'd also be willing to throw in a couple of additional ways that we can assess our level of fitness and progress in this arc of fitness program across the year. ANDY GALPIN: Amazing. I can't wait to do that. I think it is also important before we jump in to acknowledge a lot of folks may be thinking to themselves, I don't really necessarily need a plan. Why do I have to do that? I don't have a certain goal I'm going after. I'm not running a race any time soon. I'm not a competitive athlete. I just-- I go to the gym, and I workout. And that's great. Well, I would like to try to convince you that regardless of where you're at, having a plan will achieve those things we just talked about, which is more success in a shorter time frame. There's actually a significant amount of research to support this. Those individuals who go on a specific training plan compared to those who do not will receive better results independent of the effectiveness of the program. So we've talked in previous episodes about tons of different styles and strategies. And to reiterate, it really doesn't matter which one you pick. The fact that you have a plan is always more effective than not having a plan. And so, again, even if you're not planning on competing with something, if you want to shorten the amount of time you're in the gym, get more results from it, I would strongly encourage to put something together. The two largest reasons why people don't get results with their fitness training protocol is number one, adherence, and then number two, some sort of progressive overload. Both of those two things are challenging to accomplish without a plan. So the reason people don't go to the gym, one of them, and one of the reasons why it takes them so long is because they don't walk in with a very specific plan. It's sort of like going to the grocery store and figuring out what you're going to buy versus knowing exactly what you're going to get in your shopping list, grabbing those things, and getting out. You'll notice your time in the grocery store is half the length. You're more productive. And you didn't waste money on extra things. So that alone will drive adherence because you're now going to think to yourself, oh, that 90-minute workout I do is actually really just 60. And so now the next time you go to training you're like, man, I don't have 90 minutes. You realize it's only 60 or 40 or 30 or 20 or whatever it needs to be. So that alone will get you there. The second part of that which is overload. It's very difficult to understand and remember, well, the last time I did lat raises, I used I think 5 pounds. And I think I did like 12. Well, if you don't have some sort of system of tracking-- and this can be as simple as a notebook, just writing down what you did before and doing a little bit more the next time. That is going to almost guarantee you success. So having some structure-- and this structure can be fairly loose, so we're going to talk about a bunch of different examples-- is something I strongly encourage everyone to utilize for their exercise. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is also separate from Dr. Andy Galpin's teaching and research roles at Cal State Fullerton. It is, however, part of our desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, we'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Momentous. Momentous make supplements of the absolute highest quality. The Huberman Lab podcast is proud to be partnering with Momentous for several important reasons. First of all, as I mentioned, their supplements are of extremely high quality. Second of all, their supplements are generally in single ingredient formulations. If you're going to develop a supplementation protocol, you're going to want to focus mainly on using single ingredient formulations. With single ingredient formulations, you can devise the most logical and effective and cost effective supplementation regimen for your goals. In addition, Momentous supplements ship internationally. And this is, of course, important because we realize that many of the Huberman Lab podcast listeners reside outside the United States. If you'd like to try the various supplements mentioned on the Huberman Lab podcast, in particular supplements for hormone health, for sleep optimization, for focus, as well as a number of other things, including exercise recovery, you can go to livemomentous-- spelled O-U-S-- so that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. I've been using an Eight Sleep mattress cover for about the last eight months. And it has completely transformed my sleep. I'm sleeping about the same amount. But I'm sleeping far deeper. And I'm now getting the proper ratios of so-called Rapid Eye Movement or REM sleep and slow wave sleep and waking up feeling far more recovered mentally and physically. The underlying mechanism for all that is very straightforward. I've talked many times before on this podcast and elsewhere about the critical relationship between sleep and body temperature. That is, in order to fall asleep at night, your body needs to drop by about 1 to 3 degrees in terms of core body temperature. And waking up involves a 1 to 3 degree increase in core body temperature. With Eight Sleep mattress covers, you can adjust the temperature of your sleeping environment to be one temperature at the start of the night, a different temperature in the middle of the night, and a different temperature as you approach morning, each of which can place you into the optimal stages of sleep and have you waking up feeling more refreshed than ever. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman and check out their Pod 3 cover and save $150 at checkout. Eight Sleep currently ships in the USA, Canada, United Kingdom, select countries in the EU, and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 at checkout. So what sorts of things should people be thinking about when developing an overall fitness program? ANDY GALPIN: A few minutes ago, we were talking about how two of the major reasons people don't get as much out of their training programs as they would like is because of one, a lack of adherence, and two, a lack of progressive overload. So the solution to that is constructing a plan that lives within your realistic limitations. So I would like to walk you through my 10-step approach to how I design training programs. Now, before I do that, I think it is fair and important for the audience to understand that this is simply my approach. I've been doing this a long time. I played college football. And I wrote my own training programs back then. I have and am still working with professional athletes in the PGA TOUR and the NFL, the NBA, Major League Baseball, as well as a ton of general population folks. So this is a combination of the evidence base that we've been talking about in terms of best practices for strength and conditioning as well as just my years of experience. So there are many, many ways one could do this. I'm not even suggesting this is the best. This is simply how I do it. This is exactly how I handle it when a new individual comes to me and how I teach my students. So step number one is assessing properly and identifying a training goal. Now, that's actually sort of funny because we hear that a lot. But a lot of people actually never take that step, not to call anybody in the room out. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But what's happening here is this morning Andy, Dr. Galpin, and I were training together. And he was providing amazing tips on form and set rep cadence and the sort of thing. And he said, so what's your training goal for the next 12 months? And I paused. And it turned into a very long pause because-- ANDY GALPIN: Which is an nice way of saying he didn't have an answer. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I didn't have an answer. Of course, I don't just want to maintain what I've developed in terms of strength and hypertrophy and endurance. But I don't have a clear goal. So I'm hoping that by the end of today's discussion, I will be on track to a clear set of goals. ANDY GALPIN: Amazing. I'm not going to bore you all here. But, really, I can't stress enough how important that step really truly is to getting results. The analogy we use here is if you left your house and you were attempting to get to the grocery store and you just started driving and if you drove every possible route, you would eventually get to a grocery store. And so, yes, that can work. A better approach is saying, here's where I am. There's where I want to go. What is the optimal route there? And that's really what you're doing with goal. So it is a boring setup. It is not interesting to hear. I don't have any real hacks or tricks for you. But it is step number one on purpose. We have to know exactly where we're going. You can do this in two ways. Way number one is to just pick something. Arbitrarily decide I'm going to run a 5K. Or I've done that before, and I want to improve it by 10 seconds. I want to lose 10 pounds. You can just pick one. That's great. Another way is to run through that fitness testing protocol we described a few episodes before. And if you do that, you can see which of these areas that maybe you have the largest lagging in. Or what is the most severe performance anchor is how we refer to it. And then choose that as your primary goal. So either option. Some people come in to training programs with a very clear goal in mind. They want to add more muscle or whatever, whatever. OK, great. If you're like, I don't really know, I just kind of work out, then run the fitness testing protocol. You'll see what score is the lowest end. And then you'll maybe make that a priority for the next, say, three months. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So the first step is to identify a specific or set of specific training goals. ANDY GALPIN: A really nice tool for helping you set a goal is a system called SMART. Right now there's a little bit of debate on what those acronyms actually stand for. But we'll get close enough. So SMART is often Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic, and Timely. So starting off with S, specific, in general the more specific your goal is, the higher likelihood you will have at succeeding in that. M, being measurable, means it needs to be something that you can actually put a metric on. So this can be objective or subjective. But, generally, I like to have at least one objective measure. So remembering objective is something that is not based on feeling. It is not up to you. This could be something simple like your body weight. It could be how much you can bench press, what's your 1 mile time, whatever is most important to you. It actually doesn't have to be a fitness related goal. For example, if you're using fitness as a way to enhance your sleep, the main metric you may be interested in is amount of hours slept. It could be something like efficiency or whatever is most interesting. It could be work productivity. It doesn't really matter. So it doesn't have to actually be the fitness goal. But what is the motivation of why you're doing it? So that's specific, measurable. Attainable or actionable, as is often described, is something that is within your capability. So attainable-- a bad example of attainable is something like, my goal is to win more games. That may not be up to you. The other team you're playing, it could influence it, the schedule, et cetera. So attainable should be something that is within your control. Realistic or relevant to you is something that is, again, something realistic that you can achieve. You wouldn't want to make a goal that is you want to double your body mass. That is not going to happen. So think about the constraints. How old are you? What's your training experience? How much time do you really have to invest in this? And then pick something that is realistic. And then, honestly, my little twist here is take that in minus 10%. Because, typically, when people put together training programs, their goal tends to be quite lofty. And they get some small percentage of the way and realize they're never going to get there and then back off. We actually-- this sort of reminds me of a classic deception study that we did in my lab one time, where we took people and we had them do this maximal front raise. Basically, you held a dumbbell out in front of you for as long as you possibly could. And the goal here was actually-- it's a deception study. So we're tricking them. And so we said, OK, we want to just get normative values to see how long people can hold this front raise. And I think we use something like 5% of their body weight. And so they came in. And they did it one time. And we timed them. They didn't get to see the clock. They left. And then we said, we've got to come back in and repeat it. We got to do a couple of tries here to get a normal value in case it's off, whatever. Well, the participants were split up into four groups. So group one actually was told that their time was 15% lower than they actually got. Group two was 5% lower. Group three was 5% higher. And group four was 15% higher. So the second time they came in to do it, our graduate student, quote unquote, "made a mistake" and left the timer in front of them. So the first time again they did the exercise, they're just holding it. They don't have any idea how long they're holding it. The second time, they had a giant iPad set like just a little bit off centered where they can clearly see it. So they watched the time go by. And, of course, what happened was those folks, say, who did 1 minute the very first time when they tested, they came back in to do the second time. And they're holding it. And we told them they actually got 45 seconds, when in reality they had done a minute. So they're holding it and holding it. And they think they only did 45 seconds. By the time they get to like second 40, 41, 42, they get past 45. They almost all quit, like 47, 48 seconds, because they wanted to beat their previous score but then were like, cool, I beat it. And then they quit early. So they were actually not yet to failure. But they were just happy enough to beat what they thought they'd done. And then they quit. The other group on the inverse side-- again, say they got a minute. We told them they got a minute and 15 seconds. They got to like 45 seconds, 50 seconds and started realizing, oh, man, I have 30 more seconds to go. And they quit way early because the carrot was way too far out. They realized I'm never going to get there. So I'm just going to stop now. Can you guess which group did the best on the post-test? ANDREW HUBERMAN: The ones that were just within about 5% of. ANDY GALPIN: Totally. So they wanted to improve. And so, again, say, they got a minute the first time. We told them they got a minute 5-- or, sorry, they got a minute 5 the first time. We told them they only got a minute. They actually exceeded that greatly because they wanted the PR. So making sure that goal is properly aligned, it needs to be a little bit scary, a little bit unrealistic. You're going to have to work for this. If it's too easy, you'll quit. You won't feel like a challenge. If it's too hard, though, you'll quit early as well. So you want to make sure it's that reasonable balance of, ah, should I train today? Or like maybe I'll just go through-- if I do that, I'm not going to hit. I got to get after it. But not like, oh my God, like, there's just no chance here. So you're going to walk away early. ANDREW HUBERMAN: That's a fantastic study, I have to say. It's very simple. I think it illustrates a number of important psychological principles about goal setting, motivation, self perception, but also the dopamine system. The dopamine system is this universal reward system that-- meaning it doesn't only work for food or only work for fitness goals or only work for academic goals or relationship goals. It is the universal substrate for all of that. And I actually think there are some real gems of information in that study design that you describe. So just cue that for maybe a potential collaboration between our laboratories because-- ANDY GALPIN: Yeah, absolutely. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --I think it's very important. But it does cue up another question relevant to fitness. In particular, which is what are your thoughts on intermediate goals? So let's say my goal is to drop 2% of body fat from where I am now a year from now. So roll into the next year from now about 2% lower on body fat but maintain my lean body mass or maybe even increase it. How should I assess progress? Because the dopamine system loves a goal. It loves anticipation of a goal. But it responds best to, we sort of re-up, if you will, our dopamine any time we get a signal that we are on the right track to that goal. And that signal could be, OK, I did the workout. I just trust that these workouts are going to give me the result I want. But, of course, we know that when people get a glimmer of the idea or some objective feedback that they're on the right path, that dopamine system really fires and provides motivation for continuing toward the ultimate goal. And as we've talked about in the strength, speed, and hypertrophy episode, resistance training itself has this built into it because of the infusion of blood into the muscles. You actually get a little window into what you might get in terms of an adaptation simply by way of the so-called pump, whereas endurance type work generally doesn't have that. You don't see yourself get better drop back and then adapting to actually get better. But that's actually what you see with weight training. So given all of that contour of the dopamine system, what sorts of intermediate goals should I set for myself or should somebody set for themselves? And I realize it will probably depend on the ultimate goal. But would you say check in on progress once every week, every month, three months? ANDY GALPIN: I don't know if you can tell the look on my face. I love this question and this topic. I spend so much time on my senior and graduate level program design course. I've been fortunate to work with a few athletes where we've had multiple years. And if you can really take the time to step back and go-- it's not about optimizing for the next six weeks. And in this case, it's not the next fight. It is the championship fight that we need to get to in three years. Or it is the Olympics, which are on a quad program. You're really optimizing for that for a year. If you can have that foresight and really think about that and then work backwards, you can see some pretty tremendous things. The sort of saying that is we tend to overestimate what we can get done in a week and underestimate what can happen in a year. That can be extraordinarily powerful. However, you have to have those metrics called out ahead of time because you will lose motivation in that short term because you won't see that result immediately. But if you remember, I'm on a path to 4% or 2% or whatever you need to be, therefore, I only need to be this far right now. I need to be that far and then that far. It's actually quite clear. And so what we would actually do in that scenario, not to go so off track here because I can really go on this stuff, is-- let's say it was the year recommendation. You're going to actually need to go to the last part of SMART, which is timely. So part of setting this goal is making sure you understand the time domain responsible. And it's actually quite great here because, not to go Inception on us, where we're like list within a list, and Rob kills us over here. But number one of this program design thing was assessing your goal. Number two is identifying your defender. What I mean by that is, what is stopping you from hitting that goal? So you want to lose 2% body fat in the next year. OK, great. What's going to stop us? Once we can achieve that, and we'll go into more of that in a second, then you just start walking that 2% backwards. So you might have to go something like this. Look, every time I start working out really hard, I always get hurt. Interesting. OK, great. So maybe instead of jumping really hard into a high intensity interval training program, knowing we're likely to hurt something or get burnt out or quit or whatever the defender is for you, maybe we invest something right now, which is maybe improving your flexibility or working on movement technique, whatever is going to stop you from getting hurt. Or maybe we progress slower so we don't get there. That will allow us to do the work necessary to hit that goal 12 months from now, not two weeks from now, not two months from now. Maybe that's not the case. Maybe you're like, no, look, hey, I move well. I feel like I'm in decent shape. I've got enough muscle mass on me. We've talked in previous episodes why having insufficient muscle mass is sometimes detrimental for fat loss. So you checked all that boxes. I don't get hurt very often. I got equipment around, no problem. I've got the time in my schedule. And I have enough muscle. Great. Well, now we maybe just split it up and say, look, we got 12 months. We got 2%. It's as simple as doing half a percent per quarter of the year. And now all we're looking at is that number. I don't have to necessarily get all these things done. I can go a quarter, half percent, half percent, half percent, half percent. You're going to get there. The other scenario that I laid out a second ago, it maybe needs to look like something like this. Quarter one is going to be 0%. Well, yeah, that's right, you may not lose a pound for the next three months. We don't care. That's not the goal of these treatments. I know that's the goal this year. That's our major macro cycle goal. We're going to get there. But to get there most effectively, we need to invest in working more with your chiropractor or whatever the thing is. That will allow us to then go half a percent quarter two, when we can really start training. But we're going to ramp into it. Quarter three we're going to go another half a percent. And now we're halfway there. Quarter four, we've invested so much you're ready to go. We're going to go hard. We're going to get that last 1%, that last quarter. And we're going to get there. And you won't be hurt. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So that makes it very clear. And I can also envision how the precise structure of these intermediate goals would vary depending on what sort of adaptation one is pursuing. And I do remember from our previous episodes that fat loss itself is not an adaptation. It is a byproduct of other adaptations. So I just want to make sure that you know that I was paying attention. It's committed to memory. ANDY GALPIN: Absolutely. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Some goals, such as fat loss, are very quantifiable. And yet, they might not be linear. It's hard to know-- the assumption is if you ingest x fewer calories than are required per day, then you'll lose x amount of weight, some percentage from body fat. I think that cues up the idea that we need to build some flexibility into our thinking about these intermediate goals in order to just make sure that dopamine system isn't tethered to exact numbers because after all a reduction in 2% body fat, for instance, is really a desire to achieve a different sort of overall body composition or recomposition. I don't know, by the way, that that's my exact goal. I think one of my goals is to be able to run a mile faster. And I'm sort of haunted by this experience of wanting to run cross-country in college and trying to walk on. We weren't a Division I school. But the threshold for being considered for the team was you had to run a sub 10-minute 2 mile, which turns out to be very, very fast. ANDY GALPIN: That's really hard. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I did not do that. I didn't even come close. And I don't think that I could reasonably do that now. I'm not interested in committing to the kind of training required. The sacrifice isn't meaningful enough for me. ANDY GALPIN: Fair and honest. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But lowering one's time to run a mile by, I don't know, 10% seems like a reasonable goal across six months. ANDY GALPIN: Sure. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Great. So in the case of a goal like that, clearly there are specific training programs. But this raises the issue of, what if I have other goals as well? And at what point do people having multiple goals start to set up collisions between goals? How do we know whether or not something is reasonable not just on its own but because of the other things that one has structured into their program. So being able to reduce a mile time by 10% in six months, OK, maybe that's doable. Maybe it's not. You can tell me. But also being able to double the amount that they can do for single repetition leg extension for that matter, at the same time those seem like incompatible goals. ANDY GALPIN: So a couple of things. Number one, the more specific and precise you can be with a single goal, the faster you will get there, generally. So in theory, if you had one thing you wanted to achieve, the best way to go about it is to focus on that. Give it the most priority. That doesn't mean you can't do anything else along the way. You can. But you would want to focus on that. The more additional goals you bring in, the more distraction you're creating for that primary goal. Depending on what those goals are, you can actually do them at the same time. Some other combinations are less effective. Think about it like this. We went through those nine adaptations. And we went through them in a specific order on purpose. The closer those adaptations are together in that list, the more compatible they are to training each other. The further away, they become more challenging. So just to give a few examples. If you wanted to improve your speed in power, you could basically train those simultaneously. They would not interfere with each other at all. And, in fact, since power is speed times force, it would be complementary. If you just walk down the line from there to strength, hey, same thing. If you get faster, that's going to aid in strength because force is mass times acceleration. So if you improve acceleration, you're contributing to strength. Same thing with power. So speed, power, and strength are generally very complementary. You can absolutely train all three of those goals at the same time and have no issues. Getting into hypertrophy, now we've got a little bit of distinction. If you're going to train strength and hypertrophy, as we talked about in that episode, at the base those are going to be complementary. You add on some muscle. You're going to get stronger. You start training for strength. It's probably going to help you out on some muscle mass. As you get to the end of that spectrum, the overlap between the two starts to go away, such that if you truly wanted to maximize strength above everything else, if you continue to train for hypertrophy as well, that's going to take too many resources out of your recovery bin. And you won't be able to do that. The inverse would also be the same. If you're training to maximize strength, you wouldn't be able to put enough volume on to get sufficient hypertrophy. So if you wanted to then combine speed with hypertrophy, you're going farther away from each other, which means it's going to be more and more distraction. So the hypertrophy training would cause a ton of fatigue. You wouldn't be able to go at max speed for your speed or power strength. So you're going to be compromising those results. Now, speed training won't compromise your hypertrophy training because it's non fatiguing. And so, boom, here we have a little bit of an interference effect one way but probably not the other. Let's move down the spectrum one more time and get into endurance. We won't go through all of these things. But you're getting the idea here. Oh, a little bit of high intensity intervals? OK, cool. Now, would that compromise my speed, power, or strength? Probably because there's a little bit of residual fatigue. If the volume was low enough, then you'd be fine. All you're worried about there is not necessarily like some sort of cellular mechanism. It's just simple fatigue. It is amount of energy expenditure versus is that compromising my recovery to come back. Would those first three or four of those-- speed, power, strength-- interfere with your ability to elevate your anaerobic capacity? Probably not. Almost surely, in fact, if you look at any of the literature on endurance training, you will see that speed, power, and strength almost always improve endurance. Endurance training added on top of strength can be detrimental, can have a neutral effect, but generally doesn't help one get stronger by adding additional conditioning unless you're so unfit you can't get through the volume needed in the strength training. One more example here so we don't drag this out too far. In the case of something like I want to lose fat, well, hey, we don't have to worry about interference. It doesn't really matter. If you're fatigued for your hypertrophy session, not a big deal. We're just trying to get some work done. If your hypertrophy session fatigued you from your conditioning, it's cool because you got the work done. So you don't have to worry about it so much. So it really kind of depends on the actual goal. And what you want to pay attention to is, actually, what are the chances of overlap, which means like what are the adaptations you get physiologically that cross over from one to the other? And then what are the ones that are actually going to start interfering? In fact, in my class, I have this giant matrix chart of interference effect going from adaptations through a whole bunch of systems, everything from handling pH to lymphatic drainage to bone marrow density, et cetera. You can walk through these whole things and see which ones actually have a positive effect, which ones have a massive positive effect, and then which ones actually have a little bit of an interference. And perhaps if you guys are nice enough, we could throw that into a newsletter or something, some PDF or something. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I think that would be immensely valuable. I think some of that more extensive information, when it's laid out in grid form like that is really useful. So we should-- well, now we've said it. So we-- ANDY GALPIN: I didn't say I would do it. I said perhaps. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I think it's a great idea. I think it's a terrific idea. The idea that items closer to each other on the list of those nine different adaptations are going to be easier to achieve in parallel than items further apart makes perfect sense. And what I heard was that there's a few caveats that might seem minor. But they're actually quite important, such as anything that is relatively low intensity and doesn't impede recovery can probably be included as a parallel goal. So some speed work in conjunction with some long duration cardio work, versus even though we're talking about number 2 on that list and number 9 on that list. ANDY GALPIN: In that case, the long duration endurance, even if it's low intensity, may actually interfere with the speed if the volume gets too high. If you're talking about, I went on a 30 minute jog, for most people, it's totally fine. What we're really talking about here is when the miles start piling up. And the time really starts getting there in combination with some of the things-- the factors we've talked about earlier, which is exercise choice. So more eccentric landing based exercise choices. Running, for example, is more likely to interfere than cycling because you're not landing. Swimming is low impact. So if you're going to do those things, you can hedge your bets a little bit by choosing an exercise choice that is less impactful. Again, if we're literally-- because there's oftentimes confusing here is like, oh, don't do 10 minutes on the treadmill before you lift. You're going to cut-- oh, time out. Warm up is fine. We're really talking about probably more than 30 plus minutes at higher than 60% heart rate-- random number, something like that, depends on the person, et cetera. But it has to be a decent chunk. Again, you can actually fix that by then just consuming calories. You can also fix that by making sure everything else in the hidden and visible stressor bucket is improved. So that's just like one of our tricks that we'll get into when we get to the recovery, is you don't necessarily need to reduce your training if you just ramp up your recovery. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'd like to take a brief break and acknowledge our sponsor Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is a vitamin mineral probiotic and adaptogen drink designed to help you meet all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens daily since 2012. So I'm delighted that they're a sponsor of this podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day is that it helps me meet all of my foundational nutritional needs. That is, it covers my vitamins, my minerals. And the probiotics are especially important to me. Athletic Greens also contains adaptogens, which are critical for recovering from stress, from exercise, from work, or just general life. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs. And they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Again, if you'd like to try Athletic Greens, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim the special offer. I'm going to take the liberty of assuming that most people fall into one of either three bins in terms of their goals, again, most people. Certainly, there are going to be people that lie outside these bins. I think if you polled 100 people or 100,000 or 1 million people as to what their major goals were in working out, they'd say, as you so nicely listed out before, aesthetic changes, functionality, and longevity. But that one in three really kind of sit higher than most people would like to perhaps even admit. They want to look good, which usually means they want to lose some fat, gain some muscle in specific places. I realize there are folks out there who want to gain a lot of muscle and just muscle everywhere. But I think most people would like to have a little more shape here, a little more muscle there to either balance out their aesthetic or to accentuate certain parts of their physique. And they would probably like to shave off some subcutaneous fat, although there are those exceptionally lean people out there. And they exist too. I think it would be gain muscle in specific places, lose fat, and do it in a way that also provides some boost to their health span and longevity. I would say that that might even be 50% of people out there. Again, I'm taking the liberty of guesstimating. Another bin I would venture is interested in getting stronger and putting on more muscle. Certainly, there are a number of people that are interested in doing that. And that could even be more muscle all over or more muscle with some accentuation to certain areas where they happen to be weaker or less developed, as it were. And then the third bin would be people that really enjoy cardiovascular work. Oh, I should say the second bin probably care about their longevity also. But it's not really foremost, like, yeah, I feel great now, and I'll live to be whatever. But I only want to do it if I get that much muscle. We know these kinds of folks. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah, I run a poll in my class every year when I ask, what, you guys all lift? And, of course, I make them put their hand up, like, you guys are in my class, you're going to put your hand up, let you lift weights. And then I ask, why do you train? And long term health is like on the list. And they all-- I'm like any of you that selected health are liars. You're 20 to 25. You are not exercising for health. You are exercising because you want to look a certain way or get stronger. Once you get past that undergraduate age, though, the actual desire to live longer and better actually becomes pretty real. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, I think that there are people who want to feel better. They know that exercise and the results from exercise can make them feel better. But, yeah, that second bin tends to be more focused on the aesthetic changes, it seems, or being strong. And then the third category, I think, are people-- I know a lot of folks like this, who really enjoy what are normally considered endurance type activities. And here I just want to highlight again what you so beautifully illustrated in previous episodes, that you can gain a lot of endurance even using weights or machines. It just depends on how you use them. It's not about the exercise. It's about how you perform them and et cetera. And you, again, beautifully provided all those details as how to create endurance regardless of equipment standards, et cetera. But that third category seem to be people who enjoy running, cycling, swimming, hiking, dancing, activities that they can do for long periods of time. That often will involve some sort of skill that is based on improving motor patterns, maybe not so much stride but certainly for people that really love tennis, people that love a sport, like golf. They want to be able to not just walk. They want to walk the 18 holes. They want to have a great golf swing, et cetera. I'm not a golf player. So forgive me if my nomenclature is off. So there are three-- ANDY GALPIN: Golfer. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, golfers. ANDY GALPIN: You don't play golf. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Oh, got it. You don't play golf. ANDY GALPIN: Well, you play golf. You wouldn't call a golf player. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I played miniature golf a few times. And that's about it, although Stanford does have a beautiful golf course, I'm told. I should learn how to play golf. ANDY GALPIN: I'll come up and play it for you if you want. You come up. I'll play it. I'll tell you how it goes. Get me on that course. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I can almost see it from my lap. So category one, I think, is a significant fraction of people. So as we lay out these different ways to assess goals and as we approach the structure of a program, as you'll tell us-- if we could perhaps touch back to those every once in a while. Again, I'm taking the liberty of assuming that we will net about 80% to 90% of people out there, again, those categories being people who want to lose some fat, maybe build some muscle in specific areas on their body, and really want to be healthy. They want to feel great. And they want to have a long health span and lifespan. They want to live a long time feeling great. Second category, people want to build more muscle and strength. Sure, they don't want to damage their health. But that's not their main focus. Their main focus is on building muscle and strength. And then that third category of people who really want to do more endurance type work, feel great and strong doing it but not because they can carry heavy weights while they're doing it. But rather, they can feel vital and they can push harder for longer and maybe even translate that to some of the more recreational type activities or sports, like tennis, and things that are more long duration, playing soccer or maybe even softball or things of that sort. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah, surfing, swimming. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So those three categories-- maybe we could call those bin A, B, and C for sake of today's discussion. I think if you're willing to embrace-- ANDY GALPIN: Yeah, I love it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --I think that will be informative toward our listeners in a way that-- simply not assuming what people's different goals are might not be able to accomplish. Said differently, hopefully, by doing that, people will derive a lot more from the description of the program that you're going to give us. ANDY GALPIN: Love it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Now, I am certain that I want to let you return to your list of the five things that people need to consider when establishing a exercise program. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah, great, let's do that. I also do want to acknowledge a point you've brought up. Exercise doesn't mean just lifting weights. That's my background. That's what I spend my time on. So I sort of default to examples in that category. But it doesn't have to be that. You've articulated plenty of other ways where you can get amazing forms of exercise that have nothing to do with lifting weights. So for those folks in-- was it bin C or 3? I can't remember it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Bin C. We go A is, again, muscle, lose fat, be healthy now and forever. Bin B is get stronger, gain muscle, don't damage your health, but not really focus on health in the immediate term. And then bin C is want to play or do endurance type activities and, quote unquote, "feel strong doing it," so have more vigor to be able to do that longer and maybe with more attention to skill, et cetera, and, of course, also want to improve their health. ANDY GALPIN: Well, what you've effectively done is you've given us three different avatars with three different goals. So the next step for each person or group is going to be to identify their defenders. But before we get that, we've got to close the loop on this SMART thing. So in each case, they have either chosen that goal based on their personal preference. Or perhaps they did our fitness testing protocol and realized they need to gain strength. So whether the reason they chose to be in buckets B or A or C was because of our protocol or just personal preference. It really doesn't matter. They still want to go through this process of laying out their goals and making sure, again, they are specific. So let's go through bin C, which is a great one. So you want to have more energy. And you want to feel stronger when you're doing your kiteboarding. You want to feel stronger when you finish your round of tennis, round of golf, game of tennis. OK, great. That's a different strength. Absolutely see, I hear, I know what you're saying though. Amazing. So that goal needs to be specific to that. So it would be hard to make a goal like, I want to feel better at the end of my round. Boy, that depends on too many other factors. A better goal would be something like this. I want to be able to run this 2-mile loop that I do around my neighborhood. And I want to do it and have a lower heart rate at the end. Or I want to be able to get my heart rate recovery back faster. Amazing, that will probably align with you feeling, quote unquote, "stronger" with it. So I did the same course. And either I could do it at the same speed and it's not nearly as hard or I can go faster, whichever one. It doesn't matter. But that would be an example of a specific goal. The other buckets you laid out kind of already have specific goals, like I want to get stronger. Well, that's going to be the goal. The other one is going to be, I want to lose some fat. The goal is sort of implicit in that. It's the other people where you're just like, I don't really care about that. I just want to be able to surf the great waves and then not feel exhausted afterwards. All right, cool. Well, then you still should pick a metric that is not that activity maybe because it won't be within your control, depending on the waves and the temperature and all that stuff, that you can use as a proxy to say, if I were to do something that represented me feeling probably better when I surf, what would that be? And it's not perfect. But it would be still as specific as you could get. You still want to make sure it's measurable. Again, this example might be something like you're going to go to the pool and time how long it takes you to swim 800 meters or something. It's attainable. And then you'll set a goal that's realistic and timely. I'm going to improve by 5% in the next two months. OK, cool, that probably falls in the realm. And then you're making the assumption that if you did that, you'll probably feel better when you go out to do your primary activity, which is, say, surf. The reality of it is every time we work with an actual athlete, that's what we do. Athletes don't come to us to lift weights. They don't come to us to get stronger. They come to us because they want to play better. And they want to stay on the field more. What we're trying to convince them of is if you do this thing in the gym, then that should translate into you being better at your sport, recovering faster, being less injured. But it's still just a proxy. And so that's all you're doing with these other non-specific goals, especially when they're performance based goals. And we didn't package it that way. But that's really what you talked about for bin C there. It is a performance based goal. I want to be able to perform when I'm in the field. In my brain, that's a sport. In your brain, it's when you're at yoga class. It's the same thing. We've said this earlier in our series that if you have a body, you're an athlete. I want to prepare your body so that it can do exactly what you want it to do. You then get to have the choice of what you ask it to do. You call it a sport. You call it your Saturday hike with your family. I don't really care. It's the same thing. You get control of your body performing the way you want it to perform. And that's what this whole thing is about. Great. So now that we've covered, I think, as much as we need to regarding assessing and choosing a goal, I want to get back to this idea of identifying your defender. So you really need to think carefully about what is stopping you from hitting those goals. And so you're forecasting a little bit. You're also going back into your own personal history. Do you have history of knee pain? Do you have a history of working too much? Do you have a history of a lot of travel? Do you have a history of getting sick a lot? What are these things that are happening that are going to stop you from hitting your goal? A couple of examples I've already laid out so we don't need to go too much longer here. But in the case of somebody who is in maybe bin A, which is I want to lose some fat, maybe gain a little bit of muscle, OK, what's stopping you from the strength and conditioning side? Is it the fact that you can't train consistent enough? Is it the fact that when you go to train, you don't know what to do? Is it the fact that when you go to train, you train your ass off and you're not getting results. OK, great. All three of these different scenarios are going to result in different programs because they have different reasons you're failing. And that is really critical. Instead of just going I want a fat loss program and picking one up off the internet, it may not actually be addressing the point of failure for you. So the sooner you can choose your programs based on why you're failing, the sooner you'll start getting results. You have to run a little bit of a critical analysis there. And it can be something scientific. And it could be a measurement. And it also could just be thinking about you've tried this in the past and why didn't it work. It wasn't that interesting. OK, tell me more about why it wasn't interesting. I'm not really into machines. And that's all I had. OK, great. Or I loved it. I loved the gym I was at. And I was getting results. But it was so far away. OK, interesting. Why did you stop before? Why didn't it work? Or if it did work in the past, amazing. Let's go back to something similar. But has your life changed at all? Is there anything different about now than when it worked three years ago? Yes, no. If not, maybe we run it right back. If it is, OK, we're going to predict those things. And you want to work-- effectively, what I'm saying is throughout this entire 10-step process is going to be you want to make sure that there are the non-negotiables that are in your life that you know are going to be ahead of your fitness program. And you want to work with those things, not against them because life will win. When it comes to your children, when it comes to your job, life is going to win. You're going to have to give up something. It's going to take some hard work. But we want to fight the right battles for most people. Even for our professional athletes, we get this all the time. It's just like they have nothing else to do but train. Like, whoa, whoa, hold on now, they're getting traded. They have agents to deal with. They may not have a contract. They have families, blah, blah, blah. Life will get in the way, I promise. And so you want to fight the battles that you can win, not ones that you're going to lose. And so that's really what this game is about. So if the battle is, hey, my job is super hectic, OK, great. We're going to come up with a different strategy that's more flexible maybe. I'm still going to hold you to the fire. I'm not going to be easier on you. But we're just not going to try to set up a situation where you have to do this workout Monday, Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday because you know your job is on the road. And you're to provide all income for your family, whatever the thing is. That's what we really want to identify. So when I say identify your defenders, you need to run a little bit of a critical analysis on this. And a little bit of a tool I'll use for this is a modification of another system I stole from Kenny Cain, which is what we call the quadrant system. So you can imagine everything in your life goes into one of four buckets. Now, bucket 1 I'm just going to call business. And this is anything to do with your job, income, sort of all those things. Bucket 2 is relationships. So, again, this could be family or love life, anything that we would call relationships-- social connection, purpose, anything, right? Bucket 3 is your fitness. And bucket 4 is your recovery. So one of the first steps we take is we walk through this. And we say, all right, you have 10 points total. And you get to distribute these 10 points across the four areas. So not 10 each, you get 10 total. And so we walk through. And we say, right now, where are you giving your points? And we could do this right now for you if you'd like. Or I could make up a scenario. You want to do it? ANDREW HUBERMAN: Sure. ANDY GALPIN: Great. So, Andrew, right now in the last month, if you had 10 points total in those four categories, where would you be distributing the most points? Which category? And how many points would that be? ANDREW HUBERMAN: Business, my work. ANDY GALPIN: Business, work job, sort of all those things. And how many out of 10? ANDREW HUBERMAN: Which doesn't, I should say, ever quite feel like work. Running a laboratory and doing the podcast doesn't ever really feel like work in the traditional sense. But it's career. It's work. It involves relationships. But it certainly doesn't enhance my fitness except of my vocal chords and recovery. So with those notes there, I would say 4 to 5. ANDY GALPIN: You pick. ANDREW HUBERMAN: 5. ANDY GALPIN: 5, fair. That's the most common number, business 5. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Great. Once again, I'm typical, which makes me happy. ANDY GALPIN: You nailed it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: One of the few ways in which I've been accused of being normal. I pick 5 for business. ANDY GALPIN: No kidding. What's the next highest? And what's that score? ANDREW HUBERMAN: I do invest in relationships. I would say does it have to be around-- can it be-- ANDY GALPIN: It has to be a whole integer. ANDREW HUBERMAN: A whole integer. 2. ANDY GALPIN: 2, all right, we're 7 out of 10 here. So would you say it is fair that you spend roughly 2 and 1/2 percent of your-- it's not necessarily time. It's energy, time, focus, and sort of all of these things-- 2 and 1/2 times as much on your business as you do in your relationships? ANDREW HUBERMAN: It varies, depending on what's going on. It feels a little skewed in the direction of business. So I might want to adjust to a 4 to 3 ratio there. ANDY GALPIN: Maybe not. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But I think I'm going to hold to 5, 2, business, relationships. And then, just for sake of example and because this doesn't seem like an exceedingly precise measure, it can have some slop. ANDY GALPIN: Of course. Where would you put fitness and recovery? ANDREW HUBERMAN: I definitely put energy into fitness. So I'm going to give that also a 2. ANDY GALPIN: Yep, which leaves? ANDREW HUBERMAN: 1 for recovery. ANDY GALPIN: Great. That what you just laid out is, again, the most quintessential split you could have. In fact, you run this game on everyone, they're going to come up with basically the same answer unless they don't work out or whatever. So a couple of rules here. Recovery must be at minimum half of your fitness allocation. In your case, 2 to 1. You're fine. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I think I'm going to say it has to be half. It has to be 5 out of 10 points. ANDY GALPIN: No. ANDREW HUBERMAN: In which case, it doesn't leave much for anything else. ANDY GALPIN: I would like it to be minimum 20% of the total, which means 2 out of 10. Now, when I say recovery, I don't simply mean muscle. I mean you need personal time. You need meditation. You need-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Sleep. ANDY GALPIN: --sleep. You need to go to a concert and get out and see people. And so like whatever the things that give you energy back. Some folks, that's personal time. Some folks, that's social time, whatever that means to you, right? ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, I actually get a lot of energy from my work. And so that's why some of these numbers are a little bit-- you can kind of cloak the underlying dynamics. ANDY GALPIN: So here's what we do from this game. We look at that and we say, if that's our split, Andrew, 5, 3, 2, 1-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: 5, 2, 2, 1. ANDY GALPIN: 5, 2, 2, 1. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'd love to be able to put 3 in relationships just because. But then they need 11 out of-- ANDY GALPIN: Right. So here's the fun game we play. You're currently at this. And you don't get to add to 11. You have to stay at 10. Your 10 is different than my 10 maybe, right? But 10 is 10, or just-- whatever the maximum you can actually do. It's you. So if we went back to our training goal, whatever that goal was for you, and we went back to our defenders, we would look at this score now and say, is 3 out of 10-- fitness is 3, right? ANDREW HUBERMAN: Fitness is 2. So it's 5, 2, 2, 1. ANDY GALPIN: Is 2 out of 10 sufficient to hit that training goal in that time frame you described? And let's say you said, I want to hit a new PR in my mile six months from now. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, for simplicity's sake and also because it's largely true, I'm going to put myself in what I refer to as bin A earlier. My body fat percentage is OK. It's in the range that I would like. But I would like to bring it down a little bit, probably gain a little bit muscle here and there, keep or gain some endurance. And, certainly, certainly, my immediate and long term health are extremely important to me. ANDY GALPIN: Great. So then the question, and the answer maybe yes, that this is the optimal split for you. If it is not, then we have to make a choice. We either alter the goal or the timeline to make it realistic or we alter our quadrant. And then if we're going to alter our quadrant, the next step is critically important. We need a list of very specific life actions that we're going to take that allows that split to happen. So if you said, for example, I want to put three into relationships, great. What specific life actions are you going to take to pull one from fitness-- you can't pull any from recovery or one from business. And you don't have to actually answer. This is-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Too personal. ANDY GALPIN: I know you don't like making these things about you because-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Right, that's the other reason to do it. And it is a diabolical trick to insist that these be whole integers because I would have done like a 4.5 for business and a 2.5 for relationships. But, obviously, you write the rules on this, not me. ANDY GALPIN: So you would just walk that list. And the list could be something like I promise to not work after 7:00 PM Thursday through Sunday or whatever the thing is. I promise I'm going to make sure that I don't start work before 8:00 AM or blah, blah, blah, whatever. No more trips. Just make those things specific and measurable, not just like I'm going to work less. That's never going to go-- what is the very specific life action you're going to take? There's going to be alarm that goes off Tuesday night at 4:00, 5:00 PM. And no matter what we-- at Barbell Shrugged, we used to have a little shirt that was like D3AT, which is like drop everything and train, which means at 3:00 PM in the afternoon, no matter what's happening, we dropped everything and trained because that was like when you start a business and you're going, things just run away from you. And it is just sort of like, man, it's not my company. But those guys are like, we are a strength and conditioning company. And we're not training. So we had to just make this hard rule. And it was just like a little thing that came up. And it was easy to say drop everything and train 3:00. There you go. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I like this drop D, E everything, A and, blank, like it could be drop everything and-- ANDY GALPIN: Correct. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --pick your favorite. ANDY GALPIN: Totally. Drop everything and read. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Pick the relevant-- read, yeah, absolutely. I really miss reading for pleasure. I would put that under recovery and-- ANDY GALPIN: Drop everything and breathe. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Oh, and breathe you are saying. Oh, and breathe. I was saying read. ANDY GALPIN: I said that too. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, because for me, reading is actually is both recovery and relationship. Because oftentimes in my relationships, I've insisted-- not insisted. I certainly didn't insist. We've had a format of reading the same book in parallel. ANDY GALPIN: Oh, great. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, not necessarily side by side but the same book in parallel and then discussing it. It's a wonderful practice or listening to the same audio book. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah, it works well. You can do drop everything and play. You're just going to go do something. You're going to play video games. You're going to go play with your kid. You're going to-- do you want to play with your dog? It doesn't even have to actually be play. But play to you could signify personal time. It doesn't really matter. So, yeah, that's it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I really like this drop everything and blank category that you probably shouldn't have more than what? Two or three of those overall? ANDY GALPIN: Pretty much one to two maybe is where you want to go after that. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So the idea is then to redistribute the numbers on this list but through a very concrete action. And I like this drop everything and blank because it speaks to the non-negotiable aspect of it. ANDY GALPIN: Has to be. Life will get pushed. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's not a fine time to-- it's not in next year I'm going to-- ANDY GALPIN: Correct. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I love it. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah, yeah. When you put those things-- those things, you might as well just don't even put it on your list right. It's not going to happen. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, you're talking to somebody who loves rules. Because when they are non-negotiable rules, they provide this incredible organizing force for the brain. It's really a neuroscience thing in my mind. ANDY GALPIN: Totally. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And, actually, we did an episode on happiness where you find that once people make a decision, if they eliminate the possibility of other decisions, like, literally, the hatch is closed, that is it-- ANDY GALPIN: Burn the boats. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --the rates of subjective happiness, immediate and long term happiness, over time go way, way up. And so I'm convinced that the nervous system doesn't like to keep the valves on these dopamine circuits open. I actually think it diminishes from the reward component. And there are actually some data on this. Anyway, I don't want to take us off track. ANDY GALPIN: The last part of this, what we do then is we take that quadrant. And we take that list. And then you're going to print it physically. And you're going to put it in two places. This could actually be on your phone. You don't have to print it. You can screenshot and be the background of your phone. So every time you click on your phone, you immediately see that quadrant. It's a very clear reminder of like, what are my priorities today? Just a simple little picture. I also like to put it in your place of failure. So for a lot of people, that is like on their laptop or right above their workstation. It's the thing that's going to lose and beat your fitness is your job-- typically. Or it's on your TV, it's on your Netflix control-- no, sorry, Netflix, no offense. But you know what I mean? It's whatever the thing is that you fail for. I play too many video games. Great. I work too much. OK, great. And you put it there. And you put it also-- the last component is-- it has to also be in the hands of somebody who can hold you accountable. Wife, training partner, business partner, whatever. So it's like, hey, Andrew, you promised you were going to do x yourself. Why are you still here? You committed to this. You've got to get out of here. Someone who will be like, no, no. It's drop everything and read. It's 8:00. You're supposed to be reading. You got to go. You're going to check back in on that. Check back again every week. Check back in-- it doesn't matter, every month. And then, you can adjust. That's fine. You can always change the system. But that has to now change. You've got to print a new one. And now it's a whole new promise you've made to yourself. So you've got to be able to hold yourself accountable to those things. It's got to be flexible enough to where it's realistic. It can't be, I'm not going to work after 6:00 every day. Maybe it's just three days a week. Maybe it's, on Saturdays I promise to work for the first two hours so I don't work Saturday night. Or whatever, or the inverse, I'm not going to work Saturday-- you get it. You could come up with a million examples here. So that's the system we use to make sure that we have now properly identified where we're going. We found a roadmap to that. And now we know exactly how we're going to stay on track. I have to take this opportunity to add one more thing to our drop everything list. And you gave the example of DEAR, which is maybe drop everything and read, or drop everything and relax. Or another example, I have to add a DEAL, which is drop everything and-- this is for you, Lex-- love. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Actually, one of the advantages of having a dog or having children is that the drop everything and love is often enforced by the faces of those that you love. They just show up in whatever space you happen to be in. ANDY GALPIN: Especially if you work from home. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'd like to take a brief break to acknowledge our sponsor, Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health and well-being can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. One issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, is that you get information back about various levels of lipids, and hormones, and metabolic factors, et cetera. But you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes knowing what to do with all that information exceedingly easy. They have a personalized platform that lets you see what your specific numbers are, of course, but then also, what sorts of behavioral do's and don'ts, what sorts of nutritional changes, what sorts of supplementation would allow you to bring those levels into the ranges that are optimal for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit InsideTracker.com/Huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Again, that's InsideTracker.com/Huberman to get 20% off. ANDY GALPIN: Let's move on to the next one, shall we? Number three here is going to be what I call calendar or time frame. So it's going back a little bit and saying, you've decided on this goal and you've identified the defenders. Now we need to come up with a realistic time frame for how long it's going to take to accomplish that goal. And when you do that, you need to look at your life schedule. And what I mean by that is do you have important deadlines coming up? Do you have a holiday? Do you have a trip? Do you have travel? Do your children have something coming up? You need to take all that information. And I literally lay out a calendar. And I write all those dates in a physical calendar first. And the reason I'm suggesting this is you want to work your training backwards around that. As we've been discussing, life will win. If you try to plan a training program that is five days a week 90 minutes a day, and all of a sudden, you look two weeks from now and you realize you've got a grant deadline. And then you've got to take two days to go to Austin. It's just foolish. You're going to fail. And then you're going to quit. And you're going to be like, man, again, my training program failed. So you need to figure out what are the non-negotiables are in that business quadrant, and just not be foolish. So let's imagine you're going to plot out, say, a 12-week training phase. And you want to-- you've decided on this goal. And then you look and you realize in the middle of this 12-week span, week five is really hectic and chaotic. Or you realize that this is a quarter in which something important is due. Maybe we want to either adjust the goal. Or what we really do in this step is going on to actually step number four, which is choose the number of days per week you can exercise and the length in terms of amount of time you can truly afford to train. I would rather you underestimate that than overestimate it. So you, again, you look at the calendar. You put all these non-negotiables, the deadlines you cannot move in the calendar. And then you say, look, based on this, realistically, I can conservatively train three days a week for 60 minutes total. And that includes the time I walk into the gym, my warm-up, my down-regulation breathing at the end, and then me getting back either in the shower and back. Because really, now it's maybe 90 minutes by the time you traveled, you transitioned, you picked back up on work, you showered, you ate, et cetera. That time just runs away from you. And all of sudden it was a two and 1/2 hour thing even though it was a 45-minute workout. So you really need to figure that thing out. If you're a few weeks in and you realize, ooh, I actually have a little more time than I thought, you can always train more. You can do another thing. You can add up. But what you don't want to do is set up a program that is requiring you to do certain exercises on one days or certain styles of training on another, and then you constantly miss one of those days. I thought I could do four days a week, but one day a week something's getting pulled out. That's just going to keep you off schedule. It's going to make you feel like a failure. And you're going to run into problems with your training. So schedule three if you're sure you can get three. And if there's an extra day, we can always do other fun stuff. So that's really step three and four. Figure out your life events over the course of this time. How many days a week can you train? And then how long in terms of minutes per workout. Notice, we haven't selected a single exercise yet. We haven't worried about how heavy, rest intervals, all those modifiable variables. You don't need to pick those later. First, where are we going. Second, how are we going to get there, which is the quadrant and identifying of defenders. And then the third is, what are the restrictions I need to place on myself in terms of program design based on how often and how long I can work out. That is going to allow you to go back to some of the previous episodes and go, man, you gave us all kinds of ideas. How do I know which one to choose? This is your answer. You're going to choose based upon the limitations of time and frequency. So if you've already said, we're in-- let's imagine we're in bucket A, or bucket C. It doesn't matter. And you go, look, the most I can afford with where I'm at with what's going on in my life is three days a week. Well, we automatically know we're going to have to start training-- choosing a training style that's limited to three days a week. Don't even worry about the four or five day stuff. Those are off the table. And now we're on-- so we've placed restrictions. It goes back to that concept of I think it's one of your podcast's guests, Jocko. It's just like, hey, structure gives us actually some freedom. So by creating some restrictions here, we're a little more free to go, I only actually have to choose between A and B. Rather than sitting down and going, man, there's all-- I'm 20 hours into this exercise podcast thing. And there's so many options. Which one to pick? Well, you create a little bit of restriction. And now it's easier to go, oh, my only option is A or B. And there we go. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So that's number four. ANDY GALPIN: That's three and four. At that point, once we're good there, now what you want to do us go to step number five, which is actually select your exercises or your movements. And this can be as simple as selecting a kettlebell swing, or running, or swimming. It could be your entire exercise mode. What you want to do with exercise selection here is make sure that you're balancing those exercises across the whole week. Not within necessarily every workout. So if you have four days a week, five days a week, you want to look at the exercise selection and say, OK, I need to have somewhat of a reasonable balance between movement patterns, or muscle groups, or front and back, side to side, however you're thinking of it, just across that week. So again, say we're on a three-day program. And we're in either of the buckets-- any of the buckets, really. And we say, OK, great. Maybe it's not ideal if all I select is cycling every day. That's not a lot of balance. I don't notice anything. There's no upper body work there. There's no torso work. There's no other positions. So maybe I'm going to really focus on cycling. So I will do only cycling two days a week. But that third day I need to pick something for the other movement areas. And that's going to make sure you stay in a reasonable balance. If you have an exercise that you like, great. If you have exercise you have access to. Again, maybe the gym is a giant pain in the ass. And so you can say, look. That's too far away. The closest one is 45 minutes there and back. So maybe I'm going to restrict myself to only kettlebell, and bands, and running, because I can do those in my house. Awesome. We've actually created some freedom because we gave ourselves some restriction. And now we just have to figure out how am I going to give some movement patterns somewhat balanced across my three days. So really, when it comes to exercise choice, it is selecting the patterns that you know how to execute. Giving yourself, again, somewhat of a balance between the muscles, and the joints, and the movement patterns. Making sure that you are specifically targeting any muscle group or movement that you want. So making sure you want to improve muscle size in your glutes, you better make sure some of the exercises you're doing at least one day a week you're feeling in your actual glutes. So you can check that box. It doesn't have to be every exercise. It probably shouldn't. It doesn't even have to be every single day. But make sure it's checked off somewhere on that list. And the last one is, is there a strategy in which you can progress it? So if you're like, I'm just going to do bodyweight exercises. OK, great. Well, how are you going to progress those? In the case of bodyweight, it's really hard to add load. Maybe you can put a weight vest on or something. But then, maybe you don't have that, or that's an extra thing, or that can only go so far. So what's my progression strategy going to be? Well, in this case, maybe you just increase the complexity by going from two legs, like say a bodyweight squat, to a single leg squat, or you just increase repetitions, or you increase time you're going to hold it. My point is, your progression strategy will be based upon the restrictions that you place based on availability and things like that. The last thing I always recommend here in terms of exercise progression, to make sure that you can continue to do these things while lowering your risk of injury, both in the short-term and long-term, is to progress your exercise complexity in this fashion. So make sure, number one, you can do the exercise properly with assistance. So let's imagine a scenario where we're going to try to squat. So give yourself-- put your hands on a bench or something like that. Now, can you execute that squat perfectly with assistance? So you're holding onto something. Great. If you can't, then don't progress past that. Don't go now to a barbell back squat if you can't do it correctly when you have assistance. But let's assume most people can do that. OK, great. Now you can move on to the next step, which is can you do it well without assistance. So this would be bodyweight only. Check, cool. We're good there. Now you can go ahead and move on. Can you do it well with an added e-centric load? So in this particular case, if we're learning a squat, we can do it well when I hold on to something, that's great. Now I can do it well with just my bodyweight. Now if I put a little bit of weight on, whether it's a kettlebell in the front like a goblet squat, or dumbbells to the side, or whatever you want to do, can I lower it and go all the way down and stay in perfect position? If you can do that, great. You're allowed to go to the next step, which is can you hold it isometrically. So can you go all the way down and then hold that bottom position? What you don't want to do is start adding load, or speed, or fatigue if you're going down to the bottom position of the movement and you are out of control. We really want to avoid this. So I want you to show me you can go down and you can lower the weight under control. You can hold it in that position under control. If we're clear there, now we can add the concentric portion. You can now go ahead, you can lower it, you can hold that position of most danger, and now you can move up at whatever speed we want. We are all good there. Once you can show me those things, you can add the last two steps which are now speed-- if you choose to-- and the last one, which is fatigue. I would really discourage people from doing exercises to fatigue, especially with a moderate or high load, unless you can promise me you can do these first six steps. If you can, you can basically go hog wild with your training, and your chances of injury are very low. Again, both acute injury, as well as long-term injury, which is just sort of like my joints ache, and all of a sudden my shoulder hurts, and things like that. That's really what I'm looking for. And once you're clear there, you can train pretty hard. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I really like this. Because, recently, I was showing somebody how to use a-- in this case, it was a hack squat machine. I notice they were very timid of getting into a deep squat position. And they cited a previous knee injury, which has long since healed. ANDY GALPIN: Right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But even with proper foot placement and everything, you just tell, they were getting ginger about it as they approached that bottom position. But over time, with pauses at the bottom, they've become very comfortable. And now actually are going well below 90 degrees angle between femur and lower leg. ANDY GALPIN: Excellent. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So it was clear that it wasn't something range of motion limited or it was just-- it was a mental thing, but a logical one for them. Now, after what you just said, I think a better strategy that I could have used would have been to have them get into that position, just no weight at all, maybe nothing on the sled, and then slowly working up from there as opposed to doing what we did in our case, which was to just convince them that they were much stronger than they thought they were. We eventually got there. But I'm realizing that there was far too much mental anguish involved in that process. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. This whole progression, by the way, this can all happen in one session. If you can check the boxes. In that example, you may have been fine to jump there. It may have just been a, hey, you're fine here. Get through it. Oh, OK. This whole progression might take two years. I mean, this really depends on your background, if you actually have injury history, your comfort, your confidence, all these things. So you don't need to worry about rushing through that progression. You don't even need to get all the way to the end if you don't want, especially with speed and things like that. But again, it can happen. It doesn't have to be like, well, it's a month of this, a month-- well, no. If they feel great and you can go through one to seven in five minutes, then you're good to go. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Number six. ANDY GALPIN: Number six now is just order. So you know how many days per week you're going to work out. You know how long they're going to take. You've selected all the exercises you need to get done. You've balanced that across the week. Now you just need to put them in order. And the easy answer here is generally do what's most important first in the workout. There is some minor interference effect of some other things there. But the reality of it is, if you do the priority first, you're probably going to be OK. So whether this priority is a muscle group. So in the example, you want to make sure your glutes get trained. Maybe do it first. If you're trying to maximize your back squat, you may not want to do a bunch of glute exercises to fatigue first. But that's not the priority we picked. We picked a different one, which is buckets A, B, and C. OK, great. By doing it first, you told me the priority was to make sure I do something for my glutes. And then I would also like to get my back squat a little bit stronger or whatever. Fine. The same thing could be done for your endurance training. You could do your endurance training before your lifting if you understand that that means you might be compromising your lifting quality of the workout a little bit. But you might be fine with that if you say the endurance work is more important right now. Amazing. You don't know the answer to that though if you hadn't gone through steps one through four. And that's why those things are critical. So it makes what we call chaos management, which is things happen in the moment. I don't know what to do. What should I choose? That decision becomes really clear because you can always go back to the beginning of my priority was this. Then therefore, that's my choice today. So it provides a very simple set of instructions for when the workout gets cut short, when your workout has to be in a hotel, and any number of things that pop up in real life, whether, again, you're an athlete or non-athlete. Either way, life will get in the way at some point. So you need to have rules and a system that says, when this happens, I go right back to this. And that's my choice. Done. I'm moving on. No decision to make here. It's already been determined a week ago, five weeks ago. We're often rolling. So the order, again, is pretty simple. Just put the one that is most important first. Now, I know you like to do legs on Monday. That's great. I actually love that too. I do the same thing generally, because to me, that's almost always the most important thing. If I miss a bicep workout, I'm probably fine. But I really don't like missing the big movement pattern. So I make sure that those happen on a day that tend to be more stable for me. Mondays are generally pretty stable. Things get chaotic as the week moves along for me. Others might be the opposite. Others might want to go, hey, I'm actually going to keep Monday as my flexible day or off day because I like to get a lot of my work done, get that cleared so I can have-- oh, sure. Work it around you. Some people love to train on Saturdays because it's their most free, some people hate it. Sure. You tell me, what is the biggest priority, and what are you the most fresh? Monday, Tuesday, it doesn't matter. It depends on your work schedule. Maybe you work the weekends. I don't know. You decide what day of the week are you generally the most consistent, the most consistent schedule, and the most consistent energy. And do the thing that is most important on that day. It doesn't matter Monday, Tuesday, day one, day three. We were sort of talking about this earlier. But you actually don't even have to do a week schedule. Our brains tend to like to go year, month, week. But a lot of folks will even just run this thing in terms of a seven or nine-day schedule. In fact, we ran a nine-day training schedule for one of my Major League Baseball players. And he's eight or so years into his career. And he's hitting all-time PRs in velocity. And he's very, very good. And it was a nine-day training cycle. And we ran that for the entire season. So it doesn't have to be a seven-day split. But it tends to work for a lot of people because most people have a fairly consistent schedule across the seven days. So pick the thing that is most important and do it first, and do it on the day of the week that is most consistent for you in terms of schedule and energy. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I really like what you're describing. I should just say that one of the reasons I put legs on Monday is because I tend to get enough sleep on the weekends. I generally get enough sleep during the middle of the week. But oftentimes, things will come up. I can be pretty sure, however, that I've, quote unquote, caught up on my sleep on the weekends. This notion of catching up on sleep is a little dicey scientifically. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But I tend to be pretty rested by Monday morning. ANDY GALPIN: Right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And actually, my week begins on Sunday. And Sundays are when I get my long form cardio. ANDY GALPIN: There you go. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So those two are really non-negotiable. And the reason that long form cardio is on Sunday is that it can take many different forms. It can take a hike with a weighted vest. It can take the form of a jog. It can be done with other people. It can be family time. It can be time with friends and so on. And that's pretty hard to do during the middle of the week or pretty hard to ensure, at least for me. I also find that by bookending the week with some non-negotiable days of training on Sunday, Monday, then if the week gets busy Tuesday, Wednesday or even sometimes Thursday with travel and things like that, one can catch up toward the weekend. It's not ideal. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I mean, ideally, it's spaced out. But really, this isn't about what I do. This is really just to underscore the principle you described, which is, I have a very clear sense now over three decades or so of training and three decades or so of being involved in academics, and science, and work, of when I tend to be most rested, when I tend to have some flexibility in my schedule. And also, when I'm trying to combine fitness with some of my social engagements, which is actually quite fun. One thing I note is that the four boxes that you mentioned before, work, relationships, fitness, and recovery. Some of them do have some crossover. ANDY GALPIN: They all do. ANDREW HUBERMAN: A hike with family or friends is both relationship and fitness, and so on. But I love the principle. Because anything that can add consistency, as you pointed it out, is going to greatly increase the probability of reaching one's goals. That's sort of an obvious one. But in an earlier episode you also said something that I wrote down and is really still ringing in my mind, especially now, which is that consistency always beats intensity. ANDY GALPIN: Correct. Yeah, absolutely. We used to do a thing-- when I was training NFL players for the combine many years ago-- where Saturdays were supposed to be the day they came in and we did the most regeneration. So this is when they get body work done. And we do hot cold contrast and sort of all these things. And our attendance was like 1%. Nobody showed up. ANDREW HUBERMAN: For a massage? ANDY GALPIN: Nobody showed up. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Wow. I'm surprised. ANDY GALPIN: Seems right. But remember-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: I love a good massage. ANDY GALPIN: Of course. But remember, you're 18 years old. You're likely to be getting millions of dollars handed to you in the next few weeks or months. And-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: He's not referring to me, by the way. ANDY GALPIN: No, no. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'm actually quite a bit older than 18. [LAUGHS] And I'm not getting handed millions of dollars each week. ANDY GALPIN: Right. So I would think that. But those folks, they recover super fast. They've never really had that. And also, Friday night, kind of enticing. And so, nothing was there. And the strategy then was, what if we instead of having a important hard training day on Saturday we transition and it is only things they want to do. So we basically identified, what are the things in training you love the most, and let's do those Saturdays. And it turns out for those folks, no surprise here, it was what we call the gun show. So they would come into the gym. And we would literally do nothing but biceps and triceps. They'd just get a pump. And then the deal was though, you come in-- and literally, it would come in is, we would pick three guys. Say you, you, and you. You pick your favorite bicep exercise. You pick your favorite one. You pick your favorite one. You three over there, you pick your favorite tricep, tricep, tricep. And we just run a big circuit. Like this is, how many reps? I don't know. I don't care. How many sets? I don't even care. Just pump away. I don't even care. We chose small muscle groups. Not really going to interfere with much. We're training them for the NFL combine, which is-- it's not a-- it's a legs performance, basically. So it's like, if they smash their biceps and triceps on a Saturday, it's not going to influence what we did on Monday. So recovery wasn't an issue. Once we finish the gun show though, now you have to go do your regen stuff. So if you need chiro work, you need physical therapy, whatever you're going to do. So we would get them in the building with the low-hanging fruit. And then we would actually get them to do their work. You can do the same thing. And I honestly do the same thing. I tend to do either-- if I'm going to do an upper or lower split, I'm going to do that stuff either Friday night or Saturday. Because it's very difficult for me to do a hard long workout Friday night or even Friday morning for that matter. The same thing Saturday. I wake up. And now it's like, it's family mode. It's kid things. I want to do stuff. I want-- man. But I can usually convince myself to be like, all right, just go in there and go 20 minutes and get your upper body stuff done. All right. I can walk myself into that mentally. It's harder to walk yourself into your five sets of five Deadlift. It's sort of just like, whoa, I ain't got that in me right now. My high intensity intervals, the max stuff, I don't have that right now. So I'll either go for my long steady state stuff, which is like, I'm going on the bike. I'm riding down to the beach, or coming back, nasal only, I can get myself to go for a bike ride, whatever. So I picked the thing that I'm likely to do on the days where I'm probably going to be my weakest, quote unquote. Not physically, but motivation-wise. For a long time I try to-- it just got stuck in a way where my harder stuff was Friday nights. And I'm just like, why am I doing this? I was having like a 50% success rate. Just like we were having a no percent success rate with the NFL guys on Saturday. So you have to be a little bit tough. You have to grind sometimes. You have to get some motivation and go after it. But you also have to be like, well, this is just stupid planning. Why put yourself in a position where you're just failing over, and over, and over, when I could move it and go, look, those sessions are going to be things that are easier. They don't require as much gusto to get up and get them done. I get those things done 90% of the time. Because the worst case I can be like, all right, we're going to go do a family thing. Give me 20 minutes. I'm just going to run up there and smash upper body. And you don't need-- I need a 20 minute warm-up. [LAUGHS] It's like, I can just jump into those things if I had to. If I feel great, then I can still go do something else, or I could do more, I could do a longer session. But you're sort of immune to any situation. So I would book-end those, I guess, is what I'm saying. What's the day you're going to have the best day, and what's the day you generally have the worst? And put the programs around those situations. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. I love the idea of identifying the friction points, the high friction and low friction days. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Friction meaning anything that impedes you from training consistently or well. And there are so many factors that ratchet into that-- sleep, other social engagements, work. Friday night, I also find it tough to do any kind of training. I do cardiovascular training. I do interval type training on Fridays typically. But there's a lot of cumulative fatigue and stress that happens across the week. ANDY GALPIN: Right on. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And usually, for a long time, gosh, more than a decade now, I've been telling myself that Saturday is the day that I try to reduce my cortisol as much as possible from the week. ANDY GALPIN: There you go. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And then Sunday is the day that I enjoy that low cortisol state. And that's actually what opened up into the long, slow run. ANDY GALPIN: Amazing. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I actually like to think of myself as a bit of a mule during those long runs. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I actually have a shirt that has a sloth on it that I wear to remind myself to go slowly on those runs. Not that I ever run that fast. But there's the whole mindset around it is to be a bit of a mule, just kind of moving through it. And the fatigue factor is more one of at first there's just a little bit of boredom. But then, I've noticed, there's a whole different set of mental scapes that open up under different training types. And this is maybe something we get into a little bit in a future episode or discussion. When you train really intensely for short periods of time one way, your mind goes into a particular state. When you do long duration training, you're thinking and indeed even the way it affects sleep patterns is also very different. I think one of the great futures for neuroscience and exercise science in collaboration is to identify how different patterns of physical movement relate to different patterns of thinking and vice versa. ANDY GALPIN: Amazing. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Anyway, something maybe to just earmark for a future conversation. But there's clearly a relationship there. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. Well, when we certainly know of a pretty clear relationship between even what we would classify as zone five exercise and deep sleep. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So a zone five again being you're breathing a lot through your mouth because you have to in order to bring in enough oxygen to offset the acidity created by-- [LAUGHTER] ANDY GALPIN: The carbon. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Exactly. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. This is the high heart rate. So I mean, if you're going to look at it and hit a number, looking for something like 30-plus minutes a week being in the top 10% of your heart rate. ANDREW HUBERMAN: That impacts deep sleep. ANDY GALPIN: Is going to positively impact deep sleep, as long as it's done very far away from deep sleep. So you don't want to do that at night. So you want-- in terms of time. So if you hit those numbers earlier in the day, oftentimes that will enhance deep sleep. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, I was looking at some papers recently. And the number that emerged from those papers was that unless it's low intensity exercise, trying to exercise about six hours or more away from your sleep time would be ideal. ANDY GALPIN: Bingo. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Now, that said, for those of you that have to hit the gym or go for a run in the evening and then are trying to fall asleep four to six hours later, I wouldn't want that statement to impede your regular exercising. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. there's an easy trick to that. Just finish it with down-regulation breathing. So that's one of our things, that if you-- because that is a realistic situation. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Right. Finish work at 5:00, or even 6:00, and then by the time you're training or running or whatever you want to call it, it's a 7:30, 8:00, you're home at 9:00. You're eating, and then everyone's like, you can't eat two hours before bed. Pretty soon you run into a number of different collision points that make you wonder whether or not you're doing everything wrong or if it's really worth training at all. ANDY GALPIN: 100%. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Now, I would argue it's better to train than not to train. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But provided that you can still get to sleep. ANDY GALPIN: 100%. So you have to walk a little bit of a game. We run into this issue with the NBA players. You're playing games at 6:00 at night that start. Major League Baseball is a 7:05, 7:10 pitch, right? ANDREW HUBERMAN: That's right. ANDY GALPIN: And also, by the way, we're changing time zones every five days. UFC fighters and such, were usually training twice a day. There is no option to train, or I mean, we are training twice a day always. So we have to come up with strategies for that. And there's other non-athlete scenarios, of course, where it's like, there is no other option here. Cool. So what we do is a couple of things. Number one, the further away you can make it from sleep, the better if possible. We do need to train, though, around the same time you're going to be playing. That has to happen. So the harder and longer we go in the training session, the harder and longer we go in our down-regulation post-exercise. And that is, in my estimation, the number one lever you can pull that can help. Now, if it really does start crushing sleep, you're going to have to make a critical decision there. In general, it's not a good reason to not exercise. But maybe you restrict to only a couple of days a week you go all the way up in intensity. And the rest of the days maybe 70%, you stay in this kind of a working zone. Awesome. Maybe it's a longer down-regulation. Maybe there's other strategies you can do. But yeah. You want to be careful of-- and we've had this situation a number of times where it's just sleep complaints, sleep complaints, sleep complaints. We run full sleep studies on them in their house. We do the whole thing with absolute rest. We come in. We do the whole thing eye tracking, biomarkers, the whole thing. And it's like, oh, you just need to stop doing intervals at 8:00 PM. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And I would add to that, another incentive for being able to train with or without caffeine is that it's very clear that even if you can fall asleep after ingesting caffeine in the preceding hours that caffeine consumed in the, gosh, even 12 but really eight to 10 hours, four hours prior to bedtime really disrupts the architecture of sleep. So if you critically rely on caffeine in order to train, whatever your training might be, and you know that sleep is important for recovery, well, then it's pretty obvious where I'm going with this. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So having that flexibility is vitally important. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. You've probably also covered this. But you can actually measure that directly. So by eye tracking patterns, you can actually identify the effects that caffeine has on sleep independent of sleep time or not. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Right. There are never positive effects. ANDY GALPIN: Correct. ANDREW HUBERMAN: That said, I am a proponent of caffeine early in the day. And caffeine does have a lot of-- well, it's anti-neurodegenerative. As long as you're not getting anxiety, it's pro-performance, both mental and physical performance. But, of course, if you do not need caffeine, if you're one of these mutants that do not need caffeine in order to go about your daily living with focus and intensity, then, by all means, don't start taking caffeine. ANDY GALPIN: I'm not the hugest fan. I am scientifically. 100% or more. Personally, it does-- I don't do well on it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Well, you seem to ride a little bit more what we would call a sympathetic tone, shifted towards more alert. I tend to be naturally a bit more like my bulldog Costello was, a little bit more on the mellow sleepy side. And caffeine just puts me right at that alert but calm place. And I can get away with drinking it-- I wouldn't say a ridiculous, but a fair amount of caffeine and remain there. But I do restrict it until the time right up about 2:00 PM at the latest is really when I were trying to drink caffeine. Number seven. ANDY GALPIN: Great. So number seven and eight are pretty simple. This is now choose the intensity and the volume. So we've discussed those at length in the previous episodes. We probably don't have the time to go back over all those details. So remember the adaptation you're training for and pick the appropriate rep range, total amount of sets, as well as the intensity to then get the corresponding adaptation. All you have to do is select those things. In terms of progression through a week, the rule of thumb we say for intensity is something around three 3% per week. For volume, it will depend on what you're doing a little bit, but any time you cross more than 10% per week, you're going to start running into problems. So I like 5% better. It doesn't need to be as low as three. You can jump up much more than that. 5% to 7% is better. So if you are doing, say, running, because the numbers make it easy, and you're doing 10 miles per week total. And if you were to go up to 11 miles the next week, great. You're right around 10%. But what you wouldn't want to do is say, I'm running 10 miles this week. And I did maybe four Monday, three Wednesday, three Friday. So four, three, and three, you got your 10. Then you wouldn't want to add a mile every day. So Monday, instead of doing four, I did five. Wednesday instead of doing three I did four. Friday instead of doing three I did four. What you actually did is you went from 10 to 13, which is a much higher jump than the 10% prescribed. So the same thing would be true for lifting weights. The same thing is actually true for calories and trying to add them, et cetera. So the body tends to not handle those things as well jumping more than 10% per week. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So keeping with this idea of increasing progressive overload, being 10% more over some period of time, am I correct in assuming that I want to identify one, maybe two meaningful variables and progressing that or those variables? ANDY GALPIN: So progressive overload can come in the form of any of the modifiable variables. So you could increase the complexity of the movement. You could increase the intensity or the load. You can increase the volume by either more sets, more reps, or more total exercises in a day. ANDREW HUBERMAN: What about time under tension? ANDY GALPIN: You can also manipulate how-- the tempo of each repetition. You can also manipulate how many times per day you train. So you can manipulate frequency. You can also manipulate rest intervals. So you can progressively load any of these things. Increase intensity. Run a little bit faster. Complete the same amount of work slightly faster. Put 5% more on the barbell, or the load, or the handle, or whatever you going to do. That's the simple way. If you want to think about volume, in the case of endurance work is simple-- mileage, time, whatever. In the case of lifting, all you have to do is take the amount of repetitions you're doing per set, multiply it by the sets, add that all up. So if you're doing three sets of 10, that's 30 repetitions. If you did three exercises, you just did 90 repetitions. Put that number down for Monday. Put that number down for Wednesday. Put that number down for Friday. Add that total up. So say you did 90, 90, 90. You would look and say, my total number of repetitions this week is 270. If I want to go up 5%, then I need to go up another 15 or so total repetitions. Great that's all we have to do. That's the increase. You may keep the load exactly the same, keep the exercises the same, change nothing else. But you want to add 15 more total reps for your week. And you may choose to do that by adding one more repetition per set. Close enough. So last week I did three sets of 10. This week I'm going to three sets of 11. It can be as simple as that. Again, it can be complex. I walked you through-- it can be any of the modifiable variables. But the progression I just laid out is fairly simple, and it's honestly the one I recommend for most people, just because it will avoid confusion and it will avoid people taking massive leaps in volume. So the typical strategy I would recommend here is increasing load or intensity, or a little bit of a combination, slowly for about six or so weeks and then taking what we generally call a de-load. So back down to maybe 70%. Whatever that number is you've been doing. So you did three sets of 10 and you worked yourself all the way up to three sets of 15. Back that down and maybe we'll do two sets of eight for the week. And then we'll come back the following week and go back and do the highest we've done. Now we're all of a sudden we're going to do four sets of 12 or something like that. So if you get these little de-loads every-- depending on what you're doing, four weeks or so-- you should be in a spot where you can continually progress for a very long time without either burning out or overloading, and over-stressing, and injury pattern. So the simple way, pick intensity or volume. And just go up slightly every week for a short span of time, generally around six weeks. And then you come back and change your strategy if you'd like. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Because you mentioned sets and repetitions here, I just wanted to remind folks that in the episode that we did on strength and hypertrophy-- and that also included speed-- there was a description of a terrific program for strength, which is the three by five program, or three to five program, as it's called, which is to select three to five exercises performed for three to five repetitions three to five times per week with three to five minutes rest in between those exercises. ANDY GALPIN: For three to five sets. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And if I recall correctly, the protocol for generating hypertrophy, muscle growth, is to perform a minimum of 10 and probably more like 15 to 20 sets per muscle group per week. And that can be done in a single session per muscle per week. So one could train, for instance, quadriceps one day per week, as long as you're getting that volume of sets per week. Or it could be divided up across two or three different sessions for that individual muscle group. Of course, people are going to target all their major muscle groups and hopefully some of the minor muscle groups as well. And as I recall, the number of repetitions that can generate hypertrophy is quite broad, anywhere from six repetitions all the way up to 30 repetitions. But by the end of the set, it should be to failure or close to failure with good form. Is that correct? ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. And we would say, close to failure is probably most appropriate. You can actually reach failure maybe on a few of the sets, maybe the end. And probably best to choose that with the exercises that are safer, not that any exercise is particularly unsafe if you do it appropriately. But you may not want to go to true failure on every set for the more complex, larger, riskier exercises. So hedge pretty close to failure, but not all the way. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And I realized I forgot to mention rest intervals between sets. It follows that if a large range of repetitions are performed that a large range of rest intervals are allowed, meaning that there could be rest intervals between sets of as low as 30 seconds between sets or as high of two or three minutes, depending on the loads that one is using. And that, of course, will scale with the number of repetitions. ANDY GALPIN: Excellent. In fact, that leads me into step number nine of designing your own training program, which is you've decided on a goal. We've worked our calendar out. We've figured out how many days per week and how long we're going to work out in those sessions. We then went and selected our exercises. We balance them across the movement patterns and the muscle groups that we need so we're not causing excessive stress on the same exact joint or muscle group over time. We then ordered our exercises based on priority. Because of that, we've identified our goal. We went back and we selected the volume, which is the repetitions per set, the total amount of sets, and the load per set that matched the goal that we wanted to get or the adaptation. Now, all we have to do is fill in the rest intervals, which reflect back, again, the goal. So generally higher rest intervals, which means time that you rest between your sets. Higher somewhere between two to five minutes for things like speed, power, and strength. Perhaps a little bit lower, although as you mentioned, it could also stay high for hypertrophy. And then for endurance, you follow the rest interval that reflects the type of endurance training that you'd like to get. That's walked us through one through nine. We're almost done. We've put together a pretty nice little protocol. It should be well rounded. It should be effective. We've also talked about how to progress it from week to week, keeping it within, again, four to six weeks, maybe up to eight before we then take a back-off. The very last thing we have to do to make sure this training program is customized to you, your goal, and your situation, which is then going to enhance your likelihood of adherence and consistency, as well as increase the likelihood of effectiveness is, we just have to do a little bit of what we call chaos management. Which is take a quick moment to think through, this program looks great. But if I had to nitpick it, where are the possible chances of failure? And you just want to think about where would I predict things would go wrong? And if anything pops out to you. Try to come up with your solution at the beginning. And this could be a number of things. So maybe you've picked an exercise and you realize, man, I really actually don't like that exercise. Or maybe you look at the schedule now that it's laid out in front of you. You look at your work schedule. And you're like, ah, maybe that's a bit aggressive. I don't know. It could be any number of things. But it is a useful exercise to just think through everything realistically. I typically just-- it's the adage I teach my graduate students-- before we hit Submit, we're going to sleep. So it's there. It's ready. We're going to take 12 hours. We're going to wake up the next day and look at it again and go, are we sure we're good here? Yep. Make adjustments if you need. If not, if you feel confident, then hit send and cross your fingers. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. We were referring to submitting the manuscript. It's interesting you say that. I have a statement that I always make to people in my lab. They hit Submit, and they always say that you realize you're going to wake up tomorrow morning. There's going to be an email in your inbox that something was formatted incorrectly and you're going to spend tomorrow reformatting and submitting again. So I've also learned that every project is actually two projects-- ANDY GALPIN: I'm sorry. I'm trying to not die over here and interrupt you. [LAUGHS] It's true. You have no-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. It's true. I've done this enough times. I've done this many dozens of times. And then there's also another truism of science which is that there's the project, there's the scientific question. And then the paper is yet another project. And I actually think this is an analogy that carries over to other domains of life. I think that any time we take on something, if we want to write a book, or we want to get a degree, or we want to do a fitness program, I think it's worth thinking about those decisions as actually to taking on two major things. Because one is the planning and organization around that thing. And the other is the actual performance of the thing. ANDY GALPIN: Wonderful. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And so, I say that, because here what you just described, this 10 steps to consider in designing a program, I think some people who are real list makers and love the precision and the thoroughness-- and I'm one of these people-- thinking, this is great. I just want to check off each one of these things on the list and figure out the ideal program for me for a given period of time et cetera. And then other folks might be thinking, well, that's a lot. That's just a lot to do. But what I know with certainty is that performing those sorts of, let's just call them what they are, those tasks of figuring out what's what, where the defenders are, et cetera, without question makes everything go so much more smoothly once you are into the actual performance, the action of doing the exercise program, or the book, or the podcast, or whatever it is that you happen to do. So I'm grateful that you brought up both the things that act as conduits for getting good work done and this notion of defenders and bottlenecks. Because we don't consider those, I would argue that it's a very low probability that anyone will succeed. But when one does consider those, even just a few of them, I think the probability of success goes way, way up immediately. ANDY GALPIN: That's actually a very good point. That is a lot of work for a lot of people. And I know when I'm consuming information, it is helpful to hear structure, and systems, and design. It's also helpful to hear actual real-life examples. So maybe the next thing we can do here is I can just walk you through an entire setup and a program considering folks that are in bucket A, B, and C. And maybe I'll save a little bit of the explanation. And we'll eliminate maybe some background. And I'll just walk you through what this could look like. All right. So I created a program which should run about a year. And the idea here is that this could be an evergreen system. So one could check off all the boxes that we've talked about. So in general we want to have three primary goals with exercise. We want to look a certain way, whatever that means to you. We want to be able to perform a certain way, whether that's for life goals, like hiking and energy, or sport goals, or whatever. And then we want to be able to do that across our lifespan. So a program that gives you all the goals we talked about, and a program that covers that health combine that we referred to way back in some of our earlier discussions, which as a little bit of a recap is, what are the physical fitness parameters that we know are critical to maintaining both lifespan and wellness span? And as a bit of a reminder, those are things like your grip strength, your leg strength, your total amount of muscle mass, your actual speed and power so that you can catch yourself from a fall, your VO2 max, and your physical fitness. So I want a program that does a little bit of all that. It's similar, actually, and we're kind of crossing barriers between our three buckets. So I need to be able to control my fat. I need to be able to have enough muscle. That muscle needs to have enough function. And I need to be able to maintain range of motion so that I don't lose flexibility and get hurt. And then I need to have a good VO2 max as well as to be able to sustain energy over time. So that was the goal of my progress. Now, a couple of other things that we haven't chatted about, which are very important. You have mentioned, I think, on a previous podcast about the importance of seeing light? Is this something you've covered at one point or another? ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. I joked that I'll be going into the grave and they'll be shoveling dirt onto me and I'll be telling people what I'll tell you again now, which is to get five to 30 minutes of sunlight viewing as early in the day as possible, ideally from sunlight. But that's why it's called sunlight. Or from bright lights of another kind if you cannot get sunlight. And also get that in the evening. And then avoid bright lights between the hours of 10:00 PM and 4:00 AM, unless you do shift work, in which case, check out our episode on shift work. ANDY GALPIN: [LAUGHS] Amazing. So we've got a little bit of a juxtaposition where people are like, I need to work out and do all this training. But then I'm also supposed to be outside. How do I blend those two things into my training program? Cool. So I checked that box as well. I built that in. The last thing here is we've talked about structured exercise. And just in this episode, we've really opened up and do non-structured exercise-- hiking, sports, things like that. Well, one thing that is incredibly clear-- and my colleague and friend, Tommy Wood, at the University of Washington, published a fantastic paper very recently on the importance of proprioception in maintaining and staving off late onset dementia and Parkinson's. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Maybe just to remind people what proprioception is. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah, absolutely. So there's structured exercise. And that's very important. But then there's also things like balance, and coordination. And proprioception meaning you're adjusting to stimuli coming in from the outside world. So this stimuli could be sound. It could be light. It could be smell. Or in the physical case of the body, it is where you are at in space. So I'm feeling like I'm falling to the left. Therefore, I need to correct and move back to the right. So you don't get this with doing things like a hack squat on a machine. You get this typically from being outside. So now you're smelling and seeing things. And you're also not landing with your foot in the exact same position on an even platform. We get this from things like sport. Now I'm not only exercising, but I'm reacting to the outside world. The ball is going over here, my opponent's going over there. So it's very important, in my opinion, to have at least one session per week of exercise in which you are doing something that challenges proprioception. So how do I fold all of these best practices into one training program that's not 200 hours a week seven days a week? That's what I've laid out to you. Make sense? ANDREW HUBERMAN: Makes sense. ANDY GALPIN: Cool. Let me walk you through it. And then, maybe we'll come back into each individual category and you can ask questions about them. So the way that I think is best is to have a goal. And have that goal be around eight to 10 weeks long, like we've been talking about. So what I gave you is, let's start off with quarter number one of the year. So perhaps January through March or so-- and it doesn't have to be this long, but just as an example. You decide your goal is going to be to put some muscle mass on. So we're going to prioritize adding muscle. Now, within that, you're going to be bulking up, adding some muscle, but we're also going to be sleeping more. We know we need extra recovery in this session. And we need to go up in calories. Now, this happens to work nice for a couple of reasons. But in that protocol, maybe we're going to do seven days or seven sessions a week of physical activity. Doesn't mean seven days. But maybe those sessions are something like I will do one indoor sport. This could be basketball, could be any number of things. So I got my sport ticked off, and it's indoors. Why? I'm in January to March. The weather's probably not great for most of the world. So I'm not going to do as much outside activity. I'm going to do weights maybe three or four times a week, and then maybe two days a week I'll go for a long walk. Again, we'll come back and I'll explain to you why I made all these individual choices so you're going to run that for the first quarter. At the end of this quarter you're going to take a de-load week. Now, this could be fully off. Maybe this is when you schedule a vacation. Maybe this is backing off. Maybe you just keep your walks in and you spend the extra time on your family, or work, or whatever else we need to do. So we've bulked up a little bit. We spent 12 weeks adding some mass. Now we're going to transition into quarter two, which is where we start to actually get lean. This is actually a pretty standard bodybuilding template, which is put on some mass first, and then you get lean after that. So now we're going to get lean from April to June. We're going to bring calories down a little bit. So now we're actually going to play in a hypocaloric caloric state somewhat. The days tend to get longer. So we're going to have more time to spend in the sun. So we're going to shift a little bit from an indoor sport activity, like the example I said earlier was basketball, to maybe stand-up paddleboarding, or some other thing where you're actually getting your sport done, you're reacting, you're using proprioception, but now you're getting that sun in there as well because you have a greater opportunity to actually do so, and the weather probably is going to cooperate with you more often than it would in, say, February. You then maybe going to pick a fitness or an exercise class. Any number of routines where you're with multiple people. And then, two days a week in addition to that, you're going to maybe lift some weights. So now, we've added some muscle. Now we've got lean. And all of a sudden, we're actually looking pretty good for the summertime. Hmm. Interesting. Quarter three, July to September, we'll transition, and we'll try to get into great cardiovascular shape. So we'll transition more into some high intensity interval type of stuff more frequently. We're going to maybe stay at maintenance calories now. We spend a little bit of time hyper, then we went hypo, and now we're going to go back to maintenance and keep along. We're going to continue to choose some outdoor sports, but maybe you change it up. Maybe you keep the same one. Maybe now we switch it out on the golf, or now we pick a pickleball, or we play basketball, but now we just do it outside. Any number of things you can do. So maybe even we do a couple. Change it up. You do that twice a week. You're spending more time in the sun now. You're looking outside and you're seeing this great weather and you're not cooped up in a gym but you're getting your physical fitness in. That's also going to be aiding in your high intensity or your interval, your conditioning, because you're doing more stuff like that rather than lifting in a gym. And then, maybe you're actually going to do some track workouts. Maybe we'll do this on a bike, or we'll do some hill sprints outside, any number of things. And then we'll do that maybe twice a week. And then we'll still lift weights twice a week in our gym. The last quarter then is going to be October to December. And we're going to transition there into more pure cardiovascular fitness. Because we're doing that, we're going to be working harder. And remember, cardiovascular training is generally expelling much more calories than lifting. So we're going to actually go up in calories. We're going to return to that. And that works out kind of well, because I don't know if or not, but people tend to eat a little more calories from the months of, say, November through December. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, holidays, and at least in northern hemisphere, colder temperatures. ANDY GALPIN: Totally. Maybe even we play with two workouts a day here. We're trying to get really in shape. We're trying to improve our conditioning and our endurance in multiple areas. We're going to actually transition back into an indoor sport. So maybe we're going to do some kickboxing, or a jiu jitsu class, or something like that. We're going to maybe hit the cardio machine once or twice. Now we're hopping on a StairMaster, a VersaClimber, more maybe get an assault bike going, something like that. Maybe hit some machines and do our lifting there. Maybe we spent the rest of the earlier part of the year on barbells and dumbbells. We'll transition to some machines. And then we'll still try to get outside and walk twice a week. And that gets us our outside activity, but it's not necessarily a structured program. So we've got 15 minutes where the weather's breaking a little bit. So let's walk, get outside, and get a walk in. So that's the overall structure of everything. I would like to actually go back to the beginning now and walk through each one of these things in detail and explain why I chose certain things. I've kind of given some hints already. But I think it'd be helpful to walk back to the beginning and start there. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Great. I of the overall structure. I have just a couple of questions. The idea of training mostly for hypertrophy January through March makes sense. Followed by a period from April through June focusing primarily on fat loss. And then from July to September, speed and interval type work. And then October to December, you put to emphasize endurance type training. I thought for a moment that when we got to October, December, you were going to emphasize strength. And I'm wondering whether or not there's any incentive for training for strength October, December, so that when one arrives at the hypertrophy training January through March, we're that much stronger. The idea being then there's more muscle to hold on to as one then tries to lose fat from April through June. And then July through September is the speed work. Or is July through September the speed slash power phase of the program? ANDY GALPIN: The July through September would be more like your higher heart rate, learning to get all the way up, maximum exertion, and then recovering. ANDREW HUBERMAN: An October to December is long-form endurance? ANDY GALPIN: Moderate to long-form. So it's closer to that aerobic capacity stuff. It is closer to longer duration and moving through that spectrum. You are astute in pointing out that I didn't have pure strength really in there. You certainly could fold it in. But quite literally, if you spent three months bulking up in January to March, that's going to bring some strength along the way. So you should be fine there. But you absolutely could alter any of these variables if you want to emphasize something more than other one. So say you actually felt like you ran through the fitness testing. And you identified, actually, your endurance is pretty good. But you're struggling maybe with a little bit of strength and maybe a little bit of lower muscle mass. You could substitute quarter three or quarter four and say, one of those quarters will be strength. And then I'll do all of my conditioning in another quarter. And what you've really done is the programming is still fairly simple. You've just altered the priorities a little bit. And therefore, you've altered the adaptation across the year. And why this is really important, this template is meant to be something you can just run back year after year after year. And you make a subtle change like that. And now, over the course of five, 10, 20 years, you're going to be in a fantastic spot at the end. So you can make easy adjustments along the way as priorities pop up, as goals pop up. But you're going to be in a position where everything is-- there's nothing that's going to be lagging behind. You'll be in a good spot. Most of your bases are covered to be pretty lean, have a good amount of muscle, and to be in great shape. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Two other questions. One just a quick question. For sake of generating proprioceptive feedback-- during the endurance phase, is trail-running a good option? ANDY GALPIN: Absolutely. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Great. Thinking back to the days running cross-country. It's October, December, you're trail-running. ANDY GALPIN: Totally. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Training for endurance. ANDY GALPIN: The ground is not super solid, which is even better in this case. So you're making more choices and trying to not fall on your face. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Absolutely. And then you mentioned bulking up. And I just wanted to highlight that there are some folks, myself included, while I'd like to add a little bit of muscle here or there, I'm not interested in overeating to the point where I lay down a lot of body fat stores along with that. ANDY GALPIN: Sure. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And I think a lot of people out there are not necessarily interested in, quote unquote, bulking up. I also-- my understanding of the literature-- and tell me if I'm wrong-- is that while there does need to be some sort of caloric surplus above what is required to maintain body weight in order to build muscle, that many people who try and, quote unquote, bulk up basically just end up expanding the size of their cheeks and face along with their limbs and torso. [LAUGHS] ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'm not trying to poke fun at them. But the idea of deliberately overeating to the point where a lot of body fat stores come along, I would imagine that would just make the April through June phase that much harder. ANDY GALPIN: Correct. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And I'm not sure it's ever been studied directly. But I can't imagine it's all that-- excuse me, all that healthy, to bring along a lot of adipose tissue in one's pursuit of hypertrophy. ANDY GALPIN: You're absolutely correct. We have not gotten into the nutritional details there. But yeah, thank you. Good clarification point. A couple of things. You're not going to be doing this very long. It's 12 weeks. We're not going to be six, seven, or eight months. ANDREW HUBERMAN: You haven't seen me eat. [LAUGHTER] ANDY GALPIN: Number two, just since we're here to clarify, the literature is ongoing in this area. And there's actually a handful of studies that I know are coming soon. But in general, when I say hypercaloric here, I'm referring to an increasing caloric intake above baseline by something like 10% to 15%. So if you normally eat 2,500 calories throughout the day, you might add another 250 to 400. I'm not doubling calories. I don't want you to be stuffing your face, hating food, feeling awful all day, and then putting on half of your weight as fat and half your weight as muscle. It is just technically hypercaloric because you're eating more, which is an absolute requirement for most people to add muscle. Some folks who have a high percentage of body fat and a low level of fitness training can actually get away with just being either isocaloric, technically, or even a little bit lower, and still adding some muscle while losing some fat. But for most folks, that's going to be challenging. So you're going to want to be in a hypercaloric state. Another reason I put it in here is because, remember, people tend to make these extra calorie choices during this part of the year anyways. And so, you're playing into life is why I chose that. It's like, hey, you can't restrict calories all the time. It's really, really hard. So maybe if we can put it calorie restriction during the phases of the year that's a little bit easier, and give you the freedom to have a little bit more calories during the phase of the year when you're probably going to want to do that anyways. Just make sure you're doing a style of training that supports that. So you're going to be trying to add muscle when you know you're going to be adding more calories. We're going to be trying to really push the pace on our conditioning when we know we're going to be eating more calories anyways. And so, that is actually, in fact, exactly why I chose those goals for those times of the year. It's because we're now playing into life a little bit more. But we, again, certainly do not want to be eating to an excess or where it's causing some of the problems you mentioned. We just need to be eating a little bit more. The last point here is, the next phase, April to June, we know we're going hypocaloric. So it's always kind of nice to go, yeah, we're going to go in a little bit of a calorie deficit here. But it's really just these few months. And it's OK, because I spent the last six months where I wasn't restricting that much, and then one actually where I got to eat a little bit more. And now, cool, not hard for me to convince somebody that to go we're going to bring the calories down right now, or in a month, in two months. And it's just going to be this 12 or 16-week phase, or whatever you end up being in there. So those were some of the rationale that I was thinking of when I decided to do that. But thank you. That's a very important point in terms of the hypocaloric. It's not the dirty bulk. It's not the excess that a lot of folks will do. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And just a final point for folks in the Southern hemisphere, Australia, and South Americans. ANDY GALPIN: Ah, flip everything. ANDREW HUBERMAN: We actually have a large listenership in the Southern hemisphere. Of course, adjust accordingly. Even though the holiday months are still in November, December, there are, of course, holidays all year long. ANDY GALPIN: Of course. You got Fourth of July. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Many, many of the major holidays are around November, December. But it's summer down there. Just adjust accordingly. There's nothing holy about trying to achieve certain adaptations at certain times of year. It's more about trying to eliminate bottlenecks, defenders, as you mentioned. And it's really about the sequence. ANDY GALPIN: So if we go back to that first quarter, we're going to try to add some mass, for the reasons I just described. It's also tends to be pretty motivating. You're going to start the year off. You're going to want to train and get all excited because of your New Year's resolution. And you're going to see results immediately. We've talked about this in some of the previous episodes. The nice part about hypertrophy training is you see your muscles growing right now. Where the endurance stuff tends to have a little bit more of a delayed gratification. So I'm going to give you a win early. Now, we're also going to be sleeping more. Because we know-- and maybe we'll get into this in a future episode-- that sleep is absolutely critical to recovery and critical to growing muscle mass. So you're going to emphasize sleep more during this part of the year also because the sun is very low. It's harder to sleep for a lot of folks longer when the sun is out for longer, especially if you don't have a perfect blackout curtain. And so, you're just trying to play with the restrictions life gives you and optimize your scenario. So the sun's probably not out very often. And especially, depending on where you live, if you're anywhere like where I grew up in the Pacific Northwest, [LAUGHS] it's going to be dark, and gray, and gloomy most of the day. So it's not hard to convince you to go sleep a little bit more often. So we'll do that. That's also, again, why I chose an indoor sport. That activity, you're going to not shoot yourself in the foot. Being in the gym when it's cold and crappy outside is not that hard to convince yourself to do. So you're going to be lifting your weights, say, four times a week. And then, again, getting some outside time in the form of a walk so that you can do it in the middle of work if you have to, or catching 20 minutes here or there, whatever it needs to be. The chances of you missing that walk are little. And you'll still get some outside time. You've talked about the importance of getting sunlight in even if it is overcast. So you can still nail all those boxes and be in a pretty good spot at the end of that quarter. So moving on to quarter two then, April to June. A lot of people want to look good during the summer months. You're more likely to be outside. You're more likely to have your shirt off because it's hot, because you're either on vacation, or going to the beach. So let's play into that a little bit. Let's let people look a little bit better, if that's what they determine to be looking better, during the months when they're more likely to have that. You're also more likely to have things like weddings over the summertime. People don't get married often in the winter. And so, people want to look good for these events. So let's play into what a lot of people already want. And let's help you get leaner. Not a lot of holidays that involve eating during that phase. And so, you're not going to feel like you're missing out on a ton of life outside of maybe a few smaller holidays in that phase. The days are getting longer. And so, we're going to choose to get in the sun more often. We can start getting a tan better. We can start getting ready for summer. And so, that's is why we exchanged our indoor sport for an outdoor sport-- surfing, hiking, cycling outside, whatever the thing is you want to do. There's tons of them. Kiteboarding, like I said, skateboarding-- there you go. Get out and start skating a little bit, whatever it needs to be. So we'll do that once a week or so. And then I actually threw in a fitness class here. And there's a couple of reasons. One, now it's sort of nice to take the pressure programming off. It's also nice to, if you've been lifting by yourself, to get in there and lift with somebody else. It's also nice to now have some social interaction. The gamification, the group, the scoring stuff that happens in fitness classes is very, very powerful. It tends to be somewhat fleeting. So it won't last for a long time, for some people, others it does. And so, if you pepper this thing in and you know you're going to join this activity class, even if it's not great and the program design isn't perfect, it's fine for 10 weeks. In fact, you may really, really enjoy it. And also, again, it gives you something new to think about. Music is on. You're out of your house if you're lifting at your house. You're in a different part of the gym. The schedule is a little tighter. So you can't just go work out whenever you want. You've got to show up when the class is going. And you'll probably find that you just love it. You also get some social interaction, which is something that's also very important that we haven't really discussed yet, if you're out playing basketball by yourself or whatnot. So this is just another thing I'm trying to fold in that still allows you to check off multiple boxes of things that are healthy for you. You've had episodes on the importance of social connection interaction. We talked about that in the quad breakdown of making sure you have relationship time and things like that. So throwing in a fitness class and just doing, honestly, something quite different is pretty fun. But then, still, keeping two days a week where you're doing a traditional strength training thing so you have some quality control there. Lastly, you can also then make sure you're hitting any specific movements or muscle groups that are very important to you. So you don't get to control that in your fitness class. But now you can at least do the gym and make sure you hit that muscle group that you have an interest in it. So now we're feeling pretty good. We're rolling into the summer. We're pretty lean. We're getting out in the sun a lot. We're bringing calories down a little bit. And we probably are feeling pretty happy. We're also not burnt out. We've done a lot of fun things. And we've checked a lot of the boxes off for long-term development. We had a combination of specificity with exercise selection. But we also folded in just a little bit of variation so we don't have to worry about overuse injury of doing the same machines, the same lift, months, and months, and months, after months, and slowly wearing down something if our technique isn't perfect. So now we're going to go into our quarter three, which is the summer months, basically, up here at least, July to September. We'll transition. It's been a while since we've done some conditioning. So we may have lost a little cardiorespiratory fitness. We may have-- not feeling great anymore, maybe energy throughout the day stuff is starting to leak down. So we're going to get in shape. We're going to push our heart rate high. And we're going to bring the calories back up. The summertime, 4th of July, other holidays like this where eating is involved, maybe you're going to sporting events and things like that. Our sport choices is often going to be outdoors. But in fact, what you'll notice here is, is I've ramped the sport choice up to twice a week. And in fact, I would encourage you to do two different types of exercise. And one of the primary reasons for that is to spend more time outside. A challenge we often see with people with exercises going, man, it's so nice outside. I can't go sit in the gym for 45 minutes. I don't have that much free time. And then, Huberman's over here telling me I need to get direct sunlight more. How am I going to fit this in? Well, do your exercise outside. Enjoy it. Now, if you live down here like us, you take sunshine for granted. But a lot of people I know it's like, it's only nice for two and 1/2 months of the year. Get outside. So let's push more of our fitness training to outdoor activities. These sports can be intense or not. It could be go out there and swim hard. Get in the ocean. You're going to do open ocean swimming instead of swimming in the pool indoors, or whatever the case may be. So we're going to give ourselves more of a priority of being outside, looking-- we've looked pretty good. We're a little tan. And we're enjoying all the benefits of training outside and the lack of structure. Still, we have structured, but not so specific like the machines and the weights give us. Maybe even now we're doing some track workouts. So now we can do something like sprint the straightaways, walk the corners. And we don't have to, again, do our conditioning on the same StairMaster, or machine, or whatever we're on. So we're going to enjoy some stuff like that. We're going to be athletic. We're going to run. We're going to move. We haven't talked about that yet. Everything has really been about structured exercise. Well, now we're going to do some sprint work. We're going to get out and see that, which is a really important human quality that, I think, is important to not lose, is actually ability to sprint. So we'll do that. And then we'll still make sure we lift twice a week for the same reasons I talked about in the previous phase. So we make sure we have some quality control there. We maintain some of the muscle that we built in the quarter before. We don't lose too much strength. There is very good literature to suggest strength maintenance can be done in as little as five sets per week for a very long time, really up to eight-plus weeks if you do a little bit. So you're touching it enough where you're not going to get really, really weak. But what you wouldn't want to do is go 12 or 16 weeks where you lifted no weights. And maybe you got in great shape, but you're going to feel very weak after that. So maybe that number could come down to one time a week if you really wanted it to. But one to two days a week where you're lifting the big exercises, the muscle groups and movements of interest, and you're good to go. Then, lastly, we roll into our final quarter, which is October to December. And we're going to really get in great shape. The sun is starting to come down. We're rolling into the holidays. Weather's getting worse. We may have other outdoor activities we want to do, like, in my case, you're going on a hunting trip, you have some travel, conferences, whatever the case may be. And so, we're going to choose an indoor sport. And I love combat sports. So the example I gave earlier was jujitsu. Or maybe you just transition your basketball to inside, or your pickleball comes inside, or whatever it happens to be. And you're still going to have that twice a week. And then, maybe instead of the track workout outside, you do that same workout indoors, now back on some sort of machine or something like that. Our weights are actually now down to once a week because we're really pushing the pace on cardiovascular. We're doing once a week to maintain it, to not lose, and get too far behind. But we really want to bring up our VO2 max. We want to bring up our efficiency, our cardiac output, and everything like that. And we're still going to now walk twice a week so that we get something outside. And I talked about why, again, it's nice to have that flexibility of not having to train outside, because now you got to warm up and do all those things. We just get out and get a walk in. You still get the outdoor experience. So we run through that entire thing. And then you just start back the next year. Ideally, again, at the end of every quarter, you take a week off. Whether that is a true full week off, which I'm fully supportive. I mean, friends, we're only talking about four off weeks a year. That's absolutely fine. Or it could even be a slight de-load week if you want it to be. So we shouldn't run into too many issues of overuse. We have a lot of variety. We get a lot of movement patterns in because we're mixing in sport with machines and dumbbells. We're mixing in social interaction. We're mixing in the sun. We're mixing in enjoyment. We're mixing in fat loss, strength, hypertrophy, some cardiovascular endurance. We're mixing in calories in high, we're mixing a little bit of calories low. And we're trying to hit as many of these nodes as possible. If you also wanted to cut each one of these a little bit short and repeat your fitness testing at the end of every quarter, you could. I would probably recommend doing it at least once a year. Perhaps doing it maybe the third week of December or so. So you run that testing. That's your last week of training. Then you get to go on your vacation break. You come back at the beginning of the year. You've got new goals, new targets and you go. If you want to repeat it twice a year, do the same sort of thing at the end of June. It's fine. I know I laid these out as quarters, which is generally 12 weeks, with one back-off week. But if you wanted to make it nine weeks and a testing week, and then a back-off, or 10 weeks, it's fine. It's close enough. So the last little thing I want to say is, let's assume you're doing the 12 weeks. And you're going to have a back-off week at the end of the 12 weeks. I would actually still then recommend having at least one back-off week halfway through. So it would look like this. Five weeks hard where you're progressing. You're going up, up, up, up, up. Every week you're either increasing volume intensity like we talked about a few minutes ago. Then week six, de-load. Go down to 70% volume intensity. Come back. Go hard for five more weeks. And now, week 12 is your true off week where you, again, take the whole thing off. If you do that, you now have four weeks a year where you're totally off. You have four weeks a year where you're really backing down. And you just have five-week segments all year round where you're just going to push it hard for five weeks. You're going to get a break. You're going to reset, and you're going to transition a little bit. Now, as I started this conversation off with, there are many ways you could structure your training program throughout the year and hit those primary goals we talked about of looking fantastic, feeling amazing, and being able to do that your entire life. All I can tell you, though, is I know this model works. Because we've done this a lot with our clients in our rapid health optimization program. And this spans everything from 25-year-old folks who are competing in the Boston Marathon to a lot of individuals who have never exercised before, who maybe have done a little bit of exercise. In fact, it's quite literally all three of the buckets you laid out. We've had clients in all of those areas, both men and women, young and old. And we've had a tremendous amount of success transforming their lives using a very similar model to what I just laid out. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I find that overall structure to be immensely informative. And I'll tell you why in the context of a number of examples with myself, although that's the least important of them, frankly, but examples of family members of mine and friends of mine who've undertaken consistent exercise training programs but that haven't varied the program so much. And here, again, I think of the person who really loves to swim. They have a low barrier of entry to the pool or to the ocean. They love being in the water. I am not one such person. I like being in the water, but I don't motivate to drive to the pool or to bike to the pool or to get into the ocean that often. Once I do it, I enjoy it. But for me it's running and lifting weights. And it has been for a very long time. I have a family member, close family member, who doesn't really like, quote unquote, exercise, but loves dance and dancing. Going out dancing, yes, but dance classes in particular. ANDY GALPIN: Amazing. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Really enjoys it. Loves to be distracted from the fact that she's doing exercise and just really enjoys it. And actually is a very good dancer despite the fact that she's related to me. And on and on. There are many examples, I think, of folks that fall into the different bins that we talked about earlier but that also tend to default towards a given structure of training one way and doing that throughout the year. I can tell you right now that I'm personally going to modify my schedule according to this four quarters per year. It actually works because I've mostly been on the quarter system in academics for a very long time. I was at a university that had a semester system once. But this quarter system is actually the one that we follow academically. So that's one reason why it's a natural fit for me. I confess that I typically don't vary up the proportions of endurance to resistance training. I tend to keep those about three and three across the week. Three resistance training sessions, three, let's call them cardio sessions. But each one designed to achieve a different adaptation. And I've now altered those even further based on your recommendations in this episode and previous episodes. But what I have not done is to really think about de-load and to really stick to the structure that I set out to accomplish across the year. On the topic of de-load, for me, the de-load has been when I get overwhelmed with work, or I've gotten sick. I don't tend to get sick that often. But every once in a while I get knocked back with a cold or a flu. Once every three or four years I seem to really get hammered with a fever-inducing something or other. And then I'm bedridden for a couple of days. And then I'm back at it. And I tend to come back rather slowly. And that tends to be my week off. But I'm beginning to wonder whether or not part of the reason I hit those streaks of being overwhelmed by sickness or by stress is that I have not done a de-load period. So one of the things that I'm going to immediately implement is a periodic de-load according to the program that you described. And I'm also going to start matching my specific goals for each quarter with time of year. I don't think I've done that. And it's not because I live in California. And by the way, folks, there are temperature variations and amount of light across the day variations in California as well, although they are not as dramatic as they would be near the North Pole, for instance. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. They're pretty moderate. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Right. But of course, some of the listeners are at the equator. So they have the opposite issue. In any event, I'm definitely going to do that. I'm going to start incorporating regular de-load periods. And I am going to be very dedicated, very disciplined about sticking to a program for three months devoted mainly to hypertrophy, then a three-month program devoted to fat loss, then a program devoted to aerobic output, and then one devoted to endurance. Although I must say, it's very tempting for me to do a very specific strength-dedicated portion. ANDY GALPIN: Sure. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Because I don't tend to be particularly strong. I'm not weak, but I'm not particularly strong. So I might consult with you as to how I could vary endurance and strength. In any event, I love the idea of a macro-structure. And I love the idea of de-loads in anticipation of being able to go further in the long-run in terms of results. I'm hoping this next year, because we're just on the cusp of a new year, will be the first year in which I don't find myself getting some bug, or virus, or whatever it happens to be from time to time and having to back off on training for that reason. And that prompts a question. And it's something that I want to get into in more detail with you when you describe recovery-- an upcoming episode. But a couple of quick questions. Maybe there are some short or short-ish answers you could provide. If I'm not feeling well, like I really had a poor night's sleep. Maybe just two to four hours of sleep for whatever reason. Train or don't train? That's the first question. Second question is, if I'm starting to feel a little bit of a throat tickle, and I'm in that phase of denial, like I don't get sick, I'm not getting sick. And would I be better off bundling up some hot liquids, getting into bed, sleeping in a little bit more, et cetera, and protecting myself against that, or would I be better off training? And if I've-- and then the third question is-- if I've already succumbed to a bug, but it's not a severe bug. I don't have elevated body temperature. So no fever. I'm not hacking up, not productive cough or anything like that. But I'm feeling just kind of not well, head cold-ish sort of thing comes to mind, and it's not seasonal allergies, train or don't train, leaving aside the point of whether or not I'm in a position to get anyone else sick. Because obviously that's a bad idea. ANDY GALPIN: Of course. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So lack of sleep, I would say, 30% to 40% of one's typical sleep the previous night, train or no train? Starting to feel like one might be getting ill. And then the third category is coming back from being sick. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Thanks. And sorry for the extended question, but I want to make sure there was enough detail there, because I think these are three common scenarios. ANDY GALPIN: We are going to cover that in the recovery conversation that's next in detail. And I will give you very specific guidelines. And we'll have plenty of time to go into that. The quick answer is, it comes back to what phase of training you're in. Now, to walk through each scenario. If it is a crummy night of sleep, and I am in a phase of training in which we are trying to cause adaptation, I have a lot of space in my schedule, and I'm really using this time to make progress because I know coming up soon my schedule will change and my time to train will go down. I'm still training. I might use a bunch of tricks that we have for feeling better instantaneously. We call these little hacks. These are acute hacks. These are not chronic hacks. I'm going to push the pace. If it is really close to a de-load week. Say it's Wednesday and I start my de-load next week. Or this is not one bad night of sleep, this has been four bad nights of sleep in the last five days. This has been six kind of crummy nights over the course of the last nine, and you're starting to see a larger pattern, then that's a different answer. So the question we're going to ask ourselves is, is this acute? Or is this a tendency, or actually a chronic thing? If it's acute, and we're close, we're going to train through it. If it's acute and this is not a phase of training when we're trying to really push, then maybe we back off a little bit. If it's the opposite though, we need to probably make some changes and give ourselves some recovery. This may include anything from a moderate training session, maybe I'm going to go in the sauna and sit through that, and then do some breathing drills and some mobility stuff. Great. Maybe I'm going to go to the gym and ride the bike at 50% heart rate. Something restorative like that. Gives you a little bit of energy but doesn't beat you down. That's probably where we're learning. If you're feeling sick and you think it's coming, I'm probably going to do option two as well, which is some sort of restorative training. So again, this tends to be moderate. Could be weights. Could be any of the stuff. Maybe you're going to go out for your swim or whatever. But we're not going to push past probably about 70%. We can absolutely induce immunosuppression with excessive training. And so, you may want to walk out of that. The last case, which was, I think, phase number three, you said there, which is, I got a pretty gnarly cold right now. Am I going to train? Most of the time for most people, I'm just going to say, just shut it down. Get out of there. If you're not going to be able to get productivity done there, you may be better off either going and sleeping, catching up on work doing other stuff. So that the next time you go to train you don't feel behind and we can give a good solid effort for it. I Know other people who will train right through it. I tend to not, to be totally frank. If I'm feeling kind of junky, I'm really not going to train. I may actually probably do some hot water immersion. So bath, Jacuzzi, things like that. I actually like those better than I like sauna. ANDREW HUBERMAN: If one is ill? Or you just like them better than the sauna generally? ANDY GALPIN: Oh, both, actually. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Oh my. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: First person I've ever met or come on this podcast to say you like baths and Jacuzzi more than sauna. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah, absolutely. I may even do some ice. Probably not a ton though. Because you've got to be careful there. That's a big stressor. And if you're already over the line, you may be adding a pass there. Or I may go sleep. If I'm feeling very, very, very sleepy, and sometimes depending on what kind of a bug you get, that can happen. I will just sleep. And that might be the best choice you have. If that means you kick the cold half a day earlier, then you just won in the aggregate. So those are probably-- it's a little bit of insight of the algorithm that I'm running with those things. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Those are highly informative answers. Thank you. And I look forward to our discussion about recovery so that we can go into even more depth on how to recover. ANDY GALPIN: The last thing I do want to say here is going back to our quarter system. The examples I gave with the bulking up, losing fat, and then getting into better fitness and cardiovascular fitness at the end, those were just samples. Friends, please don't take that literally. If you want to emphasize strength more, put in some more strength. If you want to emphasize a different one of our nine adaptations, great. Do that too. If you're somebody who has a lot of body fat to lose, then maybe put that for two consecutive sessions, or every other. You can modify them. We've talked about nine very specific training adaptations as well as in fat loss. I only gave you four, which is just meant to be a sample that you can roll in or out. But use those priorities to adjust that system according to what is important for you now, five years, and then 45 years down the line for whatever that may be. So you are absolutely free to modify the order. You're absolutely free to modify the primary outcome. And then, adjust the specifics within each quarter based upon what is needed to do to optimize that outcome. I think maybe one more tool we can offer people is maybe giving the individual week a little bit more structure. So the system I laid out is month by month. And maybe we can lay out, say, a three-day a week workout program and a four-day a week program. That would still hit some of the same well-rounded adaptations. That probably covers maybe not individualized per bucket that we've talked about. A, B, and C, but it's going to cover 75%, 80% of what we'll need to occur in all three buckets. And then, you can use that last 25% for your individual goal or specialization. So maybe we can jump into that next. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Great. Let's hear it. ANDY GALPIN: The first one I want to give you is just a basic three-day split. That, again, same idea. It's a well-rounded exercise program. I actually wrote this all in an article that is on XPT's website. So perhaps we can link directly to that. I will just jump you straight to the answer. You can read more about why and details in that article if you'd like. But this is day one, day two, day three. You could do these days where you split them up, actually having, say, 24 hours in between, or you could do these back to back. It doesn't necessarily matter. In this particular case, say, day one you would start off and do a little bit of speed and power. And then you may finish that with a little bit of hypertrophy. Now, if you want to gain more speed and power you just do more of it. If you want to maybe just do a little bit to touch it, and you really want to gain some muscle, you would do more of an emphasis there. So the template can stay the same, and you would just increase the amount of either adaptation, the speed and power stuff, or the hypertrophy, based on how high it is in your priority list. Those are combined together because, as we talked about earlier, they don't necessarily interfere with each other. You would do the speed and power stuff first because it wouldn't hamper the hypertrophy. If you did the hypertrophy first in that workout, it would probably compromise your speed and power. And in that case, you would actually not be getting your adaptation. So day one you do that. And that could be a 20-minute workout total, or a two and 1/2 hour, up to you. Then you would come back maybe the next day or two days later, whatever you'd like to do. In your second day of exercise, you would start off with a pure strength protocol. And you would finish that with what I'm calling just a higher heart rate. So this could be something like our anaerobic capacity stuff. It could be the aerobic capacity, something where you're getting up to close to high heart rate. It could be those 20-second bursts. It could be a 90-second burst, five-minute mile repeats, anything you like. You can just plug and play this in. You're getting to a spot now where you've had a little bit of speed, a little bit of strength, a little bit of hypertrophy, and you've touched the high heart rate. So we've checked off most of the boxes already in two sessions. Our last session then would be more of a steady state long duration endurance. And so, a three-day week split like that is going to be a pretty nice setup for the average person. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So this could be a Monday, Wednesday, Friday, Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday. What's happening on the intervening days? ANDY GALPIN: Totally off if you want it to be. So I set this up as the best I can give you, Andy, is three days. Great. If you have more, we could certainly improve it. But this was my worst case scenario. I've got other things in my life. The most I could do for exercise is three days a week. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And given that it's three days per week, how long-- approximately how long each of these workouts going to last? ANDY GALPIN: I would do a whole body exercises for almost all that. I would do your full body parts. And I think you could certainly finish that in 45 minutes of work time. A little bit of time to warm up, some down-regulation at the end. You could be in and out of that gym in certainly under 60 minutes. The reality of it is you could probably be out of there in under 50 minutes. The total work time could be 30, 35 once you get going. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So that's three days. As you pointed out, probably more work per week is going to be better in terms of maximizing goals of aesthetic goals, and performance-enhancing goals, and longevity goals. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I mean, the numbers that I've heard is that we should all try to get somewhere between 150 and probably more like 180 to 200 minutes of zone two cardio per week minimum. But as I recall, you consider zone two cardio so low intensity that just walking around qualifies as really zone one, zone two cardio. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. Not to take us too far off track. But I think it's actually useful to differentiate what I consider to be exercise and physical activity. So physical activity is out for a walk. It is using a walking treadmill while you're at work. It is parking farther in the parking lot and taking more steps. These are all important. And what's clear, you are not going to reach, likely, optimal health by only exercising hard and then sitting around the other 23 and 1/2 hours of the day. So it's very, very important. Whether you want to do that in the form of zone one or zone two and hit 30 minutes a day. Various organizations will say things like that. You need to have 30 minutes a day of moderate to low-intensity exercise. I don't really care. You can combine it like that if you want. What you don't want to do is just physical activity only, which is almost always going to be like zone one to maybe zone two. You also don't want to go the other end of the spectrum, which is, again, I lift hard three days a week. And then what to do you do the rest of the time? Nothing. That's not optimal either. And so, I guess the system I walked you through here-- or the example, rather, I walked you through is-- you would need to maybe supplant that with being physically active. If you work, say you're a nurse, and you're on your feet. You're moving up and down. You're probably actually covering a decent amount of your physical activity because you might be at 15,000 steps a day. If you're sitting in front of your computer and you do this same three-day split, you would probably need to go out of your way to make sure you're adding a bunch more steps. And so, you might need to add several hours of walking to hit that 150, 180 minutes a week of physical activity. Because the program I laid out is, if you're doing, really, 45 minutes three-days a week, maybe 60 minutes, at best you've hit 180. 60 minutes times three, 180 a week. So you might actually need to then throw in maybe some more specific walks. So you could do that in a number of ways. It could be, again, actual structured exercise. It could be simply I'm going to do a 10-minute walk three times a day. It could be the exercise snacks that we talked about in a previous episode. So there's lots of ways to engage in more physical activity. But to me, those are different, oftentimes, than structured exercise. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I think many people will appreciate that you put out there for us a three-day-a-week protocol, because many people simply don't have more time to exercise. They're putting emphasis on these other bins in the quadrant. And frankly, those other bins are very important as well. So wonderful that people can check off some critical boxes for aesthetics, and performance, and longevity with three days of work or workouts, per week, I should say. What are some other schedules that people can follow if they're willing to dedicate a bit more time toward their fitness? ANDY GALPIN: Sure. If you wanted to do another sample of maybe a four-day week. And again, to clarify this, I'm really happy you said that. This is a four-day a week of structured exercise. This would not account your physical activity and moving around. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Which everybody should be doing. ANDY GALPIN: Absolutely. Maybe this is something like day one you're going to do a strength-training session, and you'll stay in the five to 10 or so repetition range. A little bit of strength, a little bit of hypertrophy, you've checked off a couple of boxes. Probably whole body, so that you get all the body parts covered or close. We're looking at generally multi-joint exercises. Could be combination of barbells, free-weights, bands, machines, anything like that would be day one. You could come back the very next day, or you could wait 24 hours. But the second day of your exercise would be maybe your long duration. And this is actually sort of similar to how you set it up. It's you do a little bit of the inverse. But what you're kind of saying is, I'm probably going to be a little bit sore from day one. And I don't have any free body parts that aren't sore. So instead of trying to do another lift or something, I'm just going to put in some restorative longer duration stuff-- same exact principles for long duration we just talked about. It could be a swim. It could be any number of things. Could be your sport. It could be you're out, ride the bike and go for a jog in the sun, whatever you would like to do. If you're feeling better, maybe that's a little harder longer. If you're feeling pretty beat up from the day before, maybe that's a little bit shorter and slower. You can modify it. Then maybe you take the next day off. Or that's open. Your third day of exercise is now, instead of being that five to 10 repetition range for your lift, you do something like 11 to 30 reps range. Also, this could be exchanged for something more like body weight, more muscular endurance type of stuff. So this is a great day, maybe it's yoga. Maybe it is a gymnastics thing you're working on, or any of the many other styles of training that are not quote unquote lifting weights. But they're not just walking and hiking. So it could be a Pilates, or equivalent, anything like this where you're going to get some muscular burn in there. But it's probably not any additional weight outside of body weight, or if it is, it's fairly minimal, five, 10, 15 pounds, something like that would be nice. Could also be done in a circuit. So we could hit our high heart rate and we could hit some muscular endurance in there. Group activity class might be nice here. Even maybe something like a spin class or a dance class. All these things could be great. And then, maybe you even finish that with 10 minutes of some light weights to hit the body part you say didn't get. So maybe you did the dance class. And then you finish and you do 10 minutes of upper body sets of 30 to make sure you get a nice pump there, because your legs probably got some work during the dance class, but your upper body didn't. And so you balance the system out a little bit. So all body parts got a little bit of muscular endurance. Your heart rate got really high, came back down, and you checked both of those boxes. Now, it's important to remember the hypertrophy episode. Doing sets of, say, 15-plus repetitions per set is as effective as doing sets of five to 10 or 12 for hypertrophy-- gaining muscle. It's not effective though for strength gains. So you wouldn't want to do this only, because you'd really be doing nothing to improve your muscle strength. And you want to make sure that that box is ticked at least a little bit. Then, again, you could take the day off after this. Or you could roll right into your fourth exercise day, which would be your last exercise session of the week. And you would do something more of a medium intensity. So this is a little bit higher intensity than our second day. And this could be something like shadowboxing, or hitting a heavy bag. It could be a little bit of higher intensity intervals, but not all the way up. So maybe this is you're going to do a one minute on, one minute off on the bike. But you're only going to go to 85%, 90% heart rate. And then, instead of going off during that one minute, you drop it down to 50%. So we would actually look like 30 minutes of straight work, but you would have a little bit of rolling intensity as opposed to staying really nice and restorative. It's going to be some work there. And you would finish it with something like five to six minutes total of max heart rate stuff. Which lines up perfectly with that number you actually [LAUGHS] created on our endurance episode of hitting six minutes total per week of maximum heart rate or close. So you could wrap that all up into one session. You could do those in the inverse order, thorough warm-up, a few minutes, whether you want to do 30-second bursts or a minute burst, or straight five minutes. This is a protocol I like to use a ton on the assault bike. It is simply a good warm-up, 10 minutes solid warm-up. Recover, and then I'm going to go five minutes and cover as much distance as I can in five minutes. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Brutal. ANDY GALPIN: It is brutal. And it's amazing. And you get a lot done in five minutes. 10 minutes on the back of that is a very gradual bring back to Earth there. I actually, in that case, I don't need to do down-regulation breathing, because I've spent 10 minutes actually coming way back down. And the last two minutes or so of that is very deliberate, five-second inhale through the nose, five-second exhale through the nose while I'm barely just moving. And you end up being in a pretty good spot. So that, again, time-wise could easily be done in 30 minutes. And you'd be rounded off there. So the nice part about this four day a week split as well as a three day a week split is it does give you a little bit of flexibility. And so, what I mean is, maybe Monday your plan is to do the day one lift. And then, any number of things popped up in life. Just shift it back to Tuesday. Rather than saying Monday is leg day and then all of a sudden, something happened, you miss leg day. It's just you're doing these things in order. And you would like to get all four done in a seven-day span. But if it doesn't happen, fine. The next day you get to work out, you just go right back into the next workout. And it doesn't matter what day they land on exactly. For the three-day routine, that works very nice, because the assumption there is you really only have time for three workouts a week. And so, that's sort of implicit is there's probably some chaos happening in the schedule a little bit. And you don't really have the ability to lock in three days per week. If that's not the case, you can go. But we're trying to listen to the pain points that people have with exercise and see if we can give them some solutions for those. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Several things about this program are attractive to me. One of them you just mentioned, which is that by not rigidly attaching individual workouts to specific days of the week, one, in theory, could say, OK, it was-- I didn't get that much sleep last night. I don't feel-- I know that a lot of people say, what is feel? But I don't feel recovered, or like I'm going to get that much out of the workout tomorrow. So I'm-- or today-- so I'm just going to push it forward a day. And the ability to slide workouts forward or back by day I think is incredibly valuable for the consistency's sake. I also really like this idea of some of the long duration work coming a day after hitting the strength and a bit of hypertrophy work. So this would be the day two. One thing that I've experienced over and over is that if I'm very sore in a given muscle group, especially my legs, doing some low intensity cardio, whether or not it's a jog, or on the bike, typically for me it's a jog, or even skipping rope and walking does seem to dissipate the soreness. I'm sure there's a mechanism-- there has to-- there's a mechanism for everything, frankly. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But I like that arrangement. And then, I also like this idea of making sure that there's a workout for muscular endurance. Because I feel like unless I've been stuck without a good gym, or I've decided to specifically train bodyweight exercise, which I did a few years ago, I got really excited about some of Pavel Tsatsouline's work. ANDY GALPIN: Sure. Great stuff. Yeah. Amazing. ANDREW HUBERMAN: He has a book, The Naked Warrior, which doesn't involve training naked, although I suppose you could if you wanted. But it was really about no weights. And involved building up to pistol squats and one-arm push-ups, and things of that sort, even doing pull-ups on doors. And I discovered that some door frames are much stronger than others in hotels. [LAUGHTER] I just accidentally caused some damage there. But in any case, muscular endurance, I think, is a really interesting one that I plan to incorporate into my schedule. But that is, I think, is one that's often overlooked, unless people really have an aversion to weights and to machines. ANDY GALPIN: You're right. And it shouldn't be. Because it's pretty low-hanging fruit. You don't need a lot of equipment for it typically. It doesn't hurt that bad. You don't often get that sore out of it. And you're going to feel a nice wonderful pump afterwards. So it's great. And as we discussed many times now, it is quite effective at hypertrophy. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. I also-- I don't know if they fit specifically with muscular endurance. But if you look at the physiques, for example, on rock climbers, I mean, they have-- to me, of course they have-- usually the experienced climbers have pretty remarkable body compositions. They tend to be lean, and lithe, and flexible, all those things that many people aspire to. But the other thing is, their development always looks exceedingly balanced. You don't really tend to see climbers that are overdeveloped in the torso and underdeveloped in the arms, or overdeveloped in the arms despite all the climbing and underdeveloped relatively in the other limb movement. And that's true for women and men. It's not a sport that I participate in. But it seems like what they're doing is essentially muscular endurance training. ANDY GALPIN: Basically. Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. So there's really something there to be valued. So that's a four-day a week schedule with off days or rest days inserted as needed. And then just-- and continuing. For those that are a bit more committed to their fitness and want to do a five or six-day a week program, would you recommend just collapsing some of the off days, paying more attention to recovery, and cycling through more quickly? ANDY GALPIN: Yeah, absolutely. You could combine that and just run that-- either one of those programs. So you could run that three-day week program back to back. Do it, get that done in six days. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Ah. So day one, speed, power, hypertrophy. Day two, strength, work with elevated heart rate, anaerobic capacity. And day three endurance. And then just-- and then just cycle through again. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. You take day four off of the week. And then you go back again. So we would be having six days of exercise, one day off. And you'd be getting every one of those adaptations in multiple times a week. That is almost exactly how I would set up a six-day-a-week program. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Great I love the elegance and the simplicity of that and the thoroughness of it, because it checks off so many, if not all of the nine major adaptations to exercise that we've been talking about these episodes. And I suppose the one thing that I want to highlight and pose this also as a question is that early in our discussions, in a previous episode, you mentioned that so much of what people think of and apply as it relates to resistance training is borrowed from bodybuilding and hypertrophy training specifically. Which typically involves getting close to failure or failures, sometimes even involving rest pause, where you hit failure, then set the weight down for a few sections and repeat these high intensity techniques, accentuating the negative, so-called the centric, et cetera. In hearing about these protocols of three-day-a-week, or four-day-a-week, six-day-a-week, it's very clear to me that if one is not careful to omit that kind of thinking, and suddenly is taking their strength work and speed to failure, or is pushing too hard on muscular endurance to the point where you're just grinding out that very last push-up on every set, that the amount of soreness and the amount of recovery that results from these workouts might start to cause progress issues. So one thing that's in the back of my mind is, as you've described these programs is, that even though some of them are very brief or involve a minimum of time commitment, in particular a three-day week but also the four-day week schedule, that there is a discipline involved in making sure that you stick to the workout that you're supposed to do that day. And not go ham, as they say, and just throw in a couple of extra sets of bicep curls and tricep pushes, because you want to do that and you thought you could maybe you could get away with that. But you have to come back pretty quickly and do some serious, meaning devoted, speed and power work and/or strength work. And if you haven't been disciplined about not doing certain forms of exercise, I could see how the whole thing could crash quickly, and one could think, oh, this is just too much work, or it's not for me. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So this, I suppose, is now where the question comes, which is, what are some of the key points that people need to keep in mind when they embrace a program? How rigidly do they need to stay attached to today's endurance day. I'm just doing endurance. Today's strength day. I'm just doing strength work. I'm not going to take things to absolute failure or beyond failure. ANDY GALPIN: I am absolutely happy with anyone modifying any of the sample programs however they would like to. My only recommendation for the question you just posed would be set your program. And then, if you're going to make a change, fine. But that is a change to your program. In other words, don't just make decisions every single day and make changes. If you're doing that, you might as well not have a program. And as we described earlier, there is clear evidence that having a program is better than not, regardless of the effectiveness of the program. And so, my general comment to that is, OK, fine, a day or two, you made some modifications. No problem. We're in a situation now where you're basically changing the workout every day as you go, then we just need to write a new program. We need to reassess where we're at. Because we need to have some structure. Look, the reality of it is, I change the programming I'm going to do the day of often because of any number of situations. I just don't feel like it. I way overestimated today. We talked a little bit in the previous episode about autoregulation, which is a style of periodization and program design in which you're adjusting based on how you're actually feeling that day, but with some specific structures. So you're going to take some measurements that day and adjust. So autoregulation is a very, very effective tool. You just need to make sure that auto is dialed. In other words, is it because your body actually needed something different? Or is it because you're now just getting a little bit lazy? Now you're just not feeling like it today. So there's a little bit of an impossible line to draw there. Both scenarios are real-- gray area-- a lot is real in the moment. And so, you just need to be a little bit aware of having some reality check, listening to your body, but then also being like, hey, no, I'm talking to you. I'm telling you this is the plan. We're going to do this. And staying within it. It is going to be challenging to progressively overload and therefore get a higher likelihood of success at your training program if you're just making decisions and changing the program right before you work out. You're probably not-- you're probably going-- for most people, you're probably going to choose less or off more so than you choose more. Now, having said that, there are more than a few clients that have come through our programs where they choose more always. They add a set. They add an exercise. They add in another workout. And that can be OK. But we're going to track various markers on them. And if we see these things consistently going down, we're going to identify whether they are-- which phase of this overtraining thing we'll talk about next they're actually in. Some phases I'm OK. Some of them I'm not. If we're seeing certain things happen physiologically, we're going to make a conversation. We're also then going to really think carefully about why are you making this choice? Do you feel like the training isn't enough? OK, great. Let's modify it then. Are you not making progress? Or are there some other reasons why you're doing this? Obviously, I'm not a psychologist or therapist. But there are clearly situations in which folks dose themselves with far too much exercise for reasons that are not because it's productive to their training or goals. And if such a case, we would probably bring in somebody that specializes in those areas to clear that out and just make sure it's like, we're not doing this for anxiety issues or energy things. If it's, I just don't think the program's enough, OK, great. Let's go back. Let's look at our metrics. Let's evaluate our tests and go there. But if there's other reasons, then we may bring in somebody to have that conversation. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. Usually when I've seen people deviate from programs, it's because they tend to revert to something that they've done for a long time. It just feels really comfortable to them. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And it worked. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And it was giving them decent results. So they're skeptical to try something else. Or there is a phenotype of haphazardness sometimes, especially if people get really caffeinated before a workout and just want to throw something in. And then, there's a third category. And this is one that I've had to contend with a lot in my life, which is that I really enjoy training with other people when I have the opportunity. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And a certain day rolls around where you're supposed to do something and not do other things and people say, hey, do you want to go for a long ocean swim? Or you want to train? And you end up doing some Kenny Kane, this one's for you, some ridiculous 20 wall ball CrossFit type workout. And I'm not acclimated for that sort of thing. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And then it does tend to throw things off, not because-- no pun intended, Kenny-- because there's nothing wrong with a 20 sets of wall balls if you're-- that's part of your conditioning. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But if it's not appropriate for where you are in your schedule, it really can disrupt what you're trying to do. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Even as a non-competitive athlete, like myself, years since I've competed in any athletic program. But as a non-competitive athlete, I think there's a beauty to and a really strong incentive to being disciplined about the program that one follows. As a mentor and professor that I worked with years ago used to say, I'd come into his office, all these ideas and things I want to do. And he'd say, let's constrain this walk. And then the question you always want to arrive at in a discussion with your students, as you know is, what's the experiment exactly? And then you go and you do that specific experiment. I think I view a workout the same way, that there are multiple adaptations, goals, and things that people are trying to achieve. Really knowing why you're there each time and really sticking to that, even if it means not training with other people. Or I always say, well, you can train with me, but I'm not going to train with you. [LAUGHTER] ANDY GALPIN: Selfish. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So that's one way to do it. But really sticking to a schedule is really what allows the progress to emerge. But that doesn't necessarily mean being antisocial. You can invite people along. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But in this case, I'm telling people to be the host, not the guest. ANDY GALPIN: I have a little bit of a rule here. Maybe I should have answered your question this way. I actually like doing things totally different occasionally. So I'll do-- when I'm traveling, I tend to do hotel workouts. What I mean by that is, I will go down to the workout room. And I will do a set of 10 to 15 reps of every single machine in the exact order in which they are laid out. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Whoa. ANDY GALPIN: Just for the sake of fun. Just for the sake of, OK. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's like the tarot card version of workouts. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah, totally. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's like, whatever comes up, I'm going to make sense of it. ANDY GALPIN: And you just move. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. ANDY GALPIN: And those are typically things of like, I just want to move a little bit for jet lag and other purposes. That's often, I wasn't going to get to work out today. And so, now I'm going to do something to feel great. I don't travel that much, though, so it's not really throwing my things off. I also, I don't get a lot of free time. And so, if I am traveling, and I'm seeing someone I haven't seen in many years or, for the first time, I mean, we got to train together this week for the first time. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It was a lot of fun. ANDY GALPIN: I'm not going to burn that opportunity. My rule is this though. I'm not going to do something that's going to cost me more than three days. So I'm absolutely happy to get out there, and maybe tomorrow morning, or tonight, we go do something fun that's off my schedule. I'm in. I'm in 100%. I'm just going to down-regulate a little bit. I'm not going to maybe do as much as you or as hard as you or whatever. I'll do more than I should. But if it costs me tomorrow, it was worth the exchange. I don't have a world record I'm setting anytime soon. I don't have-- I got many years. I'm happy to give up a couple of days of exercise to be a little sorer than I need to be for the exchange of a lifetime memory. And this stuff is so important to me. This stuff lands as true lifetime memories. I can look back-- many of my fond memories from my life are training sessions with friends, whatever it is, like doing jujitsu with somebody who's a world champion. You're just like, whatever the thing is, you're like, that was really, really cool. Absolutely worth missing two days. If it's going to be more than three days though, where I'm going to be so wrecked I can't work out for five or six days, then I'm probably like, all right, that's kind of nonsense. Unless it's just an opportunity where I'm like, I absolutely can't pass that up. So that's how I think about it. That doesn't happen too often with me though, maybe once a month. And so I'm like, OK, fine, I lost a day. Reality of it is it's probably more like once a quarter that that happens. So I don't really care. So you do want to balance joy and life. You don't want to be so rigid about your training program that it ruins and robs those experiences. Physical activity should be fun. Your fitness and your training should be something that makes your life better, not some task you have to get done so that 75 years from now you've hit some metric of who knows what. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Just alone in your room with your training logs. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. [LAUGHTER] ANDREW HUBERMAN: No, in all seriousness, I think, you point to the richness of life. And you can draw these boxes like work, relationships, fitness, recovery. But the boundaries between those boxes are blurry, because-- ANDY GALPIN: Of course. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And I should say, I love training with people. I greatly enjoyed training with you this morning, not just because I was receiving so many useful tips. In fact, thank you. First time I PR'd in a number of things today. ANDY GALPIN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Thanks to your input in the moment. And that's an irreplaceable kind of gift. But mostly, it's the gift of getting to train with a colleague and friend. So I want to underscore, highlight, and put an exclamation mark behind what you just said. Thank you once again, and again, for giving us so much interesting, clear, actionable, and at times somewhat counterintuitive information in order to build out an exceptional training program to meet any of-- and in some cases-- all of the nine major adaptations that exercise can create toward aesthetic, performance-related, and healthspan lifespan, aka longevity goals. It's really a treasure trove of information there. And I look forward to our next discussion about how to best recover from exercise, both within the exercise bout, and between exercise bouts, and in the more macroscopic structure of a week, a month, a year. I can't wait. ANDY GALPIN: I can't wait either. I love that topic. And I've got a lot to cover, so it'll be fun. ANDREW HUBERMAN: If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. If you have questions for us, or comments, or suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover, or guests you'd like me to include on the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and during today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. I'd also like to inform you about the Huberman Lab podcast free newsletter. It's called the Neural Network Newsletter. And each month, the Neural Network Newsletter is sent out, and it contains summaries of podcast episodes, specific protocols discussed on the Huberman Lab podcast, all in fairly concise format, and all completely zero cost. You can sign up for the Neural Network Newsletter by going to hubermanlab.com Go to the menu and click on newsletter. You provide us your email. We do not share it with anybody. And as I mentioned before, it's completely zero cost. By going to hubermanlab.com, you can also go into the Menu tab and go to a newsletter and see some example newsletters from months past. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion about fitness, exercise, and performance with Dr. Andy Galpin. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 227 ---
Video ID: CGjdgy0cwGk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CGjdgy0cwGk
Title: How to Stop Headaches Using Science-Based Approaches | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-02-06 13:00:15 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss the causes and treatments of different types of headaches, including tension headaches, migraines, sinus and cluster headaches, as well as menstrual and other hormone-based headaches. I describe how to distinguish between the different headache types and how to select the right treatment, including prescription-based and non-prescription-based treatments, behavioral and nutrition-based approaches. I also explain the evidence and mechanisms supporting the use of omega-3 fatty acids, high dose creatine, peppermint oil, turmeric, acupuncture and more. Additionally, I touch on traumatic brain injury, the causes of photophobia, aura, and the link between spicy foods and thunderclap headaches. By the end of this episode, listeners and viewers will have a comprehensive understanding of headaches, their types and the best way to prevent and stop them.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman
Maui Nui Venison: https://mauinuivenison.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Premium
https://hubermanlab.com/premium

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Prevention of traumatic headache, dizziness and fatigue with creatine administration. A pilot study: https://bit.ly/3Y8lKLU
Long-chain omega-3 fatty acids and headache in the U.S. population: https://bit.ly/3X5lRXw
Dietary alteration of n-3 and n-6 fatty acids for headache reduction in adults with migraine: randomized controlled trial: https://bit.ly/3Y4SXaZ
Effect of omega-3 fatty acids on premenstrual syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis: https://bit.ly/40uX5Tu
Effect of Peppermint and Eucalyptus Oil Preparations on Neurophysiological and Experimental Algesimetric Headache Parameters: https://bit.ly/3wZegiu
Herbal treatments for migraine: A systematic review of randomised-controlled studies: https://bit.ly/40uXbuk

Timestamps
00:00:00 Headache
00:03:51 Sponsors: Thesis, LMNT, Maui Nui, Momentous
00:07:47 Headache Sources: Muscle Tension; Blood Flow & Meninges
00:14:06 Headache Sources: Neurons; Inflammation & Sinus Headache 
00:23:21 3 Neuron Types, Pain, Tension Headaches
00:31:05 Tension Headaches
00:33:25 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:34:29 Migraine Headaches, Aura, Photophobia 
00:43:10 Cluster Headaches
00:47:47 Hormone-Based Headaches, Menstrual Cycle & Menopause
00:53:38 Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) & Headache, Baseline Health
01:02:08 Tool: Headache Treatment, Creatine Monohydrate & TBI
01:12:22 InsideTracker
01:13:55 Headache Treatment, Omega-3 & Omega-6 Fatty Acids (Linolic Acid)
01:22:14 Tool: Omega-3 Supplementation, Omega-6 Fatty Acids & Inflammation
01:28:11 Hormone Headache Treatment & Omega-3s
01:31:24 Tool: Aura, Photophobia & Offsetting with Red Light 
01:44:15 Tool: Tension Headache & Botox Treatment
01:49:43 Tool: Alternative Headache Treatments, Peppermint Oil, Menthol
02:01:35 Tool: Tension Headaches Treatment & Acupuncture
02:05:41 Tool: Migraine & Herbal Treatment, Caffeine Timing
02:13:26 Tool: Migraine Treatments & Curcumin (Turmeric) 
02:18:00 Carolina Reaper Pepper & Thunderclap Headache
02:24:21 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Sponsors, Social Media, Momentous, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today we are discussing headaches headaches are something that everybody will suffer at some point in their lifetime of course some people suffer from headaches far more often than others and for many people headaches can be incredibly debilitating limiting their ability to work to socialize to sleep to exercise essentially to live life in any kind of normal way as we'll soon discuss there are many different kinds of headache we have migraine headaches tension headaches cluster headaches today I will review all the different types of headaches and what the underlying biology of each and every one of those types of headaches is as well as fortunately the many excellent treatments that exist for the different types of headache in fact what we'll soon discuss is that by understanding which type of headache you have and a little bit about the underlying biology of each different type of headache it becomes quite straightforward to select the best treatment options for you to for instance provide relief from frequent and recurring tension headaches cluster headaches even sinus headaches the sorts of headaches that are associated with sinus infections and colds where the sinuses get clogged up and you experience headache so while today's episode focuses on all aspects and types of headaches it will have tremendous relevance for everybody so for those of you that experience headache every once in a while where only when you're sick or have a sinus headache or for those of you that suffer from debilitating migraines today's conversation actually has a bit of optimism woven into it meaning there are excellent treatments for each and every one of the different types of headaches and I was quite impressed and excited to learn when researching this episode that the treatments for headache range from of course prescription drug treatments and over-the-counter medications of the sort of type that most of us have heard about ibuprofen acetaminophen and so forth so-called anti-inflammatory drugs but it turns out there are many natural treatments for headaches that when compared to those over-the-counter drugs and even some prescription drugs appear to be easily as effective and in many cases more effective than the typical drug treatments many of which can carry side effects that is the drug treatments carry side effects whereas the natural treatments appear to not carry side effects now of course anytime we have a discussion about natural treatments there are likely to be some eye rolls out there and people thinking oh you know this is going to be a bunch of woo science well far from it as you'll soon learn today each and every one of the treatments for each and every one of the different kinds of headaches is grounded in solid biological understanding of why that particular treatment ought to work and does work so for instance you'll learn that some headache arises because of muscular pain other headache arises because of excessive vasodilation the arteries and blood vessels get bigger and wider and so there's a pressure and a swelling within the cranium that people experience as a headache and it turns out that many of the more natural treatments out there can address either the muscular pain issue or the vasodilation issue or other issues and underlying mechanisms for headache so again while headaches are very intrusive irritating and in some cases debilitating there is certainly light at the end of this tunnel meaning by the end of today's episode each and every one of you will have an array of excellent treatment options that you can choose from in order to address and provide relief from any of the different types of headache before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is thesis thesis makes custom nootropics and as many of you know I'm not a fan of the word nootropics because nootropics means smart drugs and as a neuroscientist I can tell you there is no neural circuit in the brain for being smart thesis understands this and has designed different nootropics in order to bring your brain into specific States for specific types of work so for instance for Creative work or to engage with more Focus or to give you more energy for cognitive or physical work so with thesis they'll design custom nootropics for you that will allow you more focus better task switching more creativity and so on and they'll be sure to include only the ingredients that you want and not the ingredients that you don't I've been using thesis for more than a year now and I can confidently say that their neutropics have been a total game changer for me I like the clarity formula prior to Long bouts of cognitive work or the Energy Formula prior to physical workouts if you'd like to try your own personalized nootropic starter kit go online to takethesis.com huberman you'll take a brief three-minute quiz and thesis will send you four different formulas to try on your first month again that's takethesis.com huberman and use the code Huber minute checkout for 10 off your first box today's episode is also brought To Us by element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't that means the exact ratios of electrolytes are an element and those are sodium magnesium and potassium but it has no sugar I've talked many times before on this podcast about the key role of hydration and electrolytes for nerve cell function neuron function as well as the function of all the cells and all the tissues and organ systems of the body if we have sodium magnesium and potassium present in the proper ratios all of those cells function properly and all our bodily systems can be optimized if the electrolytes are not present and if hydration is low we simply can't think as well as we would otherwise our mood is off hormone systems go off our ability to get into physical action to engage in endurance and strength and all sorts of other things is diminished so with element you can make sure that you're staying on top of your hydration and that you're getting the proper ratios of electrolytes if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element that's lmnt.com huberman and you'll get a free element sample pack with your purchase they're all delicious so again if you want to try element you can go to element.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by Maui Nui which I can confidently say is the most nutrient dense and delicious red meat available Maui Nui spent nearly a decade building a USDA certified wild harvesting system to help balance invasive deer populations on the island of Maui I've talked before more on this podcast and we've had guests on this podcast that have emphasized the critical role of getting quality protein not just for muscle repair and protein synthesis but also for repair of all tissues including brain tissue on a day-to-day basis and the general rule of thumb for that is one gram of quality protein per pound of body weight per day with Maui Nui meats you can accomplish that very easily and you can do that without ingesting in excess of calories which is also critical for immediate and long-term health I should say that Maui Nui meats are not only extremely high quality but they are also delicious I particularly like they're jerky so they're venison jerky I also have had Maui Nui venison in various recipes including ground venison some venison steaks and I love the taste of the venison it's lean but it doesn't taste overly lean or dry at all it's incredibly delicious so if you'd like to try Maui Nui venison go to mauinuyvenison.com huberman to get 20 off your first order again that's Maui News venison.com to get 20 off your first order the huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with momentous supplements to find the supplements we discuss on the huberman Lab podcast you can go to live momentous spelled ous live momentous.com huberman and I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding again that's livemomentis.com huberman let's talk about headaches and as we are soon going to learn there are different types of headaches and different types of headaches arise from changes in different types of tissues in the head area and indeed in the neck area as well now one of the key things to understand is that if you want relief from a headache you need to understand which tissue is mainly involved in creating that type of headache so for instance many people suffer from what are called tension headaches now tension headaches are a little bit of a misnomer because many people might think oh tension I'm under a lot of tension and stress and therefore I get tension headaches and indeed stress can cause tension headaches but tension headaches are really the sort of headache that you feel around the top part of the head not the very top but sort of where you would put a headband so above the eyes and around the head it doesn't have to be experienced all the way around the head but the main underlying reason that is the tissue system that mainly underlies tension headaches is the muscular system there are a lot of muscles on the skull Believe It or Not of course on the neck and they allow you to move your neck and head there are a lot of muscles that lie parallel to the skull and oftentimes those muscles will undergo excessive amounts of constriction now there are of course muscles and the jaw that can also lead to headache and jaw ache and things of that sort and neck aches and headaches so what we're really pointing out here is that the muscles are a key player in the formation of different types of headache Tension Headache in particular but of course muscles and muscle tension can be evolved in the other types of headaches as well okay so I just want to highlight muscular issues as one particular source of the ache in headaches the other tissue that can be prominently involved in generating the ache of a headache or the so-called meninges now the meninges in addition to being a fun word to say or a bunch of tissues that line the outside of the brain and reside between the brain and the skull so you might think okay between the brain and the skull there's probably just a little bit of fluid and the brain is right up next to the skull but it turns out that's not the case the brain is actually encased in a very thick very durable Sac or casing that's wrapped around it tight like Saran wrap it actually has a name which is dura d-u-r-a and so you can remember Dura durable and having done some surgeries many surgeries before on brains of different types ranging from Human even though I'm not a neurosurgeon as a clinician ranging from Human to other types of species what you find is that the dura is exceedingly durable getting through this thing really requires an a very sharp razor blade so the brain is actually sitting in a very fibrous like Sac that you simply could not open up with your fingertips under any conditions it's really durable the meninges are in that general area and also encasing the brain and the meninges provide an additional buffer between the brain and the dura and the skull so again you don't want to think about the brain as just sitting right next to the skull it's close by but there are a bunch of other thin fibrous tissues many of which are very thin and fragile and others of which such as the dura that are very very strong because they're very fibrous almost like a uh if you've ever felt for instance the sale of a of a sailboat you might think oh it's just this big flapping sheet in the wind it is anything but a sheet in the Wind it is a very very strong and durable material now the proximity of the dura and the meninges to the brain and the fact that everything is wrapped very tightly together and the fact that there's a lot of vasculature so that would be arteries blood vessels and capillaries are all in that area on the top of the brain and throughout the brain the fact that all of that is in very close proximity and wrapped really tight in this very durable sac is one of the reasons why when blood vessels or arteries or both become dilated they open there creates a pressure between the brain and those tissues and because there isn't much distance between the tissues like the dura and the meninges and the skull there's also pressure that allows for the brain to literally sneak up or I should say give the impression that your brain is expanding up against your skull so the point here is that while muscular tension can give rise to headache the other thing that can give rise to headache is so-called vasodilation the expansion or the widening of the arteries blood vessels and capillaries and one of the reasons why that gives rise to headache is because there's simply not a lot of space for that expansion to go it doesn't allow anything except for the brain to push up against that very durable tissue and that very durable tissue to push up against the skull and even though the brain itself doesn't have pain receptors that's right the brain itself doesn't have pain receptors that is why a neurosurgeon can take off a piece of skull and can probe around in the brain with an electrode and the person is completely unaware and in order to get through the skull of course that little skin flap has to remove be removed from the skull and that requires a little bit of topical anesthetic but really you don't need any anesthetic to go into the brain itself because there aren't pain receptors on the brain itself however the tissues surrounding the brain such as the dura the meninges and the vasculature that then reaches up believe it or not into the skull the vasculature doesn't actually stop right beneath the skull it actually blood vessels it get into the skull and they're actually portals by which blood can move within the skull itself well what that means is that since all of the tissues are very close by and very compact with respect to one another any increase in the size of the portals that allow movement of blood there and the fact that there are what are called nociceptors noci nociceptors These are essentially pain receptors because of the presence of pain receptors in the tissues around the brain when there's an increase in the size of those vascular portals the arteries capillaries and vessels we experience that as intense pain and pressure and fortunately there are excellent treatments for dealing with that intense pain and pressure but keep in mind that the intense pain and pressure that is the consequence of vasodilation that is the widening of these different vascular portals is very different than the type of pain that arises from muscular tension as is the case with Tension Headache okay so now we have two sources of pain that is the ache in headache and there are two more that we need to think about in trying to better understand the different types of headaches that we'll discuss and in terms of trying to understand which are going to be the best treatments for the different types of headaches and those are neural and inflammatory responses so let's talk about the neural type first there is a type of headache that many people unfortunately suffer from we'll get into this in a bunch more detail in a moment but those are called cluster headaches cluster headaches are headaches that arise not from the surface people don't experience them as kind of a tightening of the forehead and the neck and the jaw but rather it feels as if the headache is coming from deep within the head and in particular from behind the orbit of one or the other eyes and sometimes both eyes for those of you that have ever experienced cluster headaches they are extremely painful even the more where I should say the relatively more minor cluster headaches are extremely painful and the severe ones are exceedingly painful cluster headaches arise from Deep where this we get the Sensation that they are rising from deep within our head as opposed from the surface inward because they are neural in origin and there's a particular nerve pathway called the trigeminal nerve that often is the origin of these cluster headaches that people experience behind the eye the trigeminal as the name suggests has three branches try Okay so there's a branch that essentially extends to the eye there's also a branch that extends to the mandible right to the uh to the lip and there's a branch that extends more or less to the to the nasal area and so this trigeminal nerve becomes inflamed or in other ways is hyper activated in some cases and that causes the Deep pain below the eye because it is that first branch of the trigeminal nerve which is the ophthalmic branch which tends to be activated first so people start feeling as if there's a pain behind their eye in particular on one side oftentimes there's lacrimation which is tearing up there can be some nasal discharge another common symptom of this type of headache that is the cluster headache is that the pupil sometimes will become very small the pupils of the eyes and they won't dilate even in darkness so there are a bunch of things that are going on on one or both sides of the face that seem to arise from deep within the head or it's almost as if it's coming from the brain outward and that's because it's neural in origin Okay so we've got muscular origins of headaches we've got meningeal origins of headaches that is the the stuff around the brain and as it relates to the vasculature and we have neural origins of headaches and of course there's inflammation origins of headaches now inflammation is a term that gets thrown around a lot these days people are talking about you know this reduces inflammation inflammation is bad and and I I suppose in some cases and when inflammation is really widespread across the brainer body it's bad but I don't think any of us should think about inflammation per se as bad what I mean is inflammation is just one form of signaling in the body which of course includes the brain inflammation of a tissue is one way in which a set of cells so these could be for instance uh cells of the immune system and we cover this in a detailed episode all about the immune system if you'd like to check that out you go to hubermanlab.com just put into our search function immune system and you can find that episode by the way all of our episodes are searchable by keyword hubermanlab.com and it'll take you to specific episodes and time stamps for the topics you're interested in so for sake of this discussion about headache inflammation is going to be the case when one particular tissue in and around the head area is releasing molecules cytokines which sometimes are called inflammatory cytokines but there are also non-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory cytokines but inflammatory molecules that are signaling to the rest of the body hey there's something going on here there's either some intrusive object and indeed if you were to get you know a bb or a splinter into a particular uh you know skin area there'd be a lot of inflammation so it could be the introduction of a foreign physical object into an area that will cause inflammation it can be the presence of some sort of local toxin in that area it could be a more systemic inflammation nonetheless inflammation in the neck and head area where frankly anywhere within the sinus area so this would include the mouth the nose around the eyes because the sinuses many of us think of sinuses as just our nose but actually if I were to show you a skull a human skull or any other kind of skull you'd be very hopefully intrigued to learn that the skull is just not one big piece of solid bone or a you know a top with a jaw below it it actually has all these small what are called fenestrations little holes and canals that run through the skull and through the depth of the skull like little tubes you've got them down here on your mandible you've got them above your lips you have them um on either sides of your nose those are the sinuses the sinuses allow the passage of different fluids through the skull because the skull even though it's bone it's not a dead tissue right in a live person or animal the skull is a very active living tissue indeed all bone is active living tissue and it needs to be nourished with blood it needs to be nourished with cerebral spinal fluid in the case of the skull it needs to be nourished with all sorts of important things so those sinuses oftentimes can become clogged as is in the case with sinus headache which we'll talk about in a little bit but more generally anytime there's inflammation of one given area of the body so it could be a shoulder it could be the neck it could be the mouth it could be the nose or in the case of the headache it could be any portion of the head or neck what happens is inflammation while it's a very efficient signal it's much like the siren on an ambulance or a police car and that it sends out a very broad signal that's very clear something is wrong here and needs to be dealt with it's not very specific so it's very robust but it's not very specific so for instance if there's a little bacterial infection or a little viral infection the inflammation response to that site of infection tends to be far more widespread than the actual site of infection it's a little bit different when you have a foreign object there like a splinter or some other foreign object that tends to be a bit more localized and the immune system is always trying to limit the the extent of inflammation by putting in different scar tissues indeed a lot of the things that we think of as kind of gross you know pustules and boils and things like that I know it's a gross topic are ways in which our body tries to restrict the amount of inflammation but the face area and the head itself are so heavily infused with blood vessels and there's a constant perfusion as we say of blood and cerebral spinal fluid and other things through this incredibly metabolically active tissue that we call our brain and our eyes those are by far the most metabolically active tissues in our entire body even if we're running hundreds of miles in Ultra marathons your brain is still far more metabolically demanding than all the muscles of your body combined no matter what the conditions because of that there tends to be a generalization or a spreading out of any inflammatory response and that inflammatory response then can trigger the pain mechanisms or what we've experience as pain mechanisms in the other three types of tissues that we talked about so for instance if you have a systemic infection or you're experiencing inflammation of any kind and it has anything to do with or encroaches on the face or head area that can easily and almost always spills over into activation of nerve cells can give rise to neural based headache or to the meninges and can give rise to meningeal headaches and of course to the muscles and to muscular type headaches so we've got muscular origins of the ache in headache we have meningeal origins of the achin headache we have neural origins of the aching headache and we have inflammation-based origins of the ache in headache and that pertains to all the different types of headaches that we're going to talk about and it's important to keep in mind that there are these different sources of the ache and headache and that sometimes they exist alone and sometimes they exist in combination however this isn't important however all pain or I should say all experience of pain as a perception is going to be neural in origin when we experience pain whether or not it's a pin prick or a cut stub our toe we trip and fall or a headache it is neural in origin it is the nervous system and nerve cells that are going to carry that signal that we perceive as pain so as we talk about the different sources of pain and different types of headache we will also talk about of course I think what most people are interested in today's discussion the different treatments for the different types of headache and why each of those different treatments work but by understanding a little bit about how pain arises in the nervous system and certainly by understanding the different types of headaches you know what is a tension headache I gave you some impression that it's running around your head like a headband in many cases versus cluster headache which starts deep below the eye often it feels as if it's emerging from deep in the brain versus migraine which we'll get into in a moment by understanding the different types of headaches you should be able to quickly pinpoint what type of headache you have what types of tissues are likely involved and therefore what types of treatments are going to most quickly and most completely relieve that type of headache okay so for the next three to five minutes and I promise no more I'm going to explain how pain arises at the level of nerve cells and I suppose this is one of those times when if I had a highlighter pen that could go out and across the the microphones and speakers leading to your ears I would use it here because what I'm about to tell you is perhaps one of the most important things to understand about your nervous system that is your brain and you which is that while you have trillions of neurons and we hear that you have trillions and different types of neurons in your brain and they come in different shapes and sizes and do different things and some make dopamine and some make serotonin and so make glutamate and on and on the key distinction among different types of neurons that is the three types of neurons that I believe everybody scientists are no everybody should understand exist are some neurons nerve cells are what we call motor neurons in the sense that they control the contraction of muscles sometimes for walking other neurons control the movements of your fingers scientists call those digits other ones your toes they also control the beating of your heart although that's a slightly different mechanism and slightly different type of tissue than is involved in generating motor movements of your limbs these are neurons that we call motor neurons because their goal or their purpose I should say they don't really know what their their goal or purpose is but what they do is they make sure that muscles contract so that certain things happen in your body like your heart beats or you move your limbs you lift your eyelids or your eyebrows rather and so on and so forth other types of neurons are what we call Sensory neurons they communicate the same way that motor neurons do that is they fire what we call Action potentials which are just electrical signals they release neurotransmitters like any other neuron but they respond to certain events in the environment or the environment within the body but they are not responsible for generating muscular contractions so we call these Sensory neurons some Sensory neurons sense light touch other Sensory neurons sense firm touch other sensory neurons sense pain other Sensory neurons sense light brushing on the skin in fact you have Sensory neurons believe it or not that respond specifically to the light brushing of a hand across your skin any region of your body and if that particular region of your body happens to have hair on it and you stroke the skin in the direction that the hairs lay down we experience that as pleasurable whereas if you stroke in the direction opposite to the the way the hairs lay down we experience that as not pleasurable so these Sensory neurons respond in some cases for instance within the auditory system they respond to sound waves and your eye they respond to photons of light sometimes photons of light of particular wavelengths that we think of as red green blue and so on Sensory neurons don't move muscles they respond to things in the environment and they exist within us so we have Sensory neurons that sense for instance pressure within our head or pressure within our gut how full or empty our gut is pain within our tissues like our liver or or any kind of other internal organ so we've got motor neurons Sensory neurons and then the last kind of neuron is what we call modulatory neurons these are the ones that adjust the relationship between the sensory neurons and the motor neurons to determine whether or not we do anything in response to a sensory input that is whether or not if a sensory neuron fires sends it electrical potential whether or not it will generate a motor change let me give you a very simple example of this so for those of you listening I'll just explain what I'm doing and for those of you watching you'll be able to see I'm holding my hand out in front of me if I were to touch the top of my hand with my fingertip I can deliberately override that is I can modulate that more typical reflex which is that when something touches us if we're not aware of where it's coming from we typically move away from that thing that touches this is a very natural response but we can decide we're not going to move away we can decide to stay still or we can decide to move toward the thing that touches us but typically if you were to walk up to somebody and you were to touch them they'd either turn toward you on the side that you touch them or they'd step away it's rare that they're going to step into you but you could decide that you were not going to move away or you could step into the direction of touch and that's because you have modulatory neurons that can adjust the conversation in a very context-dependent way as to whether or not the sensory neuron will cause motor neurons to contract or not okay so we've got motor neuron Sensory neurons and modulatory neurons and you're probably thinking by now why are we talking about this I thought we were talking about headache I thought we're going to talk about treatments for headache but this turns out to be very important because you could imagine and in a moment I'll explain how let's say you have tension headaches you're somebody that has the classic symptoms of tension headache let me tell you what those are these are headaches again that occur more or less on on the in a kind of a headband like fashion or they tend to start there and exist around that these are very common they can arise from a number of different sources rise from sleep deprivation they can rise from excessive use of caffeine intake we'll talk about why that is they can arise from stress they can arise from very low level viral infections or bacterial infections but we experience these as just as headaches where you've been thinking too hard or working too hard or life has been stressful they're often also associated with jaw pain and jaw tightness and neck tightness so tension headaches everything you'd imagine muscular tension could cause well if you want to treat tension headache you can imagine that because all headache is neural that you'd want to go after some sort of neural mechanism to treat them but of course we now know that there are three types of neurons there are motor neurons Sensory neurons and modulatory neurons so we have choices we can say okay do we want to turn off the muscles in the head jaw and neck that are hyper contracted for instance you want to take a muscle relaxer or relaxedant or would you want to try and change the sensory input itself maybe don't change the way the muscles are behaving but shut off the sensory part of it your ability to sense it there are certainly ways you can do that or would you want to adjust the modulatory neurons would you want to make it such that you have the headache but you don't perceive the headache that is you cut off communication between the sensor and the motor so that the muscles relax turns out there are treatments and approaches for each and every one of those each and every one of those has different advantages and disadvantages but as you can quickly see we are going to have different types of headaches and different approaches to treating headache but if you keep in the back of your mind that you have neurons that contract muscles to create movement or tension of muscles remember you can turn off those neurons and allow those muscles to relax you have Sensory neurons that sense input and actually sense the pain and you have modulatory neurons which can allow you to adjust the relationship between the sensory neurons and the motor neurons and of course some of you are probably screaming at me by now saying wait why would you ever want to deal with the motor neurons or or the modulatory neurons once you want to just go straight to the source and just cut off the pain ah well the problem there is that many painkillers have other issues as well in particular they can be sedative many of them can be habit forming or even addictive and for many people not all but many people they don't want to take drugs whether or not they're over-the-counter or prescription drugs or even more natural supplement based type treatments and they would rather use for instance a behavioral approach in which they can modulate they can deliberately turn off the communication between Sensory neurons and motor neurons and turns out those approaches exist as well okay so at this point I promise you that I'm not going to give you any more of a biology lesson in terms of pain sensing and headaches as a more uh conceptual phenomenon instead what I'd like to do next is talk about the different types of headaches and I think this is something that's very important and not often discussed except for those people out there that unfortunately suffer repeatedly from certain kinds of headaches like migraine or cluster or tension headache but I think for most people out there who experience headache and again that is everybody at some point experiences headache rather than just think of headache as one thing understanding the major types of headache and how they differ from and are similar to one another will really help you identify what the best source of treatments for those are so I'd like to talk about what the different types of headache are now the first type of headache we're going to discuss is the tension type headache again tension type headaches tend to start off not always but tend to start off as more or less a Halo or a headband around the forehead in the area above the eyes often also include the jaw the neck muscles and can extend even into the upper back again this can be caused by some low level of infection but more often than not tension type headaches are going to come on because of some chronic psychological stress usually combined with lack of sleep usually combined with lifestyle issues and of course without getting into a long discussion about it anytime you have lack of sleep you're going to have excessive stress anytime you have excessive stress you're going to have to make sure you're offsetting that by getting proper sleep most people don't when they're under excessive stress by the way we have excellent tools we're grounded in excellent science available to you at zero cost if you are experienced chronic stress or even short-term stress we have a master stress episode of the human Lab podcast again just go to hubermanlab.com and all that's time stamped for you tension type headaches begin in a more or less a headband pattern but can really extend to other tissues as well not so often in the face but really the head and often will start to climb up toward the top of the head they are not always in this Halo pattern sometimes they can be localized to one area such as the you know the back of the head or the front of the head or one side of the head more than others and that's often the case because of tension within muscles of the neck that tend to bias the ache towards one side of the head I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors athletic greens athletic greens now called ag-1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs I've been taking athletic green since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast the reason I started taking athletic greens and the reason I still take athletic greens once or usually twice a day is that it gets to be the probiotics that I need for gut health our gut is very important it's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain in the immune system and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health and those probiotics and athletic greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health in addition athletic greens contains a number of adaptogens vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met and it tastes great if you'd like to try athletic greens you can go to athleticgreens.com huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road in the car on the plane Etc and they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin d3k2 again that's athleticgreens.com huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 the other type of headache that unfortunately is very common is migraine headaches migraine headaches are defined generally as disorders of recurring attacks of headaches so people who get migraines often get them in a recurring fashion some people get them very often other people get them less often but migraines are very debilitating the numbers that is the prevalence of migraine is still pretty debated one thing that we know for sure is that females suffer from migraine headaches at a rate at least threefold higher than do males and surprisingly this does not seem to have any direct hormonal origin because we're also going to talk about hormonal headaches that is headaches that relate to a dip in estrogen and progesterone a particular phase of the menstrual cycle that is the ovulatory cycle so there's a bit of a mystery here and the Mystery is why is it that migraine headaches occur at such greater frequency in females even independently of the menstrual cycle so when you control for changes in hormones that still appears to be the case and overall migraines are very common now the numbers on migraine and just how common migraine is are extremely wide this was a little bit frustrating for me in researching this episode you will find for instance that 17 of women suffer from migraines you will also hear that six percent of males suffer from migraines you will also hear that 43 43 percent of females suffer from migraine that is recurring headaches that qualify as migraine headaches and that 17 percent of men suffer from migraine headaches on a recurring basis which is again the definition of a migraine headache or one of the key definitions so all we can say for sure is that many many millions of people maybe even billions of people suffer from migraine headaches it's kind of a staggering thing to contemplate but we know it's extremely common and we know that it's more prevalent in females in any of the studies that you will find in terms of that compare the overall prevalence of headache it's going to be higher substantially higher in females and males does not seem to be related to the ovulatory menstrual cycle there are some interesting facts related to that that I'll just you know touch on for a moment pregnancy for whatever reason seems to be protective against migraine headaches that is women who suffer from recurring migraines before they get pregnant when they get pregnant and often after they give birth they experience fewer migraine headaches so there may be something hormonal it may be something else what do we know for sure we know that headache that is the ache in headache is neural so whether or not the origins are hormonal or whether or not the origins are inflammation or gut microbiome or some other feature of the body brain axis at this point all we know is that neural pain or the experience of pain at the neural level is the final common pathway and it's more prevalent in females so as I mentioned migraines tend to be recurring so some people get them once a week some people get them once a month some people get them far more frequently that they can be extremely debilitating oftentimes people experience migraine because it is a recurring phenomenon will know when a migraine is coming on they'll say my migraine is coming on the kind of sense it coming there's this notion of Aura and we'll talk about Aura in a little bit some people think of Aura just as visual aura or the sense of kind of a haloing of light with the sense that there's something outside the body the actual definition of Aura is that it's the experience that something is about to happen it's this kind of feeling of anticipation it's not deja vu deja vu is different and very interesting in its own right but different it's this feeling that something's about to happen and the fact that aura is such a prominent feature of migraine headaches or at least that people feel that the headache is coming on long before they feel the actual ache of the headache and the other debilitating symptoms suggests that migraine has something of deep neural origin that it arises from deep within the nervous system spinal cord and brain and that it's not something like a tension headache that is going from outside in you know the constriction of the muscles in the jaw and head so migraine headaches are very different than tension headaches even in terms of how they come on or their onset the other feature of migraine headaches that I think is important to note is that dilation of the vessels remember the vasodilation so the widening of those pipes that we call arteries vessels and capillaries is a very prominent feature of migraine and fortunately that allows for very particular types of treatment and ways of dealing with this pain specific to migraine headaches the other feature that's common in migraine headaches is so-called photophobia many of you are probably familiar with photophobia if you've ever been sleep deprived simply if you're sleep deprived and you go outside in the morning the light is going to seem very very bright much brighter than were you to have had a really good night's sleep and that's because during sleep there are all sorts of reset mechanisms in the brain there's the washing out of metabolic debris and things in the brain the so-called lymphatic washout That's essential there's also an adjustment of the neural tissue of the eyes which as many of you have heard me say before actually two pieces of rain that have been extruded from the cranial Vault so your eyes yes indeed are two pieces of brain the only two pieces of brain outside the cranial Vault and within your eyes you have neurons and mechanisms that adjust the the sort of sensitivity of your eyes to light and of your brain to light and when you are sleep deprived or when you have a low-level viral infection or a cold or a flu of any kind you tend to experience light as brighter than it actually is when you're rested or you're in the healthy state so photophobia is something that's very very common in migraine and often the photophobia is a prominent feature of the experience that a migraine is coming on people will start saying oh you know it's just too bright in here and normally they'd be able to tolerate that level of sunlight or of indoor lighting with no problem so there are two aspects of migraine that I think are particularly important to understand for sake of of the treatment and that's the dilation of vessels so we if we want to treat migraine we're going to have to think about things that can constrict blood vessels in the brain area but we also need to think about photophobia not photophobia just as a symptom of migraine but that maybe by adjusting our sensitivity to light we can actually short-circuit some of the onset and subsequent pathology of the migraine that is if we can prevent photophobia partially or completely can actually offset a lot of the ache of the migraine that would otherwise occur so that's an exciting Avenue for addressing migraine headaches we'll get into photophobia and how to deal with that we'll also talk about Aura a little bit more in a few minutes but for the time being we've talked about tension headaches we've now talked about migraine headaches again keep in mind knowing what kind of headache you have is essential it's I would say indispensable for selecting the best treatment many people out there will simply get a headache and decide oh I'm going to pop a couple of aspirin okay what does aspirin do aspirin's and anti-inflammatory it also has pronounced effects on the vasodilation and vasoconstriction system it actually allows more blood to flow through those arteries vessels and capillaries a lot of people actually use baby aspirin or small amounts of aspirin as a way to offset cardiovascular disease that's another discussion but what do we know we know that in migraine there's a hyper dilation of the blood vessels a hyper dilation of the very little portals that exist in the brain and around the brain and that are going to cause the pain you're going to activate those Sensory neurons those non-iceceptors that will then give us the experience of extreme headache and migraine so taking an aspirin or something like it for migraine in some cases the worst possible Choice again so knowing what kind of headache you are experiencing is going to be essential here the other thing that you'll sometimes hear is that drinking a cup of coffee or getting caffeine through tea is a great way to deal with headache why would that be well it turns out that coffee can cause either vasoconstriction or vasodilation depending on when you take it and we'll get into the use of caffeine as a treatment for headache because indeed it can be a very potent treatment for headache but you absolutely need to know what kind of headache you are experiencing because in some cases drinking caffeine whether it's in tea or coffee can absolutely alleviate the pain of a headache especially if you catch that onset of a migraine or attention type headache early on but in some cases it can make it far far worse again knowing which type of headache you're experiencing and how the different treatments work is key okay so we have tension type headaches migraine type headaches I think you're starting to get the picture they have different underlying biologies the next type of headache is cluster headaches cluster headaches are the ones I mentioned earlier that arise from deep within the head they feel as if they're coming from the inside out and they tend to be on one side or the other what scientists and clinicians call unilateral and tends to originate behind the eye and sometimes the nose region sometimes in the mouth region as well it feels kind of patchy but as if it's coming from the inside out and again that's because of that trigeminal nerve for those of you listening and not watching this on YouTube I've got three fingers as if I'm putting up three fingers and I'm I've got one pointed toward my eye one pointed towards my nose region and one towards my upper lip the trigeminal nerve is an easy one to remember and it will completely explain cluster headaches and what to do about cluster headaches in a moment if you remember that the herpes one virus and not herpes two not genital herpes but herpes one virus is the one that gives cold sores on the mouth herpes one virus by the way is exceedingly common up to 90 percent of people many children in fact have these again this is not a sexually transmitted herpes although it can be of course transmitted through kissing and sexual contact but that's not the only origin of it okay it can be passed by skin contact and mucosal contact um so mucosomucosal so that would be kissing mucosa lying or even skin to mucosal Linings that's why it's so common and the reason why cold sores develop on the mouth for people that have herpes one is because the virus actually lives on the trigeminal nerve and yes it is true that sometimes the virus will inflame the nerve and the inflammation will occur at the level of the eye so people do unfortunately sometimes get herpes of the eye it actually can be quite dangerous if you have an infection of the eye of a herpes infection in the eye you should see an ophthalmologist or the nose region they can experience pain in the mucosal tissue of the nose more often than not the most inflammation is occurring on the the branch that innervates the lip or the region close to the lip and that's why a cold sword develops there an immune response there signaling that there's inflammation due to the herpes virus which lives on that neuron for a very long time neurons don't turn over in the lifespan so it can live on there for the extent of of the person's life however most people hopefully treat their HSV-1 but if they don't the the sort of frequency and the severity of infections tends to taper off with time we'll have an entire discussion about viruses and herpes in particular in a future episode but the thing to keep in mind here is that this very nerve is the one that gets inflamed in these cluster type headaches now cluster type headaches are associated with a bunch of very uncomfortable symptoms again they tend to be unilateral they tend to begin very deep and they tend to be excruciatingly painful excruciatingly painful they can last anywhere from 30 minutes to three hours some people experience these in sleep in fact this is one of the cases where men experience a headache more than females men experience cluster type headaches that have a sudden onset during sleep at five times the frequency than do females the origins of that aren't exactly clear they do seem to have something to do with the biological clock mechanisms the so-called circadian mechanisms so if you are a man or woman for that matter and you're waking up in the middle of the night with a unilateral headache and it seems like it's deep within your um within your head or it's starting there and it's on one side and localized to the eye and maybe these other regions the trigeminal is involved in you may be suffering from cluster type headache and you should talk to your physician the other symptom that's quite common in cluster type headache is a droopy eyelid which should make sense because the trigeminal innervates the eye region and there are other nerves that control the eyelid but they're in that General region and they can be impacted the other thing is something called meiosis which is that you can't dilate the pupil I mentioned this before so those your pupils might get really really small and they won't dilate and the other thing is lacrimation tearing and then nasal discharge all because of a neural inflammation problem why do I tell you with such detail about cluster headaches well if you are somebody that's experiencing the kind of pain that is consistent with cluster headache taking a standard anti-inflammatory or doing something that is going to adjust the vial the excuse me the dilation or constriction of blood vessels may have an indirect impact on cluster headache but is unlikely to relieve cluster headache either acutely meaning right away or in preventing cluster headaches you have to deal with this as a neural issue and we'll talk about some of the main causes of inflammation and activation of these cluster type headaches at the level of the trigeminal nerve in a little bit because fortunately there are some excellent treatments the next type of headache that is quite common are hormonal headaches now the phrase hormonal headache should already cue you to the fact that it's far too General a term because there's so many different hormones testosterone estrogen thyroid hormone growth hormone and on and on and on and they all have many different functions in the brain and body every single hormone and in particular the so-called steroid hormones steroids again not just limited to things that people take for Sports in fact the steroid hormones refers to estrogen testosterone of the sort that we all make that men and women make naturally and those steroid hormones can impact gene expression they can are of course what turns on the growth of the of the breast tissue of the testicular tissue of the hair growth and on and on and that's all because of gene expression if you're really going to change the identity and function of a cell long term right you're going to literally change the breast tissue or change the penile tissue or change the ovarian tissue in some sort of consistent way across the lifespan you can bet that there are changes in gene expression and those changes in gene expression occur because these steroid hormones have this incredible ability sort of like the X-Men of hormones to pass through the outer membrane of a cell which we call the extracellular membrane and into the so-called nuclear membrane they can go into the area where genes are made and turn on and off different genes however they multitask in their life that is these steroid hormones like estrogen in particular and testosterone in particular can also bind to the surface of cells and impact all sorts of things at the level of the cells that have nothing to do with changes in gene expression and that second mechanism of binding to the surface of cells is one of the ways in which estrogen can control different aspects of headache now that doesn't necessarily mean the estrogen gives you headaches in fact it's just the opposite it turns out that low estrogen and another hormone low progesterone combine to give rise to headache because of the ways that low estrogen and low progesterone impact vasodilation and vasoconstriction and the inflammatory response we'll talk about how to deal with hormone-based headaches a particular hormone was headaches that occur because of low estrogen and progesterone in a moment but the key thing to know is something that we covered in the fertility episode I did a very long very detailed episode on fertility so I'm not going going to go into this in significant detail now you can refer to that episode for probably more detail than you ever wanted but also a lot of tools as it relates to fertility in both males and females but right now I'm just going to give you a course overview of that in about 60 to 120 seconds so that you'll understand when hormonal headaches are most likely to take place keep in mind that hormonal headaches are most likely to take place when estrogen and progesterone are lowest so if you understand that during the follicular stage of the ovulatory slash menstrual cycle okay so menstrual cycle is about 28 days on average not in everyone but it's about 20 days on average and the first half of that estrogen starts creeping up up up up up up up up up up and as we learn in endocrinology estrogen primes progesterone so estrogen will then Peak and then start to fall pretty quickly right about the time that the egg ovulates an egg is released and will essentially be ready for fertilization if the egg is fertilized a whole bunch of other things happen as it relates to pregnancy if not what ends up happening is that during the ludial phase which is the second half of the menstrual cycle there's been a buildup of the lining of the uterus because of an increase in progesterone so estrogen goes up during the follicular phase then it goes down and then progesterone goes up up up up up which is important for generating that thick lining of the uterus to allow the fertilized egg if it's fertilized to implant and if it's not fertilized all of that gets released from the body in this bleeding process that we call menstruation if menstruation occurs and day one of the menstrual cycle is considered the first day in which bleeding occurs well then what that means is that estrogen is already low because remember estrogen was low at the start of the follicular phase and went up up up up up up then it comes down right at the time of ovulation and progesterone goes up up up up up during the luteal phase in fact it's more than a thousand fold increase in progesterone but if there's no fertilization of the egg progesterone starts coming down down down down down what does that mean that means that on the first to about the fourth or fifth day of the menstrual cycle first being the first day of bleeding until about the fourth or fifth day of the menstrual cycle both estrogen and progesterone are very very low and it is at that time at the very beginning of the menstrual cycle so about the first week of the menstrual cycle that many women are very prone to hormonal headaches hormonal headaches not because estrogens High that's a common misconception rather because estrogen and progesterone are both low and now that you understand the Contour or the under underlying reasons for hormonal headache you can start to ask well what happens when estrogen is low well estrogen has a strong impact on the vasodilation vasoconstriction system as does progesterone we'll talk about that a little bit later but now that you know what hormonal headache is at least this one particular type of hormonal headache which is very very common given the number of women that are menstruating and the fact that low estrogen low progesterone is the cause of the hormonal headache and the fact that of course there are women who are no longer menstruating so they're either in perimenopause and menstruation is becoming more infrequent or they're in menopause and it deceased entirely well now you understand what the origin of the hormonal headache is and so all we need to know is what do estrogen and progesterone normally do in order to prevent headache and thereby you'll know exactly how to offset that is prevent or treat hormonal headache in that first week of the menstrual period the last type of headache that I'd like to discuss is headache associated with head hits that is traumatic brain injury although I definitely want to underscore the fact that even people who do not have traumatic brain injury can experience headaches as the consequence of hitting their head so the line between traumatic brain injury and lower level brain injury is one that still seeks definition in fact this is one of the major goals of the clinical field as it relates to concussion you know it's also what comes up a lot during the discussion about football you know these days you'll see players hit really hard and depending on whether or not they're laying there for five seconds 30 seconds or three minutes you know the crowd and the uh the people watching on television and everywhere else are all speculating as to whether or not the person should be allowed to play and to be quite direct there really is no way to assess the extent of brain damage after the consequence of hitting one's head or having one's head hit because first of all almost all of the best ways to detect traumatic brain injury except the most severe ones tend to require a lot of very large equipment like MRI and functional MRI and CT scans none of which are available on the side of the field or in the locker room but also because many many if not most of the effects of traumatic brain injury are going to occur not in the immediate minutes or even hours after the injury but several hours days or even weeks after that injury this is a discussion that we should hold off for a longer full episode on traumatic brain injury keeping in mind of course that football is this very Salient example of traumatic brain injury and concussion as is boxing as is even soccer with heading of the ball Believe It or Not repeated low level impact to the forehead and other parts of the head can give rise to over time traumatic brain injury without the need for any kind of full-blown concussion or being quote unquote knocked out but sports related concussion actually occupies just a tiny fraction of the majority of traumatic brain injury and concussion most traumatic brain injury and concussion and low-level brain injury that can accumulate over time to become traumatic for sake of daily living that is lowered cognition disruption and mood sleep Etc is actually the consequence of things other than Sports so for instance bicycle accidents playground accidents construction accidents and this is often forgotten for some reason all the sports in particular football tend to grab all the attention as it relates to concussion keep in mind that while for certain people is a path to a living for most people traumatic brain injury is going to occur in a car accident construction work or other types of work for which people generally don't have many options in terms of the type of work that they're doing so they are prone to concussions and head injuries simply by virtue of their work without any you know millions of dollars contracts or the opportunities necessarily some cases they do but necessarily to do other things and certainly car accidents or bike bicycle accidents are not voluntary events so the point being traumatic brain injury and headache related traumatic brain injury extends far beyond the realm of sports and in fact if you were to look at the numbers what you find is that more than 90 percent of traumatic brain injury so people coming into the hospital or clinic are people claiming that they've got consistent headaches they're not sleeping well their mood is off they're feeling more irritable after having hit their head even once is not the consequence of sports it's going to be the consequence of accidents either on at the workplace or in terms of a bicycle or other sorts of Transportation based accident like a car accident with that in mind any kind of head hit certainly involves a concussion or traumatic brain injury often leads to headaches either infrequent but severe headaches or chronic low-level headaches or a feeling there's kind of a stuffiness or a fullness to the head there can be a lot of different Origins to that a common origin is going to be actual swelling of the not necessarily the brain tissue directly but if you recall our discussion about the meninges which include the dura and the other tissues that surround the brain they're actually three layers that we call the meninges the durages being one of them and there's a very little space between those the brain the meninges that surround it and the skull it's called the subarachnoid space very cool right arachnoid like spider well if there's even a slight bit of swelling in the brain or even distant brain tissue so for instance even if the there's Whiplash so there's swelling of the tissue muscular tissue and neural tissue in the neck area that can constrict the flow of things like cerebral spinal fluid blood flow and indeed mucus and other other things that are essential we all hear mucus and we think Illness but mucus is a vital vital substance within the body for a lot of important reasons in health as well as in sickness well if there's less of that liquid and other fluids and mucus being delivered to that space well then it can clog up so sort of the plumbing is clogged up or that it's caught at the level of the site of hit or injury because there's some local swelling and inflammation there so there are many different mechanisms that can underlie headache associated with head hits or traumatic brain injury now fortunately there are some recent data pointing to some what I would call non-obvious treatments for headache in traumatic brain injury keeping in mind that anytime we're talking about injury or disease or health for that matter mental health or physical health we have to highlight a fact that's going to come up again and again in every single episode of this podcast and I think it's not being overly redundant to do so which is that regular sufficient amounts of deep sleep each night are going to be important for all aspects of mental health physical health and performance and have been shown over and over again to reduce the frequency of headache and to reduce the time to repair after traumatic brain injury and can improve cognition and on and on and on so sleep is essential for all the normal things that encourage healthy activity of the different tissues that are involved in brain and body to occur so sleep deprivation of course is going to limit those but I do want to point out that sleep sunlight and I've talked about this almost ad nauseam on this podcast but regular circadian Cycles getting sunlight in your eyes early in the day and in the evening as well and as much as possible throughout the day without burning your skin and limiting your exposure to artificial lights at night and on and on all of which is covered in the light for health episode of The huberman Lab podcast the master sleep episode The huberman Lab podcast and in the perfect your sleep episode The huberman Lab podcast you can find all that at hubermanlab.com getting light and avoiding light at the proper times of the 24 hour cycle is also going to favor all the pathways ranging from gut brain access to the inflammatory anti-inflammatory Pathways neural Pathways Etc that of course if you do that you're going to improve and offset any kind of detriment caused by traumatic brain injury is it treating traumatic brain injury directly no but is not getting sufficient sleep not getting sunlight at the right times of day and getting too much artificial light at night going to make any impact of traumatic brain injury including headache far worse yes there are certainly a ton of data to support that state statement as well and then of course nutrition and exercise are also important so we can list out sleep Sun proper nutrition exercise and I would put a proper social connection whatever that means to you healthy social connections include romantic friendship familial and relationship to self those five things sleep exercise Sun nutrition and social connection are all critical for maintaining baselines of health and raising your baselines of health and I mentioned that I can segment this out now because I think that anytime we're about to start discussing pointed treatments that is things that you can take or do to reduce headache or things that you can take or do to improve anything within mental health physical health and performance we have to remember that the foundation of mental health physical health and performance is only set at its highest level by tending to those other things and that nothing really surpasses any of those things or put differently there's no replacement for any of those things in the form of a pill a powder even a behavioral practice there are things you can do to offset getting less than ideal sleep the things that you can use like bright artificial lights during the day to try and partially offset lack of sunlight but really there is no exercise pill there is no sunlight device although some bright lights are very bright there's no no replace basement for actual sunlight there's no replacement for actual sleep there's no replacement for actual nutrition and I do feel it's an important conversation to have as we head into the next segment which is what can you take or do to reduce headache and in order to address this we're going to start first with the headaches associated with head hits and traumatic brain injury because turns out there's a surprising and very useful approach to doing that but this same approach also can help offset and treat headache in other conditions as well meaning not just for headaches caused by traumatic brain injury but also headaches caused by sudden onset Tension Headache or migraine headache or even perhaps again perhaps cluster type headaches so the first substance that I'd like to highlight that has been shown to significantly reduce the intensity and or frequency of headaches is creatine now creatine as many of you know is something that people supplement and take most often creatine is discussed in the context of muscle performance not just for people who weightlift but for people who do endurance exercise and it's often been said that 5 to 10 grams per day of creatine monohydrate depending on how much you weigh 5 to 10 grams per day of creatine monohydrate can increase creatine phosphate stores in muscles can bring more water into muscles can make you stronger get increased power output and that is all true that is all completely true we discussed this in the huberman lab podcast with Dr Andy Galpin when he was a guest on the Hebrew and Lab podcast or standard series and we discussed this extensively in an upcoming episode from Dr Andy Galpin in his special six-part guest Series where he is a guest on the Hebrew Lab podcast but where really he's the one doing the majority of the teaching that series covers everything from strength hypertrophy endurance and there's an episode on supplementation where we go deep into the discussion about creatine now in that discussion and again now we highlight the fact that creatine While most often discussed online and in the media as a supplement for sports performance for the reasons I just mentioned actually has far more data behind it that is laboratory studies exploring the role of creatine in the clinical setting so I'd like to highlight a paper from that literature now that will make very clear as to why creatine is interesting and in fact very effective for treating headache and particular headache caused by head hits or traumatic brain injury the title of the paper is prevention of traumatic headache dizziness and fatigue with creatine Administration now keep in mind this is a pilot study it was performed in humans so when you hear the words pre-clinical that is if you hear there was a pre-clinical study on blank that means almost always that the study was performed on animal models mice rats primates Etc a clinical trial is something that's carried out on humans and a pilot study means that the study was carried out on humans but on a fairly small cohort a very fairly small group uh or limited number of subjects nonetheless if the data are robust as it is in this case of this paper I think it's worth paying attention to so in this study what they looked at was creatine Administration so what they did is they had people ingest a certain amount of creatine I'll tell you in a moment in fluid so it could be taken in water milk with or without food doesn't really matter what time of day they had people take creatine why would they have people take creatine after traumatic brain injury and in particular for people that are suffering from headache dizziness fatigue Etc the reason is that neurons nerve cells rely very heavily on the regulation of calcium in order to generate those Action potentials to communicate with one another so it doesn't matter if it's a motor neuron a sensory neuron or a modulatory neuron they all generate Action potentials or something similar to it and calcium is important for that process calcium becomes dysregulated after traumatic brain injury in a number of different ways in particular in ways that impact the energy production systems of cells that are related to ATP adenosine triphosphate for those facionados out there that want to look it up you can simply look up calcium ATP and neurons and you can learn about that cycle creatine can be stored in muscles as we talked about before but creatine and in particular the phosphorylated form of creatine which is the readily available fuel source form of creatine can also be stored in brain tissue and is actually quite prominently stored in the forebrain the area where the real estate of of your brain just behind the forehead which is involved in planning and action and understanding context so it's very important for cognition it's important for personality too but it's important for a number of different aspects of life that have to do with making plans being able to focus very intensely on your work etc or on anything for that matter all functions that become heavily disrupted in people who have traumatic brain injury and concussion creatine's ability to communicate with the calcium in the ATP system was the motivation behind the study that is the authors hypothesize on the basis of pre-clinical data in animals that by increasing creatine stores within the brain not just in the muscle but in particular within the brain that the availability of creatine would allow for better cognitive function in general now they didn't look at cognition specifically in this paper but they did look at the other aspects that is that the bad stuff associated with TBI and they had people supplement with creatine at a level that is much higher than the typical level that people supplement with creatine Simply for Sports Performance so as I mentioned before most people if they supplement with creatine for sports performance they take creatine monohydrate typically five grams per day sometimes 10 grams per day if they're about 100 kilograms or or greater in body weight 100 kilograms is 200 approximately 220. pounds so the dosage that was used for supplementing creatine in this study to address the potential impact of creatine on headache dizziness and fatigue was quite a bit higher than the dosages used simply for muscle performance in this study they had people take a dose of 0.4 grams of creatine monohydrate per kilogram of body weight so for somebody that weighs 100 kilograms or 220 pounds that would be 40 grams of creatine per day if someone weighs half that much they would take 20 grams of creatine per day and they did that over a period of six months and we know that when you take creatine over and over day to day that there's a buildup of creatine stores both in the muscles and within the brain tissue now what they found as a consequence of this creatine Administration was really striking and I think quite exciting they found a very significant decrease in the frequency of headache in people that were supplementing with creatine as opposed to the controls now keep in mind that this is a pilot study but the effects are very dramatic they found a very statistically significant decrease increase in the frequency of headache in people that were taking creatine in fact if you look at the controls and you see that they're basically getting headache at a frequency of 90 percent or more after TBI the reduction in headache frequency is down to about 10 or 12 percent in the people taking creatine so that's quite quite a dramatic effect and if you look at the other measures they took keep in mind again this is a pilot study so a limited number of subjects but again the results are very impressive what they found is that the number of people experiencing dizziness was significantly reduced in people supplementing with creatine as was the number of people experiencing fatigue and acute fatigue and chronic fatigue again not chronic fatigue syndrome per se but chronic fatigue which was in this study defined as a general sense of bodily weakness and even mental weakness mental weakness is a little bit hard to quantify but they were very careful to distinguish between cognitive and mental fatigue versus physical and somatic fatigue they acknowledge that both of those occur in TBI or post-tbi the headache is quite frequent basically the takeaway of the study is that for people experiencing headache dizziness and fatigue due to TBI and perhaps and I want to underline perhaps because it hasn't really been explored yet but perhaps headache dizziness and fatigue due to other conditions symptoms or causes of headache creatine monohydrate supplementation might be again might be an excellent candidate for people to try why do we say that well first of all creatine monohydrate is relatively inexpensive it's considered safe at the dosages used in this study and certainly for sports performance as well and there are very few other compounds that have been shown to have as significant an impact on headache over the long term as has creatine monohydrate in these studies of people with TBI it's also important to highlight the fact that many many people suffer from tbis I mentioned earlier and as now there are very few treatments for TBI you tend to get the basic advice coming back and again I think it's excellent advice you know get proper amounts of sleep get exercise but don't get another traumatic brain injury that's obvious but you'd be surprised how many people go right back to work because they have to and you know we have to be sympathetic to the fact that many people just can't stop working or go on disability so many people have to go back to work that could be sport or it could be other kind of work where they are then subject to perhaps getting more TBI maybe they're getting less rest as a consequence and stress obviously stress is a confounding issue for TBI but sleep exercise Sun nutrition all of those things proper social connection are what people are encouraged to do when they have TBI but there have been very few compounds in particular very few over-the-counter compounds that are known to be safe that have shown efficacy in dealing with TBI so I think that while this is a pilot study and we can consider it preliminary I think it's important enough and the effects were dramatic enough that people with headache and in particular people with TBI ought to consider supplementing with creatine in order to deal with their headaches and of course I eagerly await other studies exploring the role of this high dosage of creatine which is a relatively high dosage of creatine monohydrate for offsetting headache meanwhile I think there are a number of people out there suffering from headache who might consider using creatine monohydrate in an exploratory fashion and seeing whether or not it helps offset their headaches keep in mind of course anytime you're going to add or remove anything supplement or otherwise from your from your treatment your nutrition Etc I do suggest that you consult with your physician in particular if you have chronic headaches I don't say that to protect me I say that of course to protect you I'd like to take a brief break and thank our sponsor inside tracker inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term Health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test the problem with a lot of blood and DNA tests out there however is that you get data back about metabolic factors lipids and hormones and so forth but you don't know what to do with those data inside tracker solves that problem and makes it very easy for you to understand what sorts of nutritional behavioral maybe even supplementation based interventions you might want to take on in order to adjust the numbers of those metabolic factors hormones lipids and other things that impact your immediate and long-term Health to bring those numbers into the ranges that are appropriate and indeed optimal for you inside tracker's ultimate plan also now includes a measure of April lipoprotein b apolipoprotein b sometimes also called APO B has emerged in recent years as among the most important measures to evaluate your overall levels of cardiovascular health and health overall and that's because apolipoprotein B levels are predictive of cardiovascular function disease and things that cardiovascular function and disease can impinge on including brain Health and Longevity if you'd like to try inside tracker you can visit insidetracker.com huberman and get 20 off any of inside tracker's plans that's inside tracker.com huberman to get 20 off what I'd like to discuss next I find extremely exciting why well what I'm about to describe is a compound or I should say a set of compounds that are available over the counter that have been shown to be very effective in reducing the frequency and intensity of headaches and not just one kind of headache but multiple types of headaches so what I'll describe has been shown to have significant effects in reducing the intensity or frequency of tension type headaches migraine type headaches as well as hormone type headaches that are related to the menstrual cycles that I described earlier now there are a lot of data centered around this General topic but I'm going to focus on three main papers but I haven't told you yet of course is what is the compound that I'm referring to what is this over-the-counter compound well it turns out this over-the-counter compound is not just available over the counter it's also available in food so it turns out that nutrition can have a very strong impact on the frequency and intensity of headache although supplementation with this particular compound can accomplish the same thing as well what I'm referring to here are omega-3 fatty acids many of you are probably familiar with omega-3 fatty acids these are fatty acids that come in the form of so-called EPA and DHA and omega-3 fatty acids are commonly distinguished from the so-called omega-6 fatty acids omega-6 fatty acids come in a bunch of different foods and they of course can be supplemented as well omega-3 fatty acids come in a bunch of different foods and can be supplemented as well Common forms of omega-3 fatty acids or I should say common sources of omega-3 fatty acids in Foods include fatty ocean fish including salmon salmon skins sardines anchovies things of that sort common sources in supplement form are so-called fish oil capsules or liquid fish oil again omega-3 fatty acids and almost always when we're talking about omega-3 fatty acids we're talking about a combination of EPA and DHA but really it is the quantity of EPA omega-3 fatty acids that seems to be the most impactful for the sorts of Health metrics that we're going to talk about in a few minutes now with respect to omega-6 fatty acids the most typical food sources of omega-6 fatty acids are seed oils I know nowadays seed oils have become quite controversial I've given my stance on this in a prior podcast but I'll just repeat it for those of you that haven't heard it I am not of the belief that all seed oils are bad that they're all inflammatory that they are killing us or making us sick that they are the major cause of metabolic dysfunction Etc however I think it is very clear and I learned this from Dr Lane Norton when he was a guest on this podcast and taught us all about nutrition in great depth I highly recommend that episode if you're interested in nutrition that people are consuming a lot more oil generally and a lot of those oils that people are consuming more of nowadays include a lot of the so-called omega-6 fatty acids and a lot of those oils are seed oils the particular omega-6 fatty acid that's going to be relevant for today's discussion is linoleic acid and that is common in a lot of seed oils so again I'm not going to tell you that seed oils are bad however it does seem to be the case that many people are consuming far too many seed oils and in doing so are consuming far too many calories and perhaps are consuming too much of the Omega six fatty acids relative to the omega-3 fatty acids now with that said I think there is General agreement among nutritionists and health professionals that we could all stand to get more omega-3 fatty acids perhaps for cardiovascular health although that's a little bit debated but certainly for immune system function for mood and for functioning of the brain and for the potent anti-inflammatory effects of Omega-3 so again Omega-3s can be sourced from food both animal based and plant-based you can simply go online and look up the various food-based sources but in thinking about headache and different treatments for headache there are some recent studies exploring how supplementing with omega-3 fatty acids and in one case how supplementing with omega-3 fatty acids and deliberately reducing the amount of linoleic acid the omega-6 fatty acids how that can impact headache so the first study I'd like to describe in reference to the role of omega-3 fatty acids and headache was published in 2018 and the title of the paper is long chain omega-3 fatty acids and headache in the U.S population there are a number of things that I really like about this study a few of those include the fact that they looked at an enormous number of people that is they included 12 317 men and women I like the fact that they included men and women in the study age 20 or older and that they broke down the population into categories that included age they certainly looked at race and ethnicity they looked at educational background they looked at body mass total energy intake which is really important if you think about it people are going to be eating and within the thing things that they eat they're going to be consuming some Omega-3s hopefully as well some omega-6s and if they're eating far more then they're going to get far more of likely going to get far more of both of those things than they would ordinarily if they were eating smaller amounts so they controlled for total caloric intake in a way that I find particularly useful for looking at these kind of data so the reason they explored Omega-3s is worth mentioning omega-3 fatty acids are known to have an anti-inflammatory effect that anti-inflammatory effect is mediated through a couple of different Pathways we won't go into these in too much detail now but the omega-3 fatty acids keep in mind actually make up various parts of cells in the brain and body that's right the membrane that remember I talked before about how steroid hormones can go through the different membranes of the cells the outer membrane and the inner membrane a lot of those actual membranes the structural constituents of neurons and other cells are actually made up of or include certain fatty acid long-chain fatty acids and the omega-3 fatty acids are important for or the actual construction of those tissues as well as having anti-inflammatory effects through things like limiting prostaglandins and other things that can cause inflammation okay so there are a bunch of different ways that omega-3 fatty acids can be useful they refer in this study to an earlier study that looked at the so-called analgesic effect the pain relieving effect analgesic means pain relieving effect of omega-3 fatty acids in what had been a randomized controlled trial and in that previous paper what they found was that diets high in Omega-3s and low in omega-6s okay so high three low six and as compared to diets that were just reduced omega-6s they found a greater analgesic effect of increasing Omega-3s while also reducing omega-6 fatty acids so in the context of the seed oil discussion although keeping in mind that omega-6s can come from other sources as well if omega-6s were just reduced on their own there wasn't as great in effect in terms of reducing pain and inflammation as there was when omega-3 fatty acids were deliberately increased and omega-6 fatty acids were reduced again in all of these studies because these are the ones in which they controlled things well as we should as we say they are holding constant the caloric intake so it's not just that you're removing fat eating less fat there's actually a removal of certain fats and fatty acids and a replacement of those with omega-3 fatty acids in one case in the other case it's just a reduction in omega-6s and you're using other food types and macronutrients to offset that that reduction in calories caused by reducing omega-6s the basic takeaway that they're relying on marching into the study is that increasing Omega-3s and reducing omega-6s seems to be beneficial for reducing pain and indeed in this study they find something quite similar which is that when you hold caloric intake constant and when you look at omega-6s whether or not you decrease omega-6 fatty acids or not you find is that increasing omega-3 fatty acids in the diet so either consumed through food sources or by supplementation was associated with a lower prevalence of severe headache or migraine so severe tension type headache or migraine so this is promising and points to the fact that long chain omega-3 fatty acids are likely to have either a pain reducing and there's evidence for that and or an inflammation reducing effect that can significantly reduce the severity of headache in both tension type headache and in migraine so that's the first study the second study is a more recent study it was published in 2021 that used a I would say a more or less similar type of overall design is the one I'd refer to earlier the title of this paper is dietary alteration of what they call N3 but those are omega-3 and n6 omega-6 sorry for this shift in nomenclature I didn't write the paper dietary alteration of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids for headache reductions in adults with migraine and this was a randomized control trial randomized control trials involve having people be in one condition where they do one thing and then they get swapped randomly into another condition so they serve as their own internal control and that controls for all sorts of things like differences in sex differences in age differences in health background in any number of other variables as best as one can in this study they had people either ingest a diet that had increased Omega-3s so increased EPA and DHA or increased EPA and DHA and reduced amounts of linoleic acid okay so that's going to reduce omega-6s or a control diet in which they had people taking well it's essentially the average intake of Omega-3s and omega-6s and you can probably already guess what the general results of the study are going to be the general results were that there were reductions in headaches okay the really cool thing is it was a massive reduction in headache okay this was they refer to it as a robust reduction in headache in particular for the subjects that increase their Omega-3s and reduce the amount of linoleic acid that they took the other thing that I really like about this study is that while they don't know the exact underlying mechanism for the effect they did spend some time delineating what it is that the omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids are likely doing to either offset or exacerbate headache now I didn't say that omega-6 fatty acids exacerbate headache but it does seem that people who ingest more linoleic acid and omega-6 are experiencing more inflammation and that is evident in a bunch of different conditions one for instance is or increases in things like cgrp cgrp is a molecule that's associated with the calcium signaling pathway it's involved in vasodilation the expansion of the blood vessels and capillaries and that's known as I mentioned earlier to exacerbate certain forms of headache okay there are also forms of headache that can be caused by vasoconstriction we'll talk about one very dramatic example perhaps as we get toward the end it's a very uncommon example but um it's a it's called Thunderclap headache and trust me you do not want Thunderclap headache um and so we'll talk about Thunderclap headache a little bit later that involves constriction of the blood vessels in any case in this paper they they didn't study mechanism directly but they're resting on this known analgesic anti-pain as well as known anti-inflammatory Pathways related to increasing omega-3 intake and simultaneously resting on the idea where I think there's I think we now can say conclusion that omega-6 fatty acids in particular linoleic acid can increase inflammation by way of increasing things like cgrp vasodilation and some other Pathways related to the so-called inflammatory cytokine Pathways and there's a whole discussion nowadays of What's called the inflammatorium so the basic takeaway is that if you are interested in reducing headache it may be beneficial at least according to these two studies and another one I'll talk about in a moment to increase amounts of omega-3 fatty acids and that can be done again through the ingestions of foods although based on the dosages that we'll talk about in a moment increasing omega-3 fatty acids by taking liquid form fish oil which is perhaps the most cost effective way to supplement Omega-3s or capsules which is perhaps the most efficient way to supplement Omega-3s relate to a level of one gram or more of EPA per day again that's the EPA form in particular so if you're for instance taking supplemental fish oil or you're getting your Omega-3s from food and you're getting what you determine to be 2 000 milligrams or two grams per day of Omega-3s keep in mind that's going to include EPA ndha and it does seem that getting above one gram per day of EPA omega-3 fatty acids either through food or supplements or both is going to be the critical threshold for reductions in the frequency and intensity of headaches that include both tension headaches and migraine headaches now some people will find actually that ingesting far more omega-3 fatty acids generally through supplementation but again can be accomplished through Foods as well can also be beneficial for other things such as mood and indeed there's a whole literature related to effects of ingesting one to three grams again three grams per day of EPA so that's going to require quite a high intake of Omega-3s in whatever form or supplement you decide to take those into your body but that that can improve mood and so forth the basic range that I was able to find in the meta-analysis so meta-analyzes are where a researcher will look at the results of a bunch of different studies focused on the same thing look at the different strength of those studies they'll do all sorts of cool statistical gymnastics like remove the most potent study the one that had the greatest effect and see whether or not they're still an effect of some treatment or for instance they will swap in and out different studies and different combinations to see whether or not any one study is really leading to the conclusion that a given treatment does something in any case in the meta-analysis of omega-3 fatty acids for the treatment of headache and that includes all the different kinds of headache they found in exploring a huge range of Omega-3 supplementation ranging from 200 milligrams all the way up to 2 000 milligrams per day it really was at the one gram or higher dosage per day where the significant impact on reducing headache frequency and intensity was found and just very briefly earlier I mentioned that not only is omega-3 fatty acids supplementation been shown to be effective in reducing the frequency and intensity of headache in tension type and migraine type headache but it's also been shown to improve outcomes for premenstrual syndrome related headaches these are what we refer to earlier as hormone-based headaches again the low estrogen low progesterone associated with certain phases of the menstrual cycle as well as other phase of the menstrual cycle are often associated with headache in uh study entitled effective omega-3 fatty acids on premenstrual syndrome a systematic review and again meta-analysis what they found and here I'm paraphrasing the conclusion was that omega-3 fatty acids could yes effectively reduce the severity of PMS symptoms and one of the symptoms in particular that they found what that was reduced was the pain related symptoms associated with headache and they actually had some very nice hypotheses as to why that likely would be and in fact point out that in earlier studies omega-3 fatty acids have actually been considered as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in some cases and indeed there are prescription forms of omega-3 fatty acids and I highlight that not because I think people need to run out and get the prescription form of omega-3 fatty acids they're actually quite hard to obtain and quite expensive but because I think oftentimes when we're talking about something like omega-3 fatty acids the fact that they are available over the counter in a supplement or by liquid or available in food for that matter leads many people to conclude that oh you know this is supplementation this is something that um you know it's going to have relatively weak or minor impact on things like headache or other health metrics but let's just say that the fact that it exists as a prescription drug and its highest potency form at least in my opinion points to the potency of omega-3 fatty acids in dealing with analgesic effects that is reducing pain and anti-inflammation as well as some of the known cardiovascular improvements that are associated with increasing omega-3 fatty acid intake put simply Omega-3s are not just something that comes from food or supplements they are also being marketed as prescription drugs so I do think they need to be considered as quite potent and at least as far as these papers that again include meta-analyzes of many other papers and data sets indicate that supplementing with omega-3 fatty acids to a point where you're getting above one gram per day of EPA is not just going to be beneficial for treating and reducing the frequency and intensity of one particular type of headache but many types of headaches and when you combine hormonal headaches tension headaches and migraine headaches you account for more than 70 percent of the total types of headaches that are out there the effects of Omega-3s on cluster headaches and some of the other types of headaches at least to my knowledge have not been evaluated there's no reason to think that Omega-3s would not be beneficial for those types of headaches but at least as far as the data sets we talked about here are concerned it is clear omega-3 fatty acids are going to be a very potent way to reduce pain and to reduce inflammation in ways that can reduce the frequency and the intensity of different kinds of headache before we continue our discussion about many not commonly known and yet very potent treatments for different forms of headache I want to touch on a topic we mentioned a little bit earlier and also provide a treatment that is in a way to alleviate something and that's photophobia and Aura now keep in mind that earlier I referred to Aura as this sense that something's about to happen that is true and that meaning that is an accurate description of Aura but oftentimes people also come to understand Aura as the feeling that something surrounds a given object visually or even that people have a sense that something's around them so again this can be a little bit vague but this idea that aura is a sense of something about to happen or that visually or in an auditory way and or maybe even in kind of a sense that something is about to happen in a certain environment and the reason I'm making uh kind of Arc shapes with my hands for those of you that are just listening I'm making art shapes with my hands is that aura is often described as kind of a Halo or a um emanating out from from one's body or from something that they're looking at again nothing spiritual about this in the context of the discussion about migraine and headache but rather many people experience photophobia sometimes with aura sometimes no and I just want to touch on a couple of the mechanisms by which aurum photophobia occur and mentioned just briefly a pretty well established way that people can start to offset photophobia and again I mentioned that because many people experience photophobia in headache but there are also a number of people that experience photophobia even if they don't have intense headaches so photophobia is pretty common pretty debilitate it actually is one of the reasons why people feel not well and need to leave work or not go to school or or leave school these kinds of things or lay in bed all day or dim the lights not go outside again sunlight being so congruent with health you can imagine how photophobia can lead to all sorts of negative Downstream consequences okay so what is Aura and what is photophobia the exact origins of ARA aren't exactly clear but it is generally thought that what Aura represents is what's called spreading depression and this is not depression of one's mood although it can be associated with that this is depression of neuronal activity again neurons communicate with one another by generating electrical impulses that travel down the length of their of their so-called axons which are like little wires and then they dump neurotransmitter out at the so-called synapse and impact the electrical activity of other neurons depression is a electrical or I should say a chemical electrical chemoelectrical is the proper term phenomenon in which the excitability of neurons is reduced so again doesn't have anything to do with depression as a mood State per se rather it is a reduced excitability of neurons and it's been shown in some Imaging studies that aura is associated with a back to front so from the back of the brain to front spreading depression like a wave of lowering levels of electrical excitability and because this originates in the visual cortex which is in the back so that's the part of your brain that is making sense of visual images coming in through the eyes and relayed through other stations in the brain that people will start to see a kind of Halo of light or that they'll start to feel that the light around them is literally surrounding their body or some other object or body that they're looking at and then it spreads forward in the brain and that's when it tends to stretch over into other so-called sensory modalities sensory modalities being things like touch or hearing so people will get the sense that kind of seeing something in their periphery of their Vision then they'll start feeling something around them there's a sense that something's about to happen so is this spreading wave of depression goes from Back to Front people experience a number of these different semi-abstract sensory phenomena that we Call Aura okay so that's how Aura originates now photophobia is a little bit different photophobia We Now understand because of some beautiful work that was done at Cliff saper's Lab at Harvard Medical School and some other Laboratories showing that photophobia originates from a specific set of neurons in the eye we call these the intrinsically photosensitive melanops and ganglion cells which is really just a mouthful of nerd speak for neurons in the eye that connect to the brain these so-called ganglion cells that respond most robustly to bright blue light or other shortwavelength light so you've got short wavelength light that is blue and greens or short wavelengths and then long wavelet light which is red or you know it can even be out past red will be infrared we don't detect infrared consciously other species do like pit vipers can see in the infrared they can even heat sense so short wavelength light is going to be light that's that's bright blue green it's what's very common in fluorescent bulbs that are commonly used in household lighting and workplace lighting and other forms of artificial lighting it's also of course present in sunlight sunlight includes a huge range of wavelengths including long wavelength light of course you've seen that as the Reds and oranges in the sunset and so on those intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells in the eye respond best to bright green or blue light and they send connections to a bunch of different places in the brain including the so-called Central circadian clock superchiasmatic nucleus that sets your day night sleep wake rhythms this is why I encourage people to view sunlight in the morning to set this system in motion to avoid bright light exposure at night from artificial sources in order to not send wake-up signals from the eye to the brain and then on to the rest of the body but these intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells are also known to connect with other areas of the brain many other areas of the brain in fact and one of the important areas of the brain they connect to as it relates to photophobia is an area of a structure called the thalamus the thalamus is an egg-like structure that sits in the center of the brain and it serves as a kind of a switchboard like a sensory relay by which information coming from the eyes from the ears from The Touch system Etc are funneled into different compartments in the thalamus and then sent to different other areas of the brain so think of it kind of like an old-fashioned switchboard or um you could think of it uh sort of like a in an airport you go uh to a particular um wing of the airport then you go to a particular gate and so on you're getting funneled progressively through uh narrower narrower channels until you arrive at your particular plane much in the same way the thalamus has a bunch of different entry points so it's sensory information coming in from a bunch of different sources and those sources get routed into progressively narrower and narrower funnels to eventually arrive at the accurate place for their function so these intrinsically photosensitive gangling cells send connections to a small but important area of the thalamus called LP it's denoted L the letter and P with lateral posterior thalamus or that I should say it's the lateral posterior nucleus of the thalamus for uficionados out there and then the neurons in that location are going to respond that is they're going to be activated by bright blue light green light or any kind of bright light originating from artificial sources or from sunlight and the neurons there that respond to that have a very interesting pattern of connections they send connections up to the so-called sensory cortex so a bunch of different layers throughout the cortex that are not associated with visual perception that is they're not associated with understanding that there are shapes and Contours in the environment but rather to neurons that are involved in the detection of pressure pain and other forms of sensory information at the level of what the meninges we talked about the meninges earlier so again while the brain itself does not have a sensory system to detect pain the tissues around it do and the tissues around those tissues that is the stuff around the meninges themselves can respond to pain and intracranial pressure is also relayed through the meninges to our conscious awareness that there's pain so what does this mean for photophobia it means that bright blue light and green light and of course light from sunlight we'll activate these neurons in the eye these intrinsically photosensitive ganglion cells which then activate the lateral posterior neurons LP neurons and those LP neurons communicate with areas of the brain that are specifically tuned to different sensory phenomena and in particular pain at the level of the meninges and intracranial pressure what this means is that when we have headache or if we simply have photophobia on its own that bright light is actually the trigger for pain sensing and even the creation of pain at the level of the meninges and intracranial pressure what does this mean in terms of dealing with or treating photophobia well most people deal with photophobia by deciding to turn off or dim all the lights and simply getting under the covers or wearing a very um low brim hat and putting on sunglasses and they want to lie down and sometimes because uh migraine can be associated with nausea or even vomiting and it's severe instances rather but one very simple way to avoid activation of these retinal ganglion cells that would trigger photophobia is that if you are starting to feel like you have a migraine coming on or you have photophobia coming on to shift to using patterns of light that are in the longer wavelength domain what that means practically is Shifting to using very orange ideally dim but very orange and red light now this is not a call for people to go out and invest in expensive red light therapies admittedly there are some excellent case uses for red light therapy particularly for acne wound healing even for improving Vision especially in people beyond the age of 40 for some hormone augmentation we talked all about that in the episode that I did on light and health again you can find that at hubermanlab.com everything time stamped what I'm talking about here would be simply having some red light bulbs on hand for any time that you need to remain awake but you're starting to experience photophobia these red light bulbs can be purchased very in expensively you know as party lights you can buy these online so there is no specific need to get any uh I would say red light that's designed specifically for photophobia or anything that sort you can find the cheapest um red light available out there and those will simply work the idea being that for many people who are experiencing photophobia they want to reduce that feeling of pain and pressure in their head experience through photophobia they also might want to stay awake get some work done and do things so operating under red light or I should say living working Etc under red light would allow you to stay awake not have to hide under the covers if you're experiencing photophobia in addition and I mentioned this at the beginning of the episode but many people find photophobia to be a entry point or a trigger to headache so what happens is they start to experience some Aura some onset of photophobia and then the photophobia itself leads to this feeling of malaise that then converts into headache and so while there are not a lot of clinical data on this just yet an emerging idea in the realm of headache treatment is the idea that if you can offset some of the early signs you can offset some of that photophobia and aura perhaps to the use of dim red lights or red lights as I've described a moment ago then you might be able to reduce the probability that you're going to have a migraine or other type of headache entirely so again no need for expensive red lights but you can find red lights very easily online and simply have them on hand or replace the current lights that you have on your nightstand or in whatever room you happen to be in with these red lights these red lights are also I should mention very useful in limiting the amount of cortisol a stress hormone that is very healthy for us to release at high levels early in the day in fact viewing sunlight will increase cortisol levels it's another reason why what I'm about to say is relevant to photophobia but if you want to keep cortisol levels low in the evening and at night and indeed you do and improve the transition to sleep and indeed your sleep overall reducing cortisol at evening time and at night time is extremely beneficial and red lights will help you accomplish that I talked about that in the episode on light and health so the point here is that if you suffer from photophobia with or without aura using red lights and not simply dimming ordinary artificial lights or feeling that you have to turn off all lights entirely is going to be one relatively inexpensive or I should say a very inexpensive in some cases because these red lights can be found very inexpensively online way to be able to continue with your daily activities at least in an indoor environment if you are suffering from photophobia so shifting back to ways to reduce the intensity and frequency of different kinds of headaches we haven't talked so much about tension headaches specifically so that's what I'd like to do now is you recall tension headaches are going to be muscular in origin again keeping in mind that everything's neural when it comes to pain everything's normal when it comes to everything frankly because every organ and tissue system in our body is ultimately controlled by our nervous system but tension headaches are often associated with tension of the muscles that are on the skull of the jaw of the neck and can be quite painful for many people and debilitating and the most common treatment for this that most people rely on that is is to take non-steroid anti-inflammatory so things like acetaminophen ibuprofen sometimes aspirin and things of that sort and oftentimes those can be helpful there are a couple things to keep in mind however the NSAIDs non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs oftentimes will work very well at first but people quickly develop a tolerance to them meaning they're going to have to take more and more in order to get the same effect and oftentimes they can't take more and more because some of them are very hard on the liver and in addition to that some of them can offset some other things that you really want so for instance it's now known that non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs can offset some of the benefits of exercise and that makes sense because a lot of the Adaptive benefits of exercise actually come from experiencing a lot of inflammation acute that means you actually want inflammation during a resistance training workout or even your endurance workout but then that inflammation triggers an adaptation event or series of adaptation events that leads to Greater strength greater speed more muscle more endurance whatever it is that you happen to be training for so reducing pain can be good of course but not if you have to take more and more of a given drug that it has side effects on the liver and can offset the effects of exercise and so forth the other issue with non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs is that many of them simply do not work for many people or again they'll work the first time and the second time but then they stop working they also tend to lower body temperature I think most people are aware of this because many of these same drugs are used in order to reduce fever but if you are taking non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs simply to reduce your headache and your lowing core body temperature that can have all sorts of Downstream issues related to sleep wake Cycles to metabolism to immune system function more generally and on and on for that reason there's been quite a lot of exploration of alternatives to non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs for the treatment of headache and indeed pain generally but today we're talking about headache now as it relates to Tension Headache one of the more advanced kind of modern treatments that you sometimes hear about is Botox right Botox I think most people are familiar with as the thing that people get injected into their face around the eyes or around the lips or elsewhere in order to quote unquote reduce wrinkles it was discovered some years ago when Botox treatments were being done for cosmetic reasons that it could often be very effective for relieving headache if injected into the muscles and the way that it works is that of course Tension Headache involves a tension of the muscles a kind of a we'll call it clinching or cinching up with the muscles but we're really talking about is contraction of the muscles and that's controlled by neurons neurons which are neuromuscular so neuromuscular neurons that don't form synapses with or connections with other neurons they form synapses with muscle they release acetylcholine onto the muscle and that makes the muscle contract this is the way you move the limbs of your body this is also a way the muscles of your head contract and can give you tension type headaches Botox arises from or is rather botulinum neurotoxin botulinum neurotoxin is a toxin that's found in canned goods not all canned goods of course and what it does is it it prevents a certain step in the release of so-called neurotransmitter in the little packets that they live in which are called vesicles little little spheres of neurotransmitter live at the end of neuron nerve Terminals and are released onto the muscle make the muscle contract botulinum neurotoxin Cleaves a particular protein in there for you aficionados who want to look this up it's a really cool mechanism it Cleaves something called Snap 25. Snap 25 is involved in the fusion of those little spheres with the membrane of the neuron and releasing of the neurotransmitter so when botulinum neurotoxin is present at the nerve muscle interface those nerves cannot communicate with the muscle and as a consequence the muscles undergo kind of flaccid tone they just kind of relax there underneath the skin sure wrinkles are relieved but if Botox is injected into the muscles themselves it can provide long-lasting relief of certain types of headaches in particular tension type headaches so while it seems like a bit of an extreme treatment people who suffer very badly from tension type headaches due to hyper contraction of the muscles of the forehead or around the temples or around the Jaws or the or certain parts of the the neck and the MUSC muscles of the neck that encroach on the on the back of the skull or that actually connect to the back of the skull can achieve tremendous long lasting relief from these Botox injections sometimes for weeks or months or even longer people go in for periodic uh you know re-ups of Botox it actually is quite safe despite the fact that botulinum neurotoxin is quite dangerous it's given in very low Doses and given locally so those are the only muscles affected so that's how Botox is used to treat headaches and um it's a very effective treatment at that of course many people I imagine are interested in not just drug based treatments and not Botox type treatments for treating headache but other types of treatments for headache that are of the more so let's call them natural or um non-drug treatments and here we're starting to get into the realm of the kind of herbal and oil-based treatments for headache now I confess when I first started researching this area of headache and treatment for headaches that is um I found myself approaching it with a bit of trepidation because when I started to hear about essential oils and about herbal medications and things of that sort I thought okay well there'll probably be some effects I mean admittedly we've talked before on this podcast about things like apogenin epigenin is one of the core components of chamomile and chamomile is known to make people feel a little bit sleepy and can enhance sleep well apogenic and high concentration can indeed augment sleep we talk about this in our sleep tool kit by the way we don't just have episodes about sleep master or sleep perfect your sleep Etc but if you go to the hubermanlab.com website and you go to the menu and you click on newsletter you can scroll down you'll see that we have a tool kit for sleep this is completely zero cost to access you don't even have to sign up although if you'd like to sign up for future newsletters you can get those one of the key components of the toolkit for sleep in addition to behavioral tools and things that are not supplement based is apogenin which is this component from chamomile so the idea that certain herbal derivatives or herbs or Oils could be very useful for improving symptoms of whatever in this case improving sleep with apogenin is not unheard of and in fact the data continued to be released all the time that many of the things that we think of as herbal Etc can actually have quite potent effects and so um while I myself was approaching the discussion about essential oils and um or I should say oils right who's to say if they're essential or not oils and herbs in the treatment of headache I finished out my research on this literature feeling um quite I should say uh surprised and um and as if I need to really check myself a bit because what I found is that there are certain herbs and oils for instance that far outperform non-steroid and anti-inflammatory drugs for the treatment of headache that's right there are certain oils that are available over the counter that when looked at in many studies meta-analyzes and I'll tell you about one particular study and a meta-analysis in a moment they show that they can reduce the frequency and intensity of headache in a manner that far outpaces What You observe with non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs with apparently none of the same issues associated with non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs so I think it's really worth paying attention to the first of those studies I'd like to describe to you is one that has now become kind of a classic in the literature I should say at least for those that are interested in the atypical treatments for headache and the title of this paper is effective peppermint and eucalyptus oil preparations on neurophysiological and experimental alge's metric headache parameters okay what does that mean well this is an interesting study because rather than look at the effectiveness of peppermint and eucalyptus oil and other oils on headache what they did is because they want to look at the mechanisms underlying headache which I confess I love the fact that they want to understand the neurophysiology and not just get subjective ratings of headache although they did that too but they really want to understand how these oils can impact things like muscular tension or perception of pain what they did is they recreated headache in human subjects by using tightening cuffs of the of the head they cut off blood supply to certain areas of the head they basically induced headache and then they measured things like the EMG the muscle response at the level of electrophysiology in the muscle and of course subjective measures of how much people perceive to be in pain or not in pain I'll give you the broad Contour of the study because I want to make sure that it's the conclusions that come through most clearly and we will provide a link to the study in our show note captions so what they did is they had people use one of four different preparations say preparation one which includes some peppermint oil and some eucalyptus oil and all the details about the amount and the relative percentages are in the paper for you to peruse online through the link I mentioned before so they had four different groups they had one group apply peppermint oil but that peppermint oil also contained eucalyptus oil they had another group used just peppermint oil they had another group use just tiny traces of peppermint oil and smaller doses of eucalyptus oil and then they had a fourth group which was just using Placebo when I say using what they were doing is they were sponge applying the oil to the temples and forehead of people and then what they did is they used these different approaches to measure the activation of muscles to measure pain and they then induced head pain they induced headache so and they looked at the temporal muscles on the side they looked at forehead muscles things of that sort so they used three different types of pain stimuli they looked at people's sensitivity to experimentally induced Pain by either providing pressure so this was kind of a cuff around the forehead or thermal pain so they actually had them basically heat heat it up at the level of the skin and actually they brought the heat up pretty high to the point where people were rating the pain almost to the to the point of um excessive pain and pain limits so they obviously couldn't take them to the point of extreme pain and they had a constriction type condition in which they cut off blood circulation to the pericranial muscles using an inflatable collar around the cranium and they inflated that to pretty high pressure so kind of a brutal experiment to be involved in but look they're trying to mimic headache and I think by using these different approaches they're able to mimic the different aspects of headache and make sure and here's the key point that every person in the study is not just getting the same treatment for headache but is getting the same headache and that's something that I think gives this study power it's not the only way to do a study like this but it gives it a lot of power in trying to understand which types of interventions are going to assist in headache and maybe even specific dimensions of the pain and headache and basically what they found in the study is that of all the treatments they used the essential plant oil preparations that contained peppermint and I'll just mention as an aside and in other studies Menthol so these minty type uh essential minty type um what we think of as flavors but are really Aromas as well and as I'll point out the mechanism in a moment they have the effect of significantly reducing the intensity of the pain that is subjects could tolerate the pain far better and experienced less pain subjectively and the magnitude of the effects were really pretty impressive again I went into all this thinking essential oils okay that's like some really woo stuff um you know I don't know about that but it turns out that these essential oils at least the ones that contain peppermint oil with or without eucalyptus oil performed very well in reducing pain the key takeaway from the study is and here I'm paraphrasing from the study of that the combination of peppermint oil eucalyptus oil and these are basically in a ethanol suspension again people are not drinking these essential oils I want to be very clear they're applying these to the to the skin around the area that's in pain and particularly the temple and the foreheads increased cognitive performance I didn't talk about that but this is the ability to maintain cognitive functioning while in pain you know here we're talking about headache up until now just as kind of pain but that pain can be very debilitating for your ability to work and perform and do other things so this combination of peppermint oil and eucalyptus oil applied to the skin allow people to increase their cognitive performance while under pain and had a very muscle relaxing and mentally relaxing effect mental relaxation was of course measured subjectively but remember one of the things that led me to feature this study in this episode in particular is that they didn't just say oh my muscles feel more relaxed they actually saw that the muscles of the forehead and temples and some surrounding muscles were more relaxed when people had these oils on applied to their forehead and the temples not perhaps to the same degree that one would observe with botox or for the same extent or duration as one would experience with botox but much in the same way which then raises the question of what's going on here I mean is this all placebo effect well no because they compared to Placebo and they controlled for the odor of course of the oil that was applied so that everyone thought that they were getting essentially the same thing pun intended but in this case what they found is that if they applied the essential oil to the forehead and temples that people experience a more or less a cooling sensation or they could feel as if something was happening in the underlying muscle well what was happening we now know that Menthol peppermint and other things that smell that way and taste that way actually have an impact on the sensory neurons at the level of the skin and can actually inhibit certain Sensory neurons and can activate other Sensory neurons okay so in order to understand this we have to go back to what I said at the beginning of the episode which is that you have motor neurons these are neurons that constrict muscles or excuse me that cause contraction of muscles strict them they cause contraction of muscles you have Sensory neurons which sense different things light sound or touch and you have modulatory neurons Menthol and Eucalyptus are actually known to activate certain channels in the sensory neurons that respond not just a touch but also the sensation of cooling okay so when we think of Menthol and peppermint we think of kind of cool scents and flavors cool meaning cold and when we think of things like hot peppers capsaicin we think of anything that has a hot temperature we tend to think of spicy so spicy and hot go together and peppermint and menthol and cool go together much in the way that the gum commercials or the mint commercials would lead you to believe and in fact they're right so what's happening here is that the application of these oils is very likely activating channels in the sensory neurons including the trip channels but others as well that are leading to the analges effect by shutting down the heat and pain Pathways because heat and pain while they're not exactly the same in our nervous system they are funneled through common Pathways whereas Cooling and Pain Relief are funneled through alternate what we call parallel Pathways so the study on peppermint and eucalyptus oil preparations in reducing pain of headache and different aspects of pain due to headache I think are really important because they don't just illustrate the fact that yes indeed and you know going record saying it because that's what the data say and there are other papers to support this statement as well essential oils applied to the skin can reduce the symptoms of tension headache in a significant way and actually can lead to some offset of some of the cognitive defects seen with headaches so that's itself very impressive I must say surprising for me kind of put me in my place as somebody thought oh essential oils is going to be like okay but it's actually seemed to um really hold some Merit and when you compare the magnitude of the effect even though this was an enormous number of subjects you compare the magnet to the effect in a paper like this or similar papers on these essential oils to the impact of non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs and they really hold their own and in some cases exceed the positive impact of anti-inflammatory drugs so for that reason I think we can look at peppermint oils and peppermint and Eucalyptus containing oils Menthol containing oils applied to the skin for the treatment of tension type headache as um among the more potent treatments available out there now another way to approach treatment of tension headache is something that many of you have probably heard about before and then I've talked a little bit about on this podcast in previous episodes and that's acupuncture we will do an entire episode all about acupuncture but much in the same way that essential oils I think for many people not all but for many people are considered kind of a woo biology or people think of it as a very alternative medicine keep in mind that as the underlying mechanisms of things like these peppermint oils are starting to be discovered or Omega-3s are starting to be discovered mechanistically they hold up very well there's a logic there there's an underlying understanding of not just why they should work but in many cases how they work in the same way acupuncture which of course has existed for thousands of years has been used very successfully to treat headache and other forms of pain so much so that many insurance companies will now pay for acupuncture as an insured practice not all but many will and in addition to that the scientific Community is starting to understand mechanistically how acupuncture works so I don't want to make this the major Focus for now but very briefly there's a laboratory at Harvard Medical School run by chufuma chufu is well known in the Neuroscience Community for doing excellent work in parsing the mechanisms of touch sensation and pain in particular so not just touch at the level of skin but pain and pain Pathways and in recent years his laboratory has started to do studies on how acupuncture works because indeed acupuncture has been known to work to alleviate pain for a long time but the underlying mechanisms haven't been clear what chufu's lab has published now in excellent journals like nature science and other journals is that the precise insertion sites of different needles lead to activation of sensory neurons and their Downstream Pathways in ways that can potently reduce inflammation and that can be used to potently reduce the activity of certain muscles for instance muscles in the forehead and temples so when you hear acupuncture can reduce pain I think some people think oh well if there's needles sticking out of your face first of all that must hurt and actually the needles are very fine needles and skilled acupuncturists can insert them without any pain or actually the person receiving it doesn't even usually recognize that the needles are in that's how quickly and efficiently they can put them in and people don't detect any pain but that has been shown to greatly reduce pain in particular headache related pain and back-related pain in some other forms of pain chufu's lab has shown that the specific needle insertion sites can activate the sensory Pathways and can deactivate the sensory motor pathways and now you're familiar with Sensory neurons motor neurons and modulatory neurons and can modulate the activity of the pain Pathways by way of impacting the activity of all sorts of different organs including organs that give rise to some of the inflammatory cytokines so basically what I'm saying here is that thanks to thousands of years of acupuncture and the maps of different insertion sites we now know or I should say people have long known and people in the west are starting to adopt the understanding that acupuncture yes indeed it really does work for relieving pain and Laboratories both in the United States such as chufus and elsewhere are starting to find the underlying mechanisms and those mechanisms include deactivation of the pain Pathways activation of some of the parallel Pathways that assist in shutting down pain or in relaxing the muscles that are causing tension type headache as well as activation of neural Pathways that impinge on organs that then cause or reduce the release of molecules into the body that give us the experience of pain so reduced inflammation and in many cases increasing anti-inflammatory Pathways so I just want to be sure to mention acupuncture and a little bit of mechanistic understanding of why acupuncture works because indeed acupuncture is shown to be quite effective for the treatment of tension type headache and to some extent migraine headache as well so we talked about omega-3 fatty acids we talked about essential oils we talked about acupuncture so this episode is starting to sound like alternative treatments to headache including migraine but I want to be very clear this is not about alternative treatments everything that I'm talking about here has a mechanistic basis and what we're talking about today are approaches to dealing with headache that yes are typically over-the-counter compounds or are grounded in nutrition or in the case of acupuncture behavioral practices but that are not necessarily meant as replacements for things like non-steroid inflammatory drugs or prescription drugs of course those things can still be taken many people derive benefit from them but the goal is always I believe I should hope for people to find ways that they can control their health outcomes and reduce things like headache using a minimum number of things that have other side effects and that of course can also include the use of essential oils in conjunction with things like non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs or the use of red light to offset photophobia in conjunction with any number of different treatments either prescription or otherwise so I do want to make that clear and I especially want to make that clear as I transition to the next segment where I'm going to tell you about herbal treatments for migraine and this is based on what I consider a very comprehensive review of many randomized control studies indeed the title of the paper is herbal treatments for migraine a systematic review of randomized controlled studies and this was published in 2020 and this contains an immense amount of information so we will provide a link to it for those of you that really want to dive deep on this in this paper they focus on a number of different reviews and Analysis of data focused on compounds for the treatment of migraine ranging from and including things like Menthol and peppermint oil so we already covered that so I won't cover that again in detail but in this review they highlight the results I refer to before plus other results that show that Menthol and peppermint oil can be quite effective in the treatment of tension type headache and in this case migraine headache as well so that's interesting that Menthol and peppermint oils can be used not just to treat tension type headaches but migraine headaches as well and they look at an enormous number of other types of herbal and essential oil type treatments everything from coriander to Citron to damask Rose chamomile lavender a bunch of things so I'm not going to go through each and every one of these in a lot of detail what I've tended to do today and I'm going to do now is to highlight the most potent of these different treatments again Menthol peppermint oil being among the most potent in addition to that there's a particular pathway that's associated with headache and when I say that I mean the different types of headache which includes the activation of this thing that we call cgrp cgrp again is involved in this calcium regulation pathway and leads to vasodilation of the vessels and arteries and capillaries in a way that can create pain and this feeling of pressure inside the head which can be very uncomfortable of course now earlier in the episode I mentioned that I was going to touch on caffeine and so I'm going to do that now now the reason I mention caffeine is that there's a sort of lore out there that if you have a headache drinking a cup of coffee can eliminate that headache a few things about that point first of all if you are somebody who ingests caffeine every day and you do not ingest caffeine you will indeed get a headache and drinking caffeine will relieve that particular headache so it's absolutely true that caffeine can relieve the lack of caffeine induced headache that's sort of a duh but that leads actually to a very important question which is why would that be the case well it turns out that caffeine is both a vasodilator and a vasoconstrictor how does it do that well one of the main ways in which caffeine makes us more alert is that it occupies The receptors for something called adenosine adenosine is a molecule that builds up in the brain and body more and more the longer we've been awake it's one of the things that makes us feel sleepy so when we drink caffeine that caffeine occupies the adenosine receptor and the adenosine cannot have its normal effect of making us sleepy when that caffeine wears off the adenosine combine and we feel sleepy adenosine is a vasodilator so when we drink caffeine because it blocks the effects of adenosine there is a vasoconstriction associated with drinking caffeine so if you have a headache that is associated with excessive vasodilation and pressure in the head indeed drinking some caffeine can cause some vasoconstriction by preventing that adenosine pathway that would normally lead to vasoconstriction and you can get some relief from that headache however caffeine is also a vasodilator caffeine has the ability to impinge on the so-called no pathway the nitric oxide pathway which is a nerve to blood pathway that involves a few different enzymes that we won't get into right now but maybe in a future episode that causes dilation of the blood vessels and as a consequence drinking caffeine can also increase vasodilation so it's sort of a two-pronged effect now one of the ways in which you might think about this and perhaps utilize this is that if you are well rested or if it's early in the day and you've had some sleep the previous night adenosine levels are very likely to be low especially if you slept very well the night before under those conditions when you ingest caffeine you are not going to experience the vasoconstriction effects of caffeine that would ordinarily be there by inhibiting adenosine why because adenosine is not present at all and under those conditions drinking coffee ought to lead to some vasodilation not a lot but nonetheless vasodilation if however you haven't slept well or it's late in the day and you've been up for a long time drinking caffeine is likely to have more of a vasoconstriction effect and this is important because some of the treatments that you hear about that involve using caffeine to treat headache are as Extreme as okay if you have a headache at night drink a cup of coffee and then go to sleep I actually saw that in the literature which I couldn't quite believe because yes indeed some people can fall asleep after drinking caffeine but we know very well thanks to the beautiful work and science Communications of people like Dr Matthew Walker from University of California Berkeley and who's been a guest on this and many other podcasts that even if you can fall asleep after drinking caffeine ingesting caffeine within the 10 to 12 hours prior to bedtime is simply not a good idea because of the ways it disrupts the architecture of sleep so what's the takeaway about caffeine and headache and vasodil relation you need to be very clear on whether or not caffeine tends to remove your headache or exacerbate it now this is going to depend on time of day and the amount of adenosine in your system as I mentioned before but also there seems to be a kind of bimodal distribution whereby some people when they drink caffeine it really improves their headache and so in some cases a very significant effects whereas other people when they drink caffeine it really exacerbates their headache and as at least as far as I could tell from the literature it's not easy to predict who those people are going to be what is reassuring however is it does not seem to be the case that if you're somebody who experiences relief from headaches by drinking caffeine that suddenly one day to the next you're going to experience a worsening of your headache and vice versa is also true so if you're somebody that drinks caffeine and your headaches get worse I don't think there's any reason to think that caffeine one day or from one day to the next rather is going to somehow alleviate your headache so you have to determine for yourself whether or not headaches are relieved or exacerbated by drinking caffeine and if you're wondering why it's so confusing it's because caffeine hits both the vasodilation and the vasoconstriction Pathways and there's nothing you or I or anyone else can do about it now the last thing I'd like to talk about in terms of relief for headaches is something that I'm guessing about probably 25 percent of you are familiar with and 75 percent of you are not which is curcumin curcumin is often also referred to as turmeric and turmeric is a root and curcumin is one of the key components of that root curcumin is known to have very potent anti-inflammatory properties I don't think that's debated at all in fact it's so potent as an anti-inflammatory that some people have cautioned against taking high levels of curcumin prior to for instance resistance training workouts or even cardiovascular workouts because it so prevents inflammation that it also can prevent the adaptation response because remember the inflammation that occurs during exercise both resistance and cardiovascular exercise is at least in part the trigger for the adaptation that it's going to lead to enhanced endurance enhanced strength hypertrophy Etc nonetheless curcumin has been explored in the context of treatment of migraine and it's one of the compounds that was analyzed in extensive detail in this wonderful review that I mentioned a little bit earlier what I like about this study is that they were able to explore the effects of curcumin as explored in previous research studies and compare those across a large range of different dosages and a large range of combinations with other things like coenzyme Q10 which we've talked about on this podcast before but I think for sake of this discussion just really focusing on what curcumin does alone or in conjunction with the omega-3 fatty acids is what turns out to be the most interesting first of all curcumin has been shown to be generally safe for most people at dosages as high as 8 000 milligrams per day or eight grams per day now I want to be very clear I do not recommend that anyone take dosages of curcumin an AKA turmeric that are that high why well curcumin and turmeric not only are anti-inflammatory but they also can impinge on other Pathways in particular hormonal Pathways and in fact curcumin AKA turmeric can alter the synthesis of something called dihydrotestosterone dihydrotestosterone is involved in an enormous range of different bodily functions it's involved in libido it's involved in Men in beard growth and in the regulation of a number of different tissues both in the reproductive axis and outside the reproductive axis and curcumin is a potent inhibitor of DHT so I do want to caution that people who take high doses of curcumin and some people who are very sensitive to curcumin will even at low doses experience reductions in DHT that lead to things that they would not like such as sufficient reductions in libido however curcumin has been shown to be effective as an anti-inflammatory and has been shown to be very effective in treating different types of headache and particular migraine headache one of the ways in which curcumin does that is to inhibit this thing that I talked about a few minutes ago which is nitric oxide or no which causes vasodilation and in doing that can reduce the feeling that one has a lot of intracranial pressure okay so curcumin dosages come in enormous range as I mentioned before dosages that range anywhere from 80 milligrams taken 80 milligrams per day that is taken for eight weeks time that's been examined it's been explored at 80 milligram dosages taken alongside two and a half grams of omega-3 fatty acids or omega-3 fatty acids alone and against Placebo and the general conclusion of these studies is that curcumin when taken it at dosages of about 80 milligrams although for those of you very sensitive to curcumin probably as low as 25 or even 50 milligrams per day in conjunction with although not necessarily at the same time but taken daily alongside omega-3 fatty acids at two and a half grams per day led to significant improvements in migraine and other forms of headache meaning both the frequency and the intensity of the headaches that occurred was greatly reduced one important point about curcumin to keep in mind is that curcumin is known to inhibit something called cytochrome p450 that's associated with an enzymatic pathway and some other things that relate to blood coagulation so for people that are taking medications that are anticoagulants to prevent clotting you do need to be very cautious about using curcumin and of course with curcumin or any other supplement you should always talk to your doctor prior to including it or removing it from your supplement regimen so as you can see there are a number of different things that in addition to prescription drugs and over-the-counter pain medications things like non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs can really impact the different aspects of headache and different types of headache in some cases differentially now today we talked mainly about tension type and migraine type headaches because those are the most common forms of headache there are of course the cluster type headaches that are of neural origin talked about hormonal headaches and indeed some treatments such as Omega-3s which have been shown to be beneficial for offsetting the menstrual related headaches now in the context of the discussion about Omega-3s keep in mind that Omega-3s can be obtained from supplementation or from nutrition so you don't necessarily have to take omega-3 capsules or liquid form Omega-3s if you want to use Omega-3s to Target different symptoms of headache but that probably is going to be the most efficient way to do it given that many foods do contain Omega threes but it's hard to get above that one gram dosage and in fact most of the studies that we talked about today involved getting two or even two and a half or in some cases on this podcast with previous guests such as Dr Rhonda Patrick she talked about the advantages of getting as high as three grams of Omega-3s per day which almost with certainty is going to require some external form of supplementation even for those of you that are making a point to eat fatty ocean fish with the skin on so I just want to make sure that I highlight that before we wrap up I can't help myself but to talk about something that I heard about on the news several years ago and it sounded too outrageous to be true but then was confirmed as accurate by one of my neurologist colleagues that's the fact that eating certain very spicy peppers can induce headache and in some cases can induce brain damage and bear with me here I'm not talking about your traditional jalapeno and I'm acknowledging the fact that certain people can tolerate far more spicy taste case then do others some people are very sensitive to spicy some people can tolerate very spicy food and that one can build up a tolerance to spicy food by ingesting progressively your spicy or excuse me spicy or and spicier Foods over time nonetheless there are these Pepper eating contests out there that um while not very common do exist and people challenge each other to eat peppers of um extreme spiciness and there's one in particular that's referred to as the Carolina Reaper by the way that's not a person as far as I know that's a pepper the Carolina Reaper which is known to have the most potent spice of any pepper and here's why you would not want to eat the Carolina Reaper a few years ago at one of these Pepper eating contests man ate a Carolina Reaper as part of the competition and suddenly experience what's called Thunderclap headache Thunderclap headache is a unique type of headache very different from all the other types of headaches it is not from the surface in so it's not tension headache it's not even the cluster type headache of the nerve activation of the trigeminal it's actually a hyper constriction of the vasculature in the brain caused by the ingestion of the pepper and inflammatory response and remember that heat and spicy go together in these neural Pathways and a bunch of different heat related and spice related Pathways get activated simultaneously when one ingests something of extreme spice and the blood vessels and indeed some of the smaller arteries feeding neural tissue shut down and he experienced this Thunderclap headache which is a brutal headache and sadly in his case um permanent brain damage so loss of neuronal tissue because neuronal tissue is very metabolically active you cut off the blood supply to that tissue Not only would you feel miserable maybe even pass out but lose vision and certain brain areas will actually die off in the absence of blood flow to those areas we know this more commonly as stroke so I don't want to strike fear in anybody about eating a you know a jalapeno or even a very spicy meal from time to time but if you're not somebody who's familiar with eating very spicy foods you certainly don't want to enter one of these competitions and just realize that the pathways from Menthol and cool or spicy and hot those aren't just subjective Pathways these are actually neural Pathways that again originate in our so-called nerds call it the sensory epithelium so our skin our our hearing our eyes and that feed that information into the body to make use of that information some case motor movement so sensory motor in other cases the information can be fed through nerve Pathways that goes to the vasculature and causes the vasculature to either dilate or constrict these very spicy peppers causing as I just mentioned extreme cerebro of of the head of vasoconstriction and brain damage again that's not going to be a common thing out there but nonetheless I encourage people to be very cautious about the Carolina Reaper so today we talked about headaches and first we highlighted the different types of headache making it clear that understanding which headache you might be experiencing can be very beneficial for understanding which sorts of treatments ought to be best and perhaps also best avoided in trying to alleviate those headaches or prevent them from happening at all we talked about tension headaches migraine headaches hormone-based headaches cluster headaches and traumatic brain injury related headaches we talked about different types of treatments ranging from creatine to omega-3 fatty acid supplementation some herbal and indeed some essential oil treatments as well as acupuncture all of which have been shown to have significant impact in reducing the frequency and intensity of headaches and in many cases reductions in the frequency and intensity of headaches that are at least as great as the results they're seen with non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs again I want to highlight that none of these approaches are necessarily designed to be done on their own or in replacement of prescription drugs from your physician there are excellent prescription drugs out there that your physician can prescribe for you for the treatment of headache nonetheless I think many people who are listeners of this podcast are interested in the things that they can do in order to inoculate themselves or at least reduce the likelihood of experiencing headache especially for people who are experiencing chronic recurring headaches such as migraine or the other forms of headache which can be so debilitating thank you for joining me for today's discussion if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's the best zero cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests that you'd like me to include on the huberman Lab podcast please put all of that in the comments section on YouTube I do read all the comments in addition please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast if you're not already following us on social media we are huberman lab on Instagram Twitter Facebook and Linkedin and on both Instagram and Twitter I cover science and science related tools some of which overlap with the content of the huberman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content of the huberman Lab podcast so again it's huberman lab on Instagram Twitter Facebook and Linkedin during today's episode and on many previous episodes of The huberman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep hormone support and focus huberman Lab podcast has partnered with momentous supplements because momentous supplements are of the very highest quality and they include single ingredient formulations this is very important as I pointed out in the episode about a rational approach to supplementation single ingredient formulations allow you to develop the most biologically effective and cost-effective approach to supplementation in addition momentous ships internationally which is important because I realize that many of you reside outside of the United States if you'd like to see the supplements described on this and other episodes of The huberman Lab podcast you can go to live momentous spelled ous live momentous.com huberman if you haven't already subscribed to the huberman Lab podcast neural network newsletter it's a monthly newsletter that's completely zero cost it includes summaries of podcast episodes and it includes tool kits for everything from improving your sleep to deliberate cold exposure and heat exposure for health and performance Focus dopamine regulation and much more in order to sign up for the huberman Lab podcast neural network newsletter you simply go to hubermanlab.com go to the menu scroll down to newsletter and you provide your email we do not share your email with anybody and again it is completely zero cost thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion all about the science and treatment of headaches and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

