--- YouTube Channel Transcript Export ---
Channel: Andrew Huberman (ID: UC2D2CMWXMOVWx7giW1n3LIg)
Export Date: 2025-05-12 14:36:37
Total Videos Found (in channel): 349
Preferred Languages: en
--- Videos starting from 1st in this file ---
========================================

--- Video 1 ---
Video ID: fSBgDq2ttCw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fSBgDq2ttCw
Title: How Hearing & Balance Enhance Focus & Learning | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-05-08 12:01:12 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I explore how the auditory and vestibular (balance) systems are essential for enhancing learning and improving focus.

I explain how the auditory system captures sound waves and how the brain interprets these signals to make sense of the environment. I also discuss the use of white noise and binaural beats to support brain states conducive to learning, focus and relaxation. Additionally, I explain how the vestibular system helps maintain balance and examine practical tools to enhance auditory learning, cognitive performance and mood.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/9QzqNcc

More Huberman Lab Essentials: https://go.hubermanlab.com/essentials

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
X: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://go.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Hearing & Balance
00:00:55 Ears, Sound Waves, Cochlea
00:04:42 Sound & Direction, Ventriloquism Effect, Cupping Ears
00:08:09 Binaural Beats, Alertness, Calmness, Learning, Anxiety
00:12:27 Tool: White Noise & Learning
00:15:54 White Noise, Hearing Loss & Child Development
00:20:02 Auditory Learning, Cocktail Party Effect, Tool: Remember New Names
00:24:06 Balance, Ears, Vestibular System
00:29:17 Improve Dynamic Balance, Tool: Improve Mood & Learning, Tilted Exercise
00:32:11 Recap & Key Takeaways

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. Today, we're going to talk all about hearing and balance and how you can use your ability to hear specific things and your balance system in order to learn anything faster. The auditory system, meaning the hearing system, and your balance system, which is called the vestibular system, interact with all the other systems of the brain and body, and used properly can allow you to learn information more quickly, remember that information longer and with more ease. And you can also improve the way you can hear. You can improve your balance. We're going to talk about tools for all of that. Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Okay. Okay. Well, if you can hear me, that's amazing because what it means is that my voice is causing little tiny changes in the air waves wherever you happen to be and that your ears and whatever is contained in those ears and in your brain can take those sound waves and make sense of them. And that is an absolutely fantastic and staggering feat of biology. And yet we understand a lot about how that process works. So what we call ears have a technical name that technical technical name is oracles but more often they're called pa the pas p i n a pa and the pas of your ears this outer part that is made of cartilage and stuff is arranged such that it can capture sound in the best way for your head size. So the shape of these ears that we have is such that it amplifies high frequency sounds. High frequency sounds as the name suggests are the is the squeakier stuff. So we have low frequency sounds and high frequency sounds and everything in between. And those sound waves, for those of you that don't maybe fully conceptualize sound waves, are literally just fluctuations or shifts in the way that air is moving toward your ear and through space in the same way that water can have waves. The air can have waves. Okay? So, it's reverberation of air. Those come in through your ears and you have what's called your eardrum. And on the inside of your eard drum, there's a little bony thing that's shaped like a little hammer. So attached to that eard drum, which can move back and forth like a drum. It's like a little membrane. You've got this hammer attached to it. And that hammer has three parts. For those of you that want to know, those three parts are called malus, incas, and stapes. It's like a but basically you can just think about it as a hammer. So you got this eardrum and then a hammer. And then that hammer has to hammer on something. And what it does is it hammers on a little coiled piece of tissue that we call the cookia. So this snailshaped structure in your inner ear is where sound gets converted into electrical signals that the brain can understand. Now the cookia at one end is more rigid than the other. So one part can move really easily and the other part doesn't move very easily. And that turns out to be very important for decoding or separating sounds that are of low frequency and sounds that are of high frequency like a shriek or a shrill. And that's because within that little coiled thing we call the cookia, you have all these tiny little what are called hair cells. Now they look like hairs, but they're not at all related to the hairs on your head or elsewhere on your body. They're just shaped like hairs. So we call them hair cells. Those hair cells, if they move, send signals into the brain that a particular sound is in our environment. Now, this should stagger your mind. If it doesn't already, it should. Because what this means is that everything that's happening around us, whether or not it's music or voices, all of that is being broken down in into its component parts. And then your brain is making sense of what it means. Your cookia essentially acts as a prism. It takes all the sound in your environment and it splits up those sounds into different frequencies. And then the brain takes that information and puts it back together and makes sense of it. So those hair cells in each of your two cookia because you have two ears you also have two cookia send little wires what we call axons that convey their patterns of activity into the brain. And there are a number of different stations within the brain that information arrives at before it gets up to the parts of your brain where you are consciously aware. And there is a good reason for that, which is that more important than knowing what you're hearing, you need to know where it's coming from. And our visual system can help with that. But our auditory and our visual system collaborate to help us find and locate the position of things in space. That should come as no surprise. If you hear somebody talking off to your right, you tend to turn to your right, not to your left. If you see somebody's mouth moving in front of you, you tend to assume that the sound is going to come from right in front of you. Disruptions in this auditory hearing and visual matching are actually the basis of what's called the ventriloquism effect. The ventriloquism effect can basically be described in simple terms as when you essentially think that a sound is coming from a location that it's not actually coming from. The way you know where things are coming from, what direction a car or a bus or a person is coming from is because the sound lands in one ear before the other. And you have stations in your brain and you meaning you have neurons in your brain that calculate the difference in time of arrival for those sound waves in your right versus your left ear. And if they arrive at the same time, you assume that thing is making noise right in front of you. If it's off to your right, you assume it's over on your right. And if the sound arrives first to your left ear, you assume quite correctly that the thing is coming toward your left ear. But what about up and down? If you think about it, a sound coming from above is going to land on your right ear and your left ear at the same time. A sound from below is going to land on your right ear and your left ear at the same time. So the way that we know where things are in terms of what's called elevation, where they are in the up and down plane is by the frequencies. The shape of your ears actually modifies the sound depending on whether or not it's coming straight at you from the floor or from high above. Now this all happens very very fast in subconscious. But now you know why if people really want to hear something, they make a cup around their ear. They essentially make their ear into more of a fenic fox type ear. If you've ever seen those cute little fenic fox things, they have these big spiky ears. They kind of look like a French bulldog, although they're kind of the fox version of the French bulldog. These big big tall ears and they have excellent sound localization. And so when people lean in with their ear like the with their hand like this, if you're listening to this, I'm just cupping my hand at my ear, I'm giving myself a bigger PA. Okay? And if I do it on the left side, I do this side. And if I really want to hear something, I do it on both sides. Okay? So this isn't just gesturing. This actually serves a mechanical role. And actually, if you want to hear where things are coming from with a much greater degree of accuracy, this can actually help because you're capturing sound waves and funneling them better. So, now I want to shift to talking about ways to leverage your hearing system, your auditory system, so that you can learn anything, not just auditory information, but anything faster. I get a lot of questions about so-called binaural beats. Binaural beats as their name suggests involve playing one frequency of sound to one ear and a different frequency of sound to the other ear. And the idea is that the brain will take those two frequencies of sound and because the pathways that bring information from the ears into the brain eventually cross over. They actually share that information with both sides of the brain that the brain will average that information and come up with a sort of intermediate frequency. And the rationale is that those intermediate frequencies place the brain into a state that is better for learning. And when I say better for learning, I want to be precise about what I mean. That could mean more focus for encoding or or bringing the information in? We, as you may have heard me say before, we have to be alert and focused in order to learn. So, can binaural beats make us more focused? Can binaural beats allow us to relax more if we're anxious? So, what do the scientific data say about binaural beats? Science on binaural beats is actually quite extensive and very precise. So sound waves are measured typically in hertz or kilohertz. I know many of you aren't familiar with thinking about things in hertz or kilohertz but again just remember those waves on a pond those ripples on a pond. If they're close together then they are of high frequency and if they're far apart then they are low frequency. So if it's many more kilohertz then it's much higher frequency than if it's fewer hertz or kilohertz. And so you may have heard of these things as delta waves or theta waves or alpha waves or beta waves etc. Delta waves would be big slow waves, a low frequency. And indeed, there is quality evidence from peer-reviewed studies that tell us that delta waves like 1 to four hertz, so very low frequency sounds, can help in the the transition to sleep and for staying asleep. And that theta rhythms which are more like 4 to8 hertz can bring the brain into a state of subtle sleep or meditation. So deeply relaxed but not fully asleep. And you'll find evidence that alpha waves 8 to 13 hertz can increase alertness to a moderate level. That's a great state for the brain to be in for recall of existing information. Okay. And that beta waves 15 to 20 hertz are great for bringing the brain into focus states for sustained thought or for incorporating new information and especially gamma waves the highest frequency the most frequent ripples of sound so to speak 32 to 100 hertz for learning and problem solving. Here we're talking about the use of binaural beats in order to increase our level of alertness or or our level of calmness. Now, that's important to underscore because it's not that there's something fundamentally important about the binaural beats. They are yet another way of bringing the brain into states of deep relaxation through low frequency sound or highly alert states for focused learning with more high frequency sound. They're effective, but it's not that they're uniquely special for learning. It's just that they can help some people bring their brain into the state that allows them to learn better. There's very good evidence for anxiety reduction from the use of binaural beats. And what's interesting is the the anxiety reduction seems to be most effective when the binaural beats are bringing the brain into delta. So those slow big waves like sleep, theta and alpha states. There's good evidence that binaural beads can be used to treat pain, chronic pain. But the real boost from binaural beats appears to be for anxiety reduction and pain reduction. Many people like binaural beats and um say that they benefit from them especially while studying or learning. I think part of the reason for that relates to the ability to channel our focus when we have some background noise. And this is something I also get asked about a lot. Is it better to listen to music and have background noise when studying or is it better to have complete silence? Well, there's actually a quite good literature on this as well, but not so much as it relates to binaural beats, but rather whether or not people are listening to music, so-called white noise, brown noise, believe it or not, there's white noise and there's brown noise. There's even pink noise. I want to be very clear that white noise has been shown to really enhance brain states for learning in certain individuals, in particular in adults. But white noise actually can have a detrimental effect on auditory learning and maybe even the development of the auditory system in very young children, in particular in infants. So, first I'd like to talk about the beneficial effects of white noise on learning. There are some really excellent studies on this. The first one that I'd like to just highlight is one that's entitled lowintensity white noise improves performance in auditory working memory task. An fMRI study. This is a a study that explored whether or not learning could be enhanced by playing white noise in the background. But the strength of the study is that they looked at some of the underlying neural circuitry and the activation of the neural circuitry in these people as they did the learning task. And what it essentially illustrates is that white noise, provided that white noise is of low enough intensity, meaning not super loud, it actually could enhance learning to a significant degree. And this has been shown now for a huge number of different types of learning. I was very um relieved to find or I should say excited to find this study published in the journal of cognitive neuroscience. This is a 2014 paper. White noise improves learning by modulating activity in dopamineergic midbrain regions and the right superior temporal sulcus. Okay, I don't expect you to know what the dopamine midbrain region is, but if you're like me, you probably took highlighted notice of the word dopamineergic. Dopamine is a neurom modulator meaning it's a chemical that's released in our brain and body but mostly in our brain that modulates meaning controls the likelihood that certain brain areas will be active and other brain areas won't be active and dopamine is associated with motivation. Dopamine is associated with craving. But what's so interesting to me is that it appears that white noise itself can raise the what we call the basil the baseline levels of dopamine that are being released from this area the substantia So now we're starting to get a more full picture of how particular sounds in our environment can increase learning and that's in part I believe through the release of dopamine from substantia. So, I'm not trying to shift you away from binaural beats if that's your thing. But it does appear that turning on white noise at a low level, but not too loud can allow you to learn better because of the ways that it's modulating your brain chemistry. So, what about white noise and hearing loss in development? I know a lot of people with children have these kind of noise machines like sound waves and things like that that help the kids sleep. And uh look, I I think um kids getting good sleep and parents getting good sleep is vital to uh physical and mental health and family health. So I I certainly sympathize with with those needs. However, there are data that indicate that white noise during development can be detrimental to the auditory system. I don't want to frighten any parents. If you played white noise to your kids, this doesn't mean that their auditory system or their speech patterns are going to be disrupted or that their interpretation of speech is going to be disrupted forever. But there are data published in the journal Science some years ago showing that when they exposed very young animals to this white noise, it actually disrupted the maps of the auditory world within the brain. So auditory information goes up into our cortex into these the essentially the outside portion of our brain that's responsible for all our all of our higher level cognition, our planning, our decision-m etc. creativity and up there we have what are called tonotopic maps. What's a tonotopic map? Well remember the cookia how it's coiled and at one end it responds to high frequencies and the other end it responds to low frequencies. sort of like a piano. In the auditory system, we have what are called tonotopic maps where frequency, high frequency to low frequency, and everything in between is organized in a very systematic way. Now, our experience of life from the time we're a baby until the time that we die is not systematic. We don't hear low frequencies at one part of the room or at one part of the day and high frequencies another part of the room, another part of the day. They're all intermixed. But if you remember the cookia separates them out just like a prism of light separates out the different wavelengths of light. The cookia separates out the different frequencies. And the developing brain takes those separated out frequencies and learns this relationship between itself meaning the child and the outside world. White noise essentially contains no tonotopic information. The frequencies are all intermixed. It's just noise. So, one of the reasons why hearing a lot of white noise during development for long periods of time can be detrimental to the development of the auditory system is that these tonotopic maps don't form normally. At least they don't in experimental animals. Now the reason I'm raising this is that many people I know in particular friends who have small children they say I want to use a white noise machine while I sleep but is it is it okay for my baby to use a white noise machine and I consulted with various people scientists about this and they said well you know the baby is also hearing the parents voices and is hearing music and is hearing the dog bark so it's not the only thing they're hearing however ever. Every single person that I consulted with said, "But you know, there's neuroplasticity during sleep. That's when the kid is sleeping." And I don't know that you'd want to expose a child to white noise the entire night because it might degrade that tonotopic map. It might not destroy it. It might not eliminate it, but it could make it a little less clear. Like sort of taking the keys on the piano and taping a few of them together. Once your auditory system has formed, once it's established these tonotopic maps, then the presence of background white noise should not be a problem at all. In fact, it shouldn't be a problem at all because you're also not attending to it. The idea is that it's playing at a low enough volume that you kind of forget it in the background and that it's supporting learning by bringing your your brain into a heightened state of alertness and especially this heightened state of dopamine, dopamineergic activation of the brain which will make it easier to learn faster and easier to learn the information. So now I want to talk about auditory learning and actually how you can get better at learning information that you hear, not just information that you see on a page or motor skill learning. So, there's a phenomenon called the cocktail party effect. Now, even if you've never been to a cocktail party, you've experienced and participated in what's called the cocktail party effect. The cocktail party effect is where you are in an environment that's rich with sound. Many sound waves coming from many different sources, many different things. So in a city, in a classroom, in a car that contains people having various conversations, you somehow need to be able to attend to specific components of those sound waves. Meaning you need to hear certain people and not others. You and your brain are exquisitly good at creating a cone of auditory attention, a narrow band of attention with which you can extract the information you care about. and wipe away or erase all the rest. Now, this takes work. It takes attention. One of the reasons why you might come home from a loud gathering, maybe a stadium, a sports event, or a cocktail party for that matter, and feel just exhausted is because if you are listening to conversations there or trying to listen to those conversations while watching the game, it takes attentional effort. And the brain uses up a lot of energy just at rest, but it uses up even more energy when you are paying strong attention to something. Literally caloric energy, burning up things like glucose, etc. Even if you're ketogenic, it's burning up energy. So the cocktail party effect has been studied extensively in the field of neuroscience and we now know at a mechanistic level how one accomplishes this feat of attending to certain sounds despite the fact that we are being bombarded with all sorts of other sounds. So there are a couple ways that we do this. First of all, much as with our visual system, we can expand or contract our visual field of view. Okay, we can do that. We can expand and contract our visual field of view. Well, we can expand and contract our auditory field of view, so to speak, or our auditory window. we can really hear one person or a small number of people amidst a huge background of chatter because we pay attention to the onset of words but also to the offset of words. So, one of the more common phenomena that I think we all experience is you go to a party and or you meet somebody new and you say, "Hi, I would say hi, I'm Andrew." And they'd say, "Hi, I'm I'm Jeff," for instance. Great, great to meet you. And then a minute later, I can't remember the guy's name. Now, is it because I don't care what his name is? No. Somehow, the presence of other auditory information interfered. It's not that my mind was necessarily someplace else. It's that the signal to noise, as we say, wasn't high enough. Somehow the way he said it or the way it landed on my ears, which is really all that matters, right? When it when it comes down to learning, is such that it just didn't achieve high enough signal to noise. So the next time you ask somebody's name, remember, listen to the onset of what they say and the offset. So it would be paying attention to the J in Jeff and it would be paying attention to that F in F. in Jeff, excuse me. All right. And chances are you'll be able to remember that name. Now, I do acknowledge that trying to learn every word in a sentence by paying attention to its onset and offset could actually be kind of disruptive to the learning process. So, this would be more for specific attention. Using the attentional system, we can actually learn much faster and we can actually activate neuroplasticity in the adult brain. something that's very challenging to do and that the auditory system is one of the main ways in which we can access neuroplasticity more broadly. I'd like to now talk about balance and our sense of balance which is controlled by believe it or not our ears and things in our ears as well as by our brain and elements of our spinal cord. The reason why we're talking about balance and how to get better at balancing in the episode about hearing is that all the goodies that are going to allow you to do that are in your ears. They're also in your brain, but they're mostly in your ears. So, as you recall from the beginning of this episode, you have two coccia coas that are one on each side of your head. And that's a little spiral snail-shaped thing that converts sound waves into electrical signals that the rest of your brain can understand. Right next to those, you have what are called semic-ircular canals. The semic-ircular canals can be best visualized as thinking about three hula hoops with marbles in them. So imagine that you have a hula hoop and it's not filled with mar marbles all the way around. It's just got some marbles down there at the base. Okay? So, if you were to move that hula hoop around, one of those hula hoops is positioned vertically with respect to gravity, but basically it's upright. Another one of those hula hoops is basically at a 90° angle, basically parallel to the floor if you're standing up right now, if you're seated. Okay? And the other one is kind of tilted about 45 degrees in between those. Now, why is this system there? Well, those marbles within each one of those hula hoops can move around, but they'll only move around if your head moves in a particular way. And there are three planes or three ways that your head can move. Your head can move up and down like I'm nodding right now. So, that's called pitch. Or I can shake my head no side to side. That's called yaw. And then there's roll. Tilting the head from side to side. the way that a cute puppy might look at you from side to side. Pitch, yaw, roll are the movements of the head in each of the three major planes of motion, as we say. And each one of those causes those marbles to move in one or two of the various hula hoops. Okay? They aren't actually marbles, by the way. These are little um little kind of like little stones, basically, little calcium like deposits. And when they roll back and forth, they deflect little hairs, little hair cells that aren't like the hair cells that we use for measuring sound waves, but they're basically rolling past these little hair cells and causing them to deflect. And when they deflect downward, the neurons, because hair cells are neurons, send information up to the brain. So if I move my head like this, there's a physical movement of these little stones in this hula hoop as I'm referring to it. But they deflect these hairs send those hairs which are neurons. Those hair cells send information off to the brain. Any animal that has a jaw has this so-called balance system which we call the vestibular system. One of the more important things to know about the vestibular, the balance system, is that it works together with the visual system. Let's say I hear something off to my left and I swing my head over to the left to see what it is. There are two sources of information about where my head is relative to my body. And I need to know that. First of all, when I quickly move my head to the side, those little stones, as I'm referring to them, they quickly activate those hair cells in that one semic-ircular canal and send a signal off to my brain that my head just moved to the side. but also visual information slid past me my my field of view. I didn't have to think about it but just slid past my field of view. And when those two signals combine my eyes then lock to a particular location. Now if this is at all complicated, you can actually uncouple these things. It's very easy to do. If you get the opportunity, you can do this safely wherever you are. You're going to stand up and you're going to look forward about 10 12 feet. You can pick a point on a wall. Stand on one leg and lift up the other leg. You can bend your knee if you like and just look off into the distance about 10 12 feet. If you can do that, if you can stand on one leg, now close your eyes. Chances are you're going to suddenly feel what scientists call postural sway. It is very hard to balance with your eyes closed. You might think, well, and if you think about that, it's like, what? Why is that? That's crazy. Why would it be that it's hard to balance with your eyes closed? Well, information about the visual world also feeds back onto this vestibular system. So, the vestibular system informs your vision and tells you where to move your eyes. And your eyes in their positioning tell your balance system, your vestibular system, how it should function. So, up until now, I've been talking about balance only in the static sense, like standing on one leg for instance. But that's a very artificial situation. Even though you can train balance that way, most people who want to enhance their sense of balance for sport or dance or some other endeavor want to engage balance in a dynamic way, meaning moving through lots of different planes of movement. For that, we need to consider that the vestibular system also cares about acceleration. So, it cares about head position. and it cares about eye position and where the eyes are and where you're looking, but it also cares about what direction you're moving and how fast. And one of the best things that you can do to enhance your sense of balance is to start to bring together your visual system, the semic-ircular canals of the inner ear and what we call linear acceleration. So, if I move forward in space rigidly upright, it's a vastly different situation than if I'm leaning to the to the side. One of the best ways to cultivate a better sense of balance literally within the sense organs and the neurons and the biology of the brain is to get into modes where we are accelerating forward. Typically, it's forward while also tilted with respect to gravity. Now, this would be the carve on a skateboard or on a surfboard or a snowboard. This would be the taking a corner on a bike while being able to lean safely. Of course, lean into the turn so that your head is actually tilted with respect to the earth. The head being tilted and the body being tilted while in acceleration, typically forward acceleration, but sometimes side to side, has a profound and positive effect on our sense of mood and well-being. And as I talked about in a previous episode, it can also enhance our ability to learn information in the period after generating those tilts and the acceleration. And that's because the cerebellum has these outputs to these areas of the brain that release these neurom modulators like serotonin and dopamine and they make us feel really good. Those modes of exercise seem to have an outsized effect both on our well-being and our ability to translate the vestibular balance that we achieve in those endeavors to our ability to balance while doing other things. So, I encourage people to get into modes of acceleration while tilted every once in a while, provided you can do it safely. It's an immensely powerful way to build up your skills in the realm of balance. And it's also for most people very, very pleasing. It feels really good because of the chemical relationship between forward acceleration and head tilt and body tilt. Once again, we've covered a tremendous amount of information. Now you know how you hear, how you make sense of the sounds in your environment, how those come into your ears, and how your brain processes them. In addition, we talked about things like low-level white noise and even binaural beats, which can be used to enhance certain brain states, certain rhythms within the brain, and even dopamine release in ways that allow you to learn better. And we talked about the balance system and this incredible relationship between your vestibular apparatus, meaning the portions of your inner ear that are responsible for balance and your visual system and gravity. And you can use those to enhance your learning as well as well as just to enhance your sense of balance. Last but not least, I'd like to thank you for your time and attention and desire and willingness to learn about vision and balance. And of course, thank you for your interest in science.

========================================

--- Video 2 ---
Video ID: 1e4QdH-LeKc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1e4QdH-LeKc
Title: People Who Do Prenuptial Contracts Stay Together Far More Than Those Who Don’t
Published: 2025-05-08 04:32:39 UTC
Description:
The Huberman Lab episode out this week is about contracts for love and money—which might sound like a downer, but as attorney James Sexton explains, these contracts are more about defining the specific things people need in order to feel respected and safe, as opposed to protecting “the ending.” In fact, much of what goes into these agreements is about the marriage, not divorce conditions.

Also, somewhat counterintuitively, people who create prenuptial agreements get divorced far less than the average population. The current divorce rate in the United States is 56% (!).

Note: The episode is not really about divorce. It’s about love, and it also addresses the forces outside a relationship that can erode it, as well as the things to pay attention to in order to avoid those increasingly common pitfalls.

Through both his profession and his life, James has adopted a unique and important perspective on all of this. It’s an episode that ought to benefit anyone—married, single, divorced, etc.—because it addresses the emotional and legal contracts around romantic relationships that most everyone encounters at some point.

James is also an amazing storyteller and a genuinely good human being. It was a pleasure to host him.

Transcript Language: English
I've done probably hundreds, if not thousands, of prenups over 25 years. I think there are maybe five people that I did their divorce after they had a prenup. Really? Yeah I think people need to hear that again. I think that, yeah, so I've done hundreds, if not at least 1,000 prenups in 25 years. I probably do two or three prenups a week, so I do a lot of prenups. Most of my colleagues do a lot of prenups. And I've never asked my colleagues this, but, you know, usually when you do a prenup, you have a good relationship with the person by the time it's finished. It's a transaction people feel good about. It's, a divorce, sometimes you finish a divorce and the person's like, "Oh my God, I never want to see you again because you remind me of this really dark chapter." But prenups, it's usually a very friendly transaction, it's positive. This is surprising to me. So people who prenup tend not to break up? Yes that rhymes. Yes, yes. I think many people will be very surprised to hear that. I think it's self-selecting. I think the kind of people who can have a conversation that you need to have in order to discuss and negotiate. And, again, there's another term. I don't think it's the right term, negotiate a prenup. Negotiate gives the impression, it's like you're buying a car, you know? Like, the kind of people who can have the conversations you need to have in order to have a prenuptial agreement, I think are the kind of people that are going to be successfully married, period.

========================================

--- Video 3 ---
Video ID: zpkwefXtbfk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zpkwefXtbfk
Title: Contracts of Love & Money That Make or Break Relationships | James Sexton
Published: 2025-05-05 12:01:44 UTC
Description:
My guest is James Sexton, Esq., a renowned attorney specializing in contracts related to love and money—prenuptial agreements, divorce and custody. We explore the counterintuitive fact that people with prenuptial agreements tend to stay married longer and report more satisfying relationships than those who don’t. We discuss how legal contracts can foster deeper understanding by encouraging vulnerability and honest communication about each partner’s values and expectations.

We also examine what defines true, lasting love versus generic romantic ideals—and how social media can distort our understanding of what we truly need. Additionally, we review how cultural traditions, gender dynamics, courtship length, and age at the time of marriage shape marital outcomes.

This episode offers practical tools for anyone—single or partnered—to build more successful and stable relationships through deeply honest dialogue and contracts that reflect genuine values around love and money.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/uElXh1O

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Wealthfront**: https://wealthfront.com/huberman
BetterHelp: https://betterhelp.com/huberman
Our Place: https://fromourplace.com/huberman
Function: https://functionhealth.com/huberman

_**This experience may not be representative of the experience of other clients of Wealthfront, and there is no guarantee that all clients will have similar experiences. Cash Account is offered by Wealthfront Brokerage LLC, Member FINRA/SIPC. The Annual Percentage Yield (“APY”) on cash deposits as of December 27,‬ 2024, is representative, subject to change, and requires no minimum. Funds in the Cash Account are swept to partner banks where they earn the variable‭ APY. Promo terms and FDIC coverage conditions apply. Same-day withdrawal or instant payment transfers may be limited by destination institutions, daily transaction caps, and by participating entities such as Wells Fargo, the RTP® Network, and FedNow® Service. New Cash Account deposits are subject to a 2-4 day holding period before becoming available for transfer._

*James Sexton*
Website: https://www.nycdivorces.com
How to Stay in Love (book): https://amzlink.to/az05AIHWmd3Ak
If You’re In My Office, It’s Already Too Late (book): https://amzlink.to/az0VDJ8FnkSZ9
Trusted Prenup: https://trustedprenup.com
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/@rocklanddivorce 
X: https://x.com/nycdivorcelaw 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/nycdivorcelawyer
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@nycdivorce 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/JamesJSextonDivorce
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/james-j-sexton-805109b7 

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 James Sexton
00:02:19 Divorce & Breakups, Men vs Women, Perception; Infidelity
00:12:04 Sponsors: Wealthfront & BetterHelp
00:14:41 Contracts, Business, Marriage Celebration, Prenups
00:26:24 Nesting; Prenups, Creating Rulesets
00:33:56 Prenups & Strengthening Marriage
00:38:19 Marriage Traditions; Divorce Rates, Religion
00:44:44 First vs Second Marriages, Love & Impermanence
00:50:09 Sponsors: AG1 & Our Place
00:53:53 Contracts, Relationships & Hard Conversations
01:02:37 Marriage & Underlying Problems, Love, Successful Marriages
01:16:27 Ideals, Social Media & Advertising, Simplicity, Dogs
01:27:33 Sponsor: Function
01:29:26 Intimacy, Tool: Early Framework for Hard Discussions
01:37:06 Prenup Consultation, Legal Defaults, Reasons for Marriage
01:47:37 Alimony, Prenups & Creating Rulesets, Yours, Mine & Ours, Adultery, Pets
02:02:30 Fond Memories & Ending Relationship, Pain, Divorce
02:12:49 Social Media, Movies & Ideals, Pornography vs Real Sexual Relationships
02:22:43 Revealing Flaws, Bravery, Prenups & Expectations, Money
02:37:49 Bravery, Vulnerability, Relationship Changes, Men vs Women, Marriage
02:47:11 Relationship Sacrifices, Men & Women; Prenups, Government
02:54:45 Life Milestones, Early vs Late Marriage, Navigating Challenges
03:01:38 Courtship Period & Marital Outcomes
03:10:12 Knowing Self & Partner, Vulnerability
03:16:58 "Postnup", Rekindling or Ending Relationships, Tool: Leave a Note
03:26:41 Heartbreak & Love, Divorce; Acknowledgements
03:34:45 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Follow & Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Protocols Book, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. My guest today is James Ston. James Ston is a renowned attorney with over 25 years of experience in family law, specializing in prenuptual agreements and divorces. He is known as what many call the voice of reason between love and legal. Today we discuss something that might seem counterintuitive, which is how the legal frameworks and contracts surrounding relationships, particularly prenuptual agreements, can actually deepen emotional connection and build trust between partners. As James points out, intimacy and trust are fundamentally about the ability to be your true self with your partner and them with you. It's about allowing ourselves to be vulnerable. It's also about having a same team spirit, of course, respect for one another, and admiration for each other's unique qualities. Today we explore how prenuptual agreements, which most often are viewed as being unromantic or pessimistic, can actually serve as ways to establish a sense of safety for both people and prevent many common conflicts and misunderstandings. As James puts it, everyone has a prenup. You either have one that was created by the state legislature or you can tailor one to you and your partner's unique needs. He also points out something that many people will find surprising, which is that the vast majority of people who do prenups stay married. and yet most people opt not to do them. We also discuss love itself and the key questions that we all need to ask to find the right partner and if you have one to build the strongest possible bonds with them. The information in today's episode is going to be extremely important for anyone looking for or currently in a relationship. Whether you're single, dating, engaged, or married, understanding how the legal and emotional frameworks that support lasting relationships intersect can help you navigate one of life's most rewarding but challenging journeys with much greater awareness and intention and probability of success. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, this episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with James Ston. Jim Ston, welcome. Thank you. It's good to be here. Been wanting to do this for a while. I know it's a long time in the making. Yeah. I think if two guys sit down, one of them a lawyer who's known as a divorce lawyer and they're talking about divorce and love and money and contracts and the ending of things. I think there's a understandable default mindset where the female half of our audience are probably gonna think like here a couple guys talking about relationships and divorce through the lens of their Y chromosomes which of course it's impossible to avoid completely because I haven't done the karaotyping but you have a Y chromosome and I do as well. I would like to know in your experience working with male clients and female clients, is there something unique to the female experience of divorce or the female experience of realizing, wow, this contract that I thought was for life may not or is it not for life that sort of drives a kind of uh female specific um set of uh psychological responses. Here I'm I'm basically asking for a generalization. Yeah. And I want to be clear, I'm not asking this for politically correct reasons. I'm asking this because, like I said, two guys sitting down to talk about relationships, love, and divorce. It's kind of where the mind goes. Yeah. And and I mean before I would get, you know, before I would get cancelled in the comments for being misandressed or misogynist, I I always try to say that, you know, the things I'm observing are a function of having divorced thousands of people, you know, men and women. Like for 25 years, I've done nothing but divorce law on a full-time basis. And I mean on a truly full-time basis. So I I I wake up in the morning thinking about this stuff. I go to bed thinking about this stuff. I work six, seven days a week. That's why I'm divorced. I I I really really love the work. And so all the things I'm saying are are really just my observation. So, you know, in response to that question, I think I think the world relates to divorced men and divorced women differently. And I think people's self-conception, right, is very different. So I I often tell my male clients when we're dealing with, you know, a custody case, for example, which is, you know, arguments over when a child's going to live with whom and when they're going to spend time with whom. And there was this concept called the maternal presumption, which was around legally for years, or something called the tender years doctrine. It's called different things in different states, but it was around until probably the 1980s, and that was that a child was assumed to stay in the custody of the mother unless you could prove she was an unfit mother. So men were automatically secondass when it came to being a parent. So it was automatic. It was the default. Now of course in the 80s there was a different makeup of the workforce. There was a different in gender roles obviously in terms of assignment of of child care responsibilities. It was a different world to some degree. But that was eradicated in the 1980s and the bench even the judges have changed dramatically. When I started practicing 25 years ago 90% of the judges I appeared in front of were old white men. Period. Like that was it was old white men. And so I got in the habit of like have a short haircut, hide the tattoos, like look like you're coming out of the set of Inherit the Wind, like look like you are what you because you got a conservative old man as your judge. That is not the makeup of the bench anymore. The bench now is as diverse as the people that it serves. So one of the things though that I I tell my male clients is even though that maternal presumption is gone, women fight harder for custody than men do. Really, I'd love to say to you that it's because the maternal instinct and bond is so strong that women just care about their kids and they want custody. I I don't really believe it's that. I I think it's the following. If you and I just met in normal life, right? Like we're just out at a bar and I sit up night and you say, "So, so said so Jim, tell me about yourself." And I say, "Well, I'm divorced. Uh my kids live with their mom. I see them every other weekend and once a week for dinner." He would go, "Okay, cool. Jim's divorced guy, you know, he's working. He's does his thing. I'm a woman and I say, "I have two kids. They live with their father. I see them every other weekend." You go, "What is wrong with this woman? Is she on substance use issues, mental health issues? Like, why does he have custody of the kids? Why doesn't she have custody of her kids?" So there is a there is an element of how motherhood is perceived as an identity even for a working woman that it's like if you don't have your kids on a full-time or close to full-time basis there's this percept so that infuses that changes the way that women are in custody litigation. That's a huge piece of it. On the other side of things, you know, the the gender stuff in divorce and in breakups is really interesting and complicated in this sense that, for example, if a man cheats on his wife, he's a piece of can't keep it in his pants, he's a child. Why couldn't he be honest? A woman cheats on her husband, she was driven into the arms of another man. She couldn't get, he wasn't meeting her needs. This was her journey of self-discovery. Like you see in popular media like watch any film any TV show when the man cheats it's like he's a leerous guy you just get the woman cheats it's like oh this poor woman like she she needed to find herself she needed like her eat prey love moment and so that's again like the the way the world interacts with people in breakups and in the clay that builds to the breakup is very different. So how people react to it is very different. men in my experience as clients there's a lot of anger that that you know manifests in very honest ways like very blunt ways like very kind you know because men are you know men are Bill Burr recently in one of his recent special has this thing about men are allowed to be two things angry or fine that's it like angry or fine and that's and I used to always say that growing up you know I'm 52 like growing up I had two choices you're either Clint Eastwood or Richard Simmons. Those were your two choices as a man. You were either like stoic, you know, stony, no emotion or gay. That was it. Those were like your two choices. And of course, it's totally dishonest. Of course, the reality is is men have a different, you know, we have an emotional vocabulary. It just expresses in different ways. But anger is something men are allowed to have. So when men are sad, they seem angry. When men are angry, they seem angry. women. My experience of women in divorce is is they're they're much more forgiving in unhappy marriages. They're much more willing to stay in relatively unhappy marriages and and sort of torture their partner. And then when they've decided, okay, I'm out, there is a a level of like, yeah, whatever we got to do, we got to do. Like that sometimes to me as someone who does this for a living is like, oh, oh, okay. like you're you're just willing to you're just willing to go there, you know, like mercenary. Yeah. Just there's, you know, like when and you look at the history of the marriage and you go, "Wow, when they were together, like there's nothing she wouldn't do for him." And now it's ending and man, there's nothing she won't do to him. Like she is just weaponized on him. And it's it's um it's kind of it used to be surprising to me. It's not really surprising to me anymore. I I think I have a friend who was a criminal lawyer for many years, criminal defense attorney, really good one in the city. And we used to laugh because he used to say, "As a criminal lawyer, he sees bad people at their best. And as a divorce lawyer, I see good people at their worst." And I it's always astounding to me because I've reached a level in my career, thankfully, where I represent elite athletes. I represent, you know, people in the financial markets who who literally move markets with their trades, people in entertainment industry, and they are as bad at this as any of us. Like they're as bad at relationships, they're as bad at heartbreak as anybody. So, you know, there were differences in the gender piece. There are differences in the socioeconomic piece, but at the end of the day, it's like it's hurt people hurting people, and it kind of looks roughly the same. It's very interesting, and there's a lot in there. I want to return to this um sort of divergent response to men cheating versus women cheating a little bit later. Super interesting area for exploration. Well, I feel like I have a PhD in infidelity because it's just it's part of like 90 plus% of divorces in some form. Yeah. Really? Well, it's it's why people, I think, you know, mistake correlation for causation. I mean, people all the time are like, you know, why are you getting divorced? Because he's sleeping with his secretary. And it's like, oh, that's a pretty good reason to get divorced. But, you know, then when you scratch the surface, you're like, okay, but why is he sleeping with his secretary? And there's almost always this very deep backstory of like, well, we stopped sleeping together. Why do we stop? Well, because he's unkind to me. Well, why is he unkind to you? Well, because you're totally indifferent to me. And and you start to go, okay, the truth's at the bottom of a bottomless pit, and we're never going to get there. Like, and all of those facts come with a point of view. So when you do what I do for a living, which is, you know, full contact storytelling basically in a in a courtroom against someone who's trying to tell the opposite story, you you find a lot of what you're doing is just figuring out how to present the most persuasive version of this person's subjective experience of their own life. I would like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Wealthfront. I've been using Wealthfront for my savings and for my investing for nearly a decade, and I absolutely love it. At the start of every year, I set new goals. And one of my goals for 2025 is to focus on saving money. Since I have Wealthfront, I'll keep that savings in my Wealthfront cash account, where I'm able to earn 4% annual percentage yield on my deposits, and you can as well. With Wealthfront, you can earn 4% APY on your cash from partner banks until you're ready to either spend that money or invest it. With Wealthfront, you also get free instant withdrawals to eligible accounts every day, even on weekends and holidays. The 4% APY is not a promotional rate, and there's no limit to what you can deposit and earn. And you can even get protection for up to $8 million through FDIC insurance provided through Wealthfront's partner banks. Wealthfront gives you free instant withdrawals where it takes just minutes to transfer your money to eligible external accounts. It also takes just minutes to transfer your cash from the cash account to any of Wealthfront's automated investment accounts. When you're ready to invest, there are already a million people using Wealthfront to save more, earn more, and build long-term wealth. Earn 4% APY on your cash today. If you'd like to try Wealthfront, go to wealthfront.com/huberman to receive a free $50 bonus with a $500 deposit into your first cash account. That's wealthfront.com/huberman to get started now. This has been a paid testimonial of Wealthfront. Wealthfront brokerage isn't a bank. The APY is subject to change. For more information, see the episode description. Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online. I've been doing weekly therapy for well over 30 years. There are essentially three things that great therapy provides. First of all, it provides good rapport with somebody that you can really trust and talk to about any issues you want. Second of all, it can provide support in the form of emotional support and directed guidance. And third, expert therapy provides useful insights. Insights that allow you to better not just your emotional life and your relationships, but of course also the relationship to yourself and to your professional life into all sorts of life and career goals. With BetterHelp, they make it extremely easy to find an expert therapist who you can really resonate with and that can help provide these benefits that come through effective therapy. And because BetterHelp allows for therapy to be done entirely online, it's very timeefficient and easy to fit into a busy schedule. There's no commuting to a therapist's office, finding parking, or sitting in a waiting room. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. We're talking about breaking one contract, the contract of marriage, and creating a new contract, the contract of divorce. I'm fascinated by contracts in the world of business. um my business partner and I that started this podcast um I insisted that uh we take an even split. That was important to me. It's absolutely critical um because this podcast wouldn't be what it is without him um and his incredible expertise. He is the uh the genius behind it all. Our our initial contract was on a piece of paper in a little coffee shop in Manhattan where I said, "How about this? How about this?" And we we discussed it. people like you give lawyers like we get hives like you say that and I I instantly start like you know six months later uh or so a lawyer told us we had to get a real contract and we did it um and I have to say it was fine and I'm glad we have contracts but to me all contracts whether or not it's a scribble on a piece of paper or it's a formal contract um contracts make me feel safe. They make me feel good. I like rules and guidelines. Um, I like knowing what's going to happen if for a scientist, um, this doesn't really exist. You you like to think you can control outcomes, but you can't, and you acknowledge that, and you you go into the unknown. So, contracts are very reassuring to me. Yeah. I want to talk about the contract of marriage first. Yeah. And what you think is going through people's mind when they decide to get married? There's the engagement. There's a lot of love. Hopefully, there's a lot of love. Hopefully, um, there's a lot of dopamine. That's a wonderful thing. Um, presumably there's a lot of pherommones. There's a lot of emotional and biological stuff happening. Sure. There's the recognition from others. There's the party. There's the bachelor party, the bachelorette party, the the shower, the the wedding. I mean, there's so many things reinforcing this bond. And every one of the things you just named are awesome. Mhm. They're great. Like, those are all positive things. like the from the cake to the bachelor party, bachelorette party to the dress to the way we're going to have photos taken to commemorate the moment and sort of have this snapshot in time of who we were and who our families were. Like all of that, how could you not cheer for that? Like it's phenomenal. All of that sounds great. It's like, you know, like, oh, I like this ice cream. What's not to like? It's ice cream. Of course you like ice cream. Yeah. To me, it's celebration of life. Yeah. You know, it's very different than the birth of a child, but it's this each one of those is a celebration of the the life spirit. Yeah. And your place in the timeline and the history and the merging of families, the merging of clans like the and and and sort of this we're going to merge now and maybe new life comes of that and then that life merges with more life and we become part of this chain like this is gorgeous stuff and this is the fundamental building blocks of human civilization. So, it is perfectly understandable that we get absolutely intoxicated by the thought of it and that we get so hopped up. But, but here's what people don't think about. The term contract never gets into that discussion. I'm telling you right now, right now, someone's getting married somewhere and they've never The word contracts never come out of there, but they don't view marriage as a contract. the the two things that I as a divorce lawyer I'm constantly thinking about is marriage as an economy and marriage as a contract and those are two the minute you say that people assume you don't believe in or experience emotionally any of those other beautiful things you just said and I think 90% of the appeal of my media work in this chapter of my life has been that people go oh a divorce lawyer or this is just going to be a guy talking about how like marriage is the worst thing ever. And in reality, I I think what I'm saying is, look, this is amazing. This is wonderful. Why wouldn't you fall in love? Why wouldn't you have pair bonds? Why wouldn't you consider locking in with another person and say, but my god, be honest with yourself about the risks involved. be honest with yourself about the ways you can hedge that risk and be honest with yourself about the the contract and the economy because those are two things that I do not think that there is anything unromantic. I don't think it takes away from the romance or the beauty of a thing. You know, I I I I often say you my favorite poem is a poem by Joseph Broaddsky called The Song. And he wrote it when his wife passed away. And it's a it's a beautiful poem about love and loss. And the the sort of refrain of the poem is I wish you were here, dear. Like, I wish you were here, dear. I wish you were here. I wish we sat in the car and you sat near. It's this beautiful poem. And one of the lines is I wish you were here, dear. I wish you were here. I wish I knew no astronomy when stars appear. And I I remember the first time I read that line thinking like, "Oh, that's so beautiful." Because once you know astronomy, like there's something less magical about the stars, you know? I mean, I don't know. See, I I don't believe it has to be that way. Yeah. I don't either. Uh the great Richard Fineman, Nobel Prize winning physicist of uh surely you're joking, Mr. Fineman fame, said that uh understanding things at a reductionist level added to his sense of beauty with the with the physical world. And I think it can. I mean that's my sense of biology and physiology and what I I know of psychology. Understanding the the deeper layers adds to my sense of wonder. But I acknowledge and agree with you completely that for most people when we think about all those um things around marriage, the the engagement, the wedding, the party, they all imply a ton of trust. I believe in you. I I have faith in you. I'm going to merge lives with you. Yeah, the word contract implies somewhere in there a lack of trust. I gave this little anecdote about something very different than marriage, right? A business contract with my business partner where when they said, "Oh, you need to have a formal contract." Yeah. It there is something about that that implies that things could go wrong or that there will be unforeseen circumstances that our verbal contract Yeah. can't anticipate and won't allow us to navigate as business partners. And this is again far and away different arguably lesser example than a marriage contract which is a much bigger life milestone. But I think what you're a point you're making that I think I would slightly reframe is the following. There is a contract that binds you and your business partner. It was written by the legislature of the state in which you reside. Okay. So, do you want your relationship with this person governed by a contract you didn't write? You had no input in. And the government can change without your consent or knowledge. And by the way, once they've changed it, you can't say, "Oh, I don't I don't like that new rules, so I don't want those to apply." Yeah. Too late. Too late. So, I tell everyone, you you have a prenup. Every married person has a prenup. It was either written by the government or written by the two people who allegedly love each other more than the other 8 billion other options in the world. Now, if you ask me who is going to write a better contract, unnamed politicians who are subject to being elected and unelected or two people who have an abundance of optimism towards each other who get like there's a rule set. There's a rule set and if you're signing up for a rule set you wrote or co-authored with your partner, I think you're in a better place than saying let's trust it to the government. I have to tell you, I've been to the DMV. I've never walked into the DMV and thought these people should be in charge of everything. This is great. They they have got it down. Like this is they should be in charge of my marriage. They should be in charge of everything. My business dealings, they should be the ones who make the rules because they're clearly so together in their thinking. I don't feel that way. I feel like there is tremendous value in the level of trust and optimism that two people at the beginning of a venture, whether that venture is a marriage or whether that venture is a business venture. While we're in this heady space of optimism, excitement, trust in each other, that's the time to say, "Hey, we're going to disagree about something at some point." It happens. It'll be my fault. I say dumb I say dumb all the time. So, I'll probably say something that's going to upset you. So, why would you learn how to fight while you're in a fight? Like, learn how to fight before you get in a fight. Learn the rule set. Have a discussion about, hey, if we disagree, what's the best way? Do you need a minute? Do you need some time to yourself to like kind of cool off? Or are you the kind of person that's like, no, we got to sort this out right now. I can't go to bed angry. I'll fester. So, that to me, the the right mindset is not faith and trust or contracts. I think that's the totally wrong way to frame it. I think the right way to frame it is there's a contract. There's a whether you want to call it a contract or not, just like there's an economy. An economy is an exchange of value. You know, this many bananas is worth this many coconuts cuz if it was what how many bananas will you trade me for bananas? That's not an economy. Like we're not bringing the same thing to the table. So, it's the same thing. Why is it a dirty word to say, "Hey, I'm marrying you. Why? What do I bring to your life? What do I mean to you? what value do I present to you and what value do you present to me so I know what to protect and preserve you know so I know like when that slips to start talking to you about it and and by the way you can tell me and remind me when hey this thing I loved about you has changed so like you talked about all these good things about your business partner like oh he has this vision or he has this patience or he has this organizational skill and he makes up for some things that I don't have like if you just said oh yeah he has the exact same characteristics as me it's like Well, what do you need him then? You know, it's many hands like work maybe, but ideally you have the Steve Jobs and the Steve Waznjak. You know, either of whom without the other would have been kind of eh, but together it's like lightning in a bottle. So, I just genuinely think framing this slightly differently and saying there's going to be a rule set. So, we are the best people to write that rule set. That's the way to look at it. Yeah. The way you're framing the contract of marriage and prenups, I I love it. Um because you're putting a positive emotional lens on it, right? Sure. Two people who love each other. Therefore, let's discuss the contract of love and marriage. Two people that are committed to creating perhaps children together and a whole life together, raiding together lineages. Let's get a contract to really solidify this. And what do we owe each other? You know, what do we owe each other? That's a huge piece for me. It's like, why are we doing this? you know, what is the problem we seek to solve or what is the value we add to each other's lives? That's such a beautiful question. Like, and by the way, it's an invitation to such an intimate discussion like this. These are the things that you make me feel like these are the things you do that make me feel that way. like they you make me feel loved really when when you uh uh remember that tea that I like and you make sure that it's here, you know, or oh when you you know uh remembered it was my sister's birthday and sent her a text and then sent me a screenshot. Like these are this dumb little things that make us feel so loved and seen. So why wouldn't we embrace an opportunity to say to this person, by the way, like do you know what I love about you? Do you know what you do that makes me feel so loved and makes me feel so in love with you? Because that's a worthy conversation. The way you're framing this, I think, is entirely different than how most people would envision a discussion about a prenup, which I think that's true. Which I really appreciate, and I know the audience appreciates, too, because you're putting a different lens on things. I'm going to just put on my hat as a neuroscientist and biologist for a moment. I think there are certain words that people for whatever reason consider kind of a buzzkill. Like we're talking about pherommones and love and children and romance and sex and vacations and honeymoons and parties and then someone says contract. Yeah. And someone and somebody says um you know we finances which you know maybe that turns certain people on. I guess people in the finance world it probably turns them on. But do you get where I'm coming from? I I have to assume it's a different brain circuit for most people. Whereas what you're doing is you're coming at this from a different perspective, which is part of the reason why you're here, is that you're saying this discussion around a prenup contract can potentially shed more light into the nature of the bond and maybe even deepen the connection. Of course. And and I I will tell you I've been doing prenuptual agreements for 25 years for clients and I usually end up having a very good relationship with the person I do a prenup with because you're talking a lot about their fears, their hopes. Is it one person or both? I wanted to ask this one at a time. So each of you has your own lawyer. Each of you has your own attorney. You cannot as a lawyer represent both people because they have what's called potentially adverse interests. And what if one person has substantially more income to hire a better lawyer um assuming that more money gets you a better lawyer? I have to assume on average it does um than the other. Yeah, it's unfortunate. It's an unfortunate thing. I mean, one of the projects I' I've been involved in in the last couple of months is a a website trusted prenup.com. I worked with a a couple of tech people to put together something that's going to democratize prenups. Because up until now, prenups have been something that you spend 510 $15,000 for a traditional lawyer to draft for you and then your fiance brings it to an attorney to review and then they want to make revisions and it sort of walks into this adversarial process as opposed to sort of democratizing prenups. So what we are trying to do is sort of leverage technological innovation, AI, my hundreds of prenups I've drafted, we sort of fed into this to create the ability for you to go online and to create a prenup for like in the realm of $600, $700. That would be a game changer. It's really an opportunity. But but the purpose of it as far as I'm concerned is not just to democratize prenups, which I think we have to do, but to really reframe the way we look at it because people come in all the time and they're like, "Well, I I don't know if I need a prenup because I'm not wealthy." And you say, "Well, you're still going to have a rule set applied to your marriage." And actually, if you're super wealthy, like most of my clients, they can afford to buy six more houses. Like they you keep the house, I'll buy another house down the street, and then we'll buy another house for the kids, and then we'll visit with them in that house. Like that's actually called nesting. It's a thing. So that's nesting. Nesting is when I was coming up, nesting meant something very nesting now is when you each have your own home and then one home is just where the kids live and instead of doing a custodial rotation where the kids go back and forth between homes, the kids have a home and the parent who has parenting access during that time is in the nest with the kids. When I was in college, nesting was when you got a tablecloth. Nice. Nice. Yeah. It's a very it's a very you know the rich divorce in different ways than than than the normal general populace. And so that's why we're trying to say look bring this democratize this bring this to let people develop a rule set because especially too when you have scarcity like most people can't afford to give away one half of everything they have and still have enough to function. Most people are going paycheck to paycheck. Most people are a couple of paychecks off from being in bankruptcy if things don't go the right way. So when they divorce and now we have two electric bills and two internet bills and two that's something most people can't do. So all the more reason for people to have a rule set that the two of them created again when they were feeling positive and benevolent and optimistic towards each other and they were trying to protect you because to me personally I don't know how you can feel loved if you don't feel safe like I think you have to feel safe emotionally safe physically safe like if you're afraid of your partner emotionally physically how can you really feel loved. So to me, the prenup is an invitation to a can we talk about hard things? Because I'll tell you right now, when somebody says to me, "Well, I would do a prenup. I know it would be good, but I, you know, that's just going to be a hard conversation." Don't get married. If you can't have hard conversations with a person, you have absolutely no business marrying them. I mean, it's good for me as a future income stream, but I'm telling you, I don't think it's a good idea. like you're going to have to talk about hard things, you know, and you're going to have to have uncomfortable truths instead of comfortable lies to this person, you know. So, I'm a big fan of early on in the process having those conversations. And again, it doesn't all have to be like, you know, the convers like when you talk about your will, that's a hard conversation. Like there's no upside to being dead, you know, like other than being off social media, like there's no upside to it. So, I I I I understand why people are like, "It's really hard to think about like if I die and if both of us die, what do we do with the kids?" Like, that's a hard conversation. But look, if we break up, what would you need to feel safe? Like, would you, you know, there's a line from a Prince song, um, if I was your girlfriend? Uh, and it is, would you run to me if somebody hurt you, even if that somebody was me? And I think there's something really sweet about saying to someone like, "Hey, if I hurt you, like, how can I still have you feel safe? like how can I have you still feel loved? Like I don't think that you know when I meet someone and their exes are like they just have painted them as a villain like with no redeeming qualities whatsoever. And that's frequent, you know, it's frequent people do that. And to me that that says a lot about like the core values of both of these people. You know, I I think there's real value in saying to someone early on like, "Hey, if I hurt you, what are you going to need from me?" Like, "What what do we need to be made whole? How can we both feel safe in this relationship?" That's what those discussions are about. Like throwing the words contracts, throwing the words economy in there. I understand. Like, I think you're totally right. There's something about those words. But I think reality can be beautiful. I don't I don't think like I don't think you have to CGI everything for it to be perfect. I think it's perfect. I think it's already perfect. I There's something very perfect about how imperfect and flawed and frightened we are. And I think there's something really beautiful about finding someone that you can be that with and I don't think I can learn everything I need to know about myself from myself. Like I think I need someone there. Ideally, someone who really loves me and is cheering for me and sees my blind spots. And and I think the conversation about a prenup is that's what that conversation should be. It's fantastic. I love the way you lean into life uh in all its um light and shadows and say, "Okay, let's accept all of that right off the bat and uh figure out what's going to give this the highest probability of working." Well, it's reality. I've never thought about prenups as a way to bolster the probability of the marriage working. Well, I'm telling you, I I I and I got sidetracked as I tend to do, but I've done probably hundreds if not thousands of prenups over 25 years. I think there maybe five people that I did their divorce after they had a prenup. Really? Yeah. I think I think people need to hear that again. I think that Yeah. So, so I've done hundreds if not at least a thousand prenups in 25 years. I probably do two or three prenups a week. So, I do a lot of prenups. Most of my colleagues do a lot of prenups and I've never asked my colleagues this, but you know, usually when you do a prenup, you have a good relationship with the person by the time it's finished. It's a transaction people feel good about. It's a divorce. Sometimes you finish a divorce and the person is like, "Oh my god, I never want to see you again because you remind me of this really dark chapter." But prenups, it's usually very friendly transaction. It's positive. This is surprising to me. So people who prenup tend not to break up. Yes, that rhyme. Yes. Um I think many people will be very surprised to hear that. I think it's self- selecting. I think the kind of people who can have a conversation that you need to have in order to discuss and negotiate and again there's another term I don't think it's the right term negotiate a prenup. Negotiate gives the impression it's like you're buying a car you know like the kind of people who can have the conversations you need to have in order to have a prenuptual agreement I think are the kind of people that are going to be successfully married period. Like there's something about there that that I'm not going to talk about a prenup because I don't want to talk about the possibility that anything could ever go wrong with this thing. It's perfect. It's wonderful. It's cake. It's roses. It's nothing but romance and sex and it's wonderful. Okay, you got no Listen, falling feels like flying for a little while, you know, and then you hit the ground and it is waiting for you. And if the first time you ever think about what legal rights and obligations do I have is when you're in my office like you've you're already screwed. You're already screwed. You did nothing to prepare emotionally, financially, you know, nothing. So there's something about the imagination, right, that people if you if you're just the kind of person who's like, I don't even want to talk. I actually met I had a they'll remain nameless, but it was a neighbor and I tried to every once in a while I get it in my head that I'm going to like try to be a more social person. So, I'm like, "Oh, I should like invite the neighbor over for a drink, you know, a couple." And uh they don't live near me anymore, so I can get away with it now. But I invited these people over for a drink. They came over, lovely people. But at some point, she said, "Oh, you know, I don't know how you do what you do. Like, we don't we don't allow the dword in our house." And I was like, "You you mean?" She's like, "No, no, we just you're not allowed to say the word divorce in our house." And she said it like divorce like she was saying Voldemort, you know. She was like, "We don't say the D word." And I was like, and I thought to myself, "If only it was that easy, you know." By the way, got divorced like three years later. Really? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. 100%. And like down, drag out, brutal. Both of them tried to call me and hire me, you know, and I I will not represent people that I know in any capacity. And I just remember thinking like that did like that is such a what a delusion like that I'm never gonna say the word like what are you my great-g grandandmother like you have to say cancer like this cuz if you say cancer and like of speaking volume suddenly like tumors will develop like do are you that superstitious like do you believe you know do you believe in Chewbacca too like that's crazy I mean superstition is a form of paranoia it's a mild form of paranoia but it's a form of paranoia of course yeah but I think It's, you know, I I say all the time that I think most of our attitudes about marriage have been just handed down. Like it's just it's this is something that like marriage, you could be the most like modern Bella Abzug feminist person and a lot of women are like, "Oh yeah, I still want my dad to walk me down the aisle and give me away." Give you away? Like seriously? Like you're you're a seuite executive at a software company and he's going to trade you for what? goats like this is going to be where he because you are your father's property and now you will be the property and he will give you away to your husband and you'll now be his property. That's where that tradition comes from. Gang, what do you think uh the psychological underpinnings of of what you're describing are about? Is it some sort of internal validation of worth external validation of worth? I mean none of it computes for me when I look at you know like you said like a let's say these are extreme examples but seuite female executive let's make or a founder also these exist I'm from the bay area of them yeah and typically they will take their soon tobe husband's last name interesting not always% um that's far more common than men taking their their wife's last name actually I can't even think of a single instance I've had a few that hyphenate that's a new evolutionary biologists do that. It used to be all the evolutionary biologist most give the kids the husband's name. Most give the kids the husband's name. And I again I don't know if that's a male thing that like men are like that's my kid, they're going to have my name. I I really don't know. But yeah, there's the a lot of the feminism gets thrown out the window. Another one is that in divorces, I've observed this. I don't have statistics on this, but women will keep their ex-husband's last name. Yeah. Because what I was told is they want to have the same last name as their kids. That's pretty common. Um, which is understandable. Yeah. Yeah. Of course, the kids could switch last name. It eliminates a certain level of confusion because at school like to say, you know, like this is my name and the kids name is different. Some of it's through the kids. That piece I get. I absolutely get, but I I also, and by the way, I I have clients cuz you don't have to change your name back, but you have the right to and I have male clients who like want their name back. Like I want her to no longer be allowed to use that name. And I have to explain to them that's kind of you can't force her to not have your name. He's like, "Well, that's my name." And I'm like, "You understand? I can change as long as you're not doing it for the intent of defrauding creditors. Anyone can I can change my name to Andrew Huberman tomorrow if I want to. As long as I'm not doing it to defraud my creditors, you'd get a lot more problems than be the lifeline. I'd be Mrs. Huberman. That's very fun. Very fun. Oh my goodness. Um, no. You'd be Andrew Huberman. And that comes with a certain number of liabilities. That sounds exhausting. I don't think I can handle it. I I can't do that. I can't bench that much either. Full-time fun. No, just kidding. Um, in all seriousness, wow, people have asked for their name back. Yeah, they want her prohibited from having her name and and even though the kids have that name, but again, that's that anger thing. Like that's just a pure expression of anger. And I get it. You know, a lot of what I do is sort of helping people get to the core of like what are they really upset about? And that's a lot of what my job is. Like I my undergraduate degree was in psychology. My master's was in cultural anthropology and specifically in the study of death and dying. And uh and then my law degree, I wanted to be a divorce lawyer as soon as I started law school. And I I think I use the psych degree as much as I use the law degree because it's so much of what I do is just dealing with people when they're in this very heightened emotional state. Like I'm a fan of faith, but just not blind faith. Like I'm a fan of fairy tales. If the fairy tales inspire something in you, that's incredible. Like if if you say to me, you know, Jim, I love Star Wars. Like the struggle of the Jedi against the Empire, like it inspires me to want to be a disciplined person and to fight for good and to, you know, not be afraid of evil and to know like that's a beautiful story. If you try to tell me Wookies are real though, like we've got a problem, man. You got to get checked out. Like that's not okay. That's not true. So the divorce rate's 56%. So 56% of the time this technology fails. 56. 56. Yeah. It changes every year, but 56 is the divorce rate currently. Okay. So 56% of marriages and in divorce. Now is that true? Excuse me. In Europe as well and South America as well and Australia. Every country the statistics are different. There are states does not have you can actually look this up online. And there's a a great there's like a running tally that's kept um but the highest uh divorce rates are in I believe Italy is currently winning that race. Ireland was at the bottom because basically divorce was not possible in Ireland for an extended period of time. Countries that have a very strong underlying religious narrative like Sharia law and things like that obviously have a very low divorce rate. Mhm. Um but it it it it varies in terms of but but but countries that are um I don't want to say you know like very modern you know where there's been a proliferation of social media where there is a open information environment so people can compare themselves to other people constantly not North Korea not North Korea great example yes that there is a sense of um because I actually even North Korea like has an underlying religious narrative. It's just that they've decided that their or they've been told their leader is a god, you know. So, I think when when you don't have a core foundational religious narrative that that prohibits divorce as part of its structure, then you're left to people's desires to some degree and the cultural foundations of it. And tradition, right? And tradition for many, many years, tradition was you stay married even if you're unhappy. And then tradition in the 1970s and 1980s started turning into your happiness is more important than the institution of marriage. So if you're unhappy, you might need to leave your marriage and get divorced. And that's when the divorce rate started to spike, right? So and I think there's some value to that. Like I, you know, tradition is in some ways like the wisdom of the people before us and they saw things we might not see. And to some degree, tradition is peer pressure exerted by dead people. So I think our our fascination with marriage as this I found my soulmate and now we're not even going to think about the possibility of us ending even though fully 56% of the time the thing's going to end. Like that's the part I can't wrap my head around is and again look at the numbers there. Like let's assume conservatively that another 10% stay together for the kids cuz the 56 is just the ones who actually said this is so bad we're getting lawyers and we're ending this thing. Like how many people stay together for the kids or religious reasons or because they don't want to give away half their Like that's a got to be a big number. I I mean conservative 10%. I think it's more than that. 20%. Definitely more. And these are first marriages. First marriages. the the statistics for each subsequent marriage the divorce rate gets much higher. So like by the time really second marriage is higher than first marriage, third marriage is much higher. Interesting. And then once you get past three it's like you're you know all the divorced people in my family remarried and have been in those second marriages very long periods of time. I know a lot of very happy secondary very happy because I and I think there's value to that because I do think as a divorced person um you learn a lot about yourself through the process of divorce. You learn a lot about what you don't want to do again in a relationship and what didn't work for you. So I I don't do anything perfectly the first time I do it. So I think that there's value in in sort of giving something a try. Like you don't learn how to swim by reading books about swimming. You learn how to swim in the pool. So that's why I'm a like I'm a fan of marriage even though the the divorce rate is very high. It's clearly a very risky technology. One could argue it's a reckless thing to do. You know that that I mean the the legal definition of negligence is a failure to perceive a substantial and unjustifiable risk of serious harm. Okay. Recklessness legally is a conscious disregard for a substantial and unjustifiable risk of serious harm. Okay. So if you know something ends in heartbreak and division of assets and fighting that requires attorneys 56% of the time and you don't make any plan for that in advance. I would argue that's reckless. You're consciously disregarding a substantial risk of harm. Period. Yeah. And if there's kids it it brings them different kind of even higher level. Yeah. Do you happen to know the numbers or the rough numbers on percentage of first marriages with kids that last whether or not they're happy or not? I don't I don't know that delineation. I mean, I know that these statistics are fairly closely tracked. So, you can find them out online pretty easily because they're tracked by the government. Every time we do a divorce, we have to file what's called a certificate of dissolution of marriage. And that certificate includes the grade level, the highest grade level each person completed, um whether there are children, how many children, the ages of the children. And the whole purpose of that document is to compile demographic information. So the government for many many years has been monitoring this and looking at you know, okay, what are those numbers? Those numbers are not well publicized. I think partly because the wedding industrial complex does not want people getting involved in that conversation. Like you don't want people to really look at the truth of things because it takes away from the fantasy of things. But see, again, I think that's a framing issue because to me, I think, you know, the stars are still beautiful even if you know astronomy. Like I I think if anything I actually think and maybe this is just the way that I look at things, the fact that love is loaned and not permanently gifted makes it more beautiful. Like the fact that I'm going to die for sure makes my life more beautiful. There's a finite number of sunsets I'm going to see. There's a number. I I don't know it yet. It might be five. It might be 500, but there's a number, right? And so when you when you're with someone, that marriage is going to end. Every marriage ends. It ends in death or in divorce. It's one of the only things in the world that you go, I hope this ends in death. Like if you said to someone at their wedding like, "Man, I really hope your marriage ends in death." They would be like, "What is wrong with that guy?" But it's the truth because all marriages end. They end in death or divorce. I hope that yours ends in death. But you I don't think that makes it less beautiful. It makes it more beautiful that every day this person wakes up and decides to continue to be your spouse and to continue to be your partner and ideally your cheerleader and your, you know, your fan, you know, and and and to me, the fact that you don't own this person, that they have free will, they have autonomy and agency, and they they choose you, not just on one day where you put on nice clothes and played good music and everybody got drunk, which is there's value in that and the memory of that and the photos of that and a reminder, but like the fact that they every day get up and continue to choose to be with you like that and and if you said to me that the reason why they stay with you is they don't want to get divorced. Like that's a terrible reason. You know, I I was a smoker many many years ago. You know, people used to say like, "Oh, you got to quit smoking. You know, it takes it's going to take 10 years off your life." And I'm like, "Right, like the last 10 like the adult diaper wearing years. I don't want them anyway. Like you met a 90-year-old, like I don't want to be 90. It's fine. Like take you're taking them off the tail. Once I made the connection between I feel better, I taste food better, I can run further and faster. Then it made sense to me because now there's something real and tangible in the present. There's something that has value. So it's the same I think it's the same thing with marriage. It's the same thing with prenups, which is let's not talk about what is this going to give us on the back end or what are we going to lose if we don't have this on the back end. Let's talk about what can this do for us in the present? What can this conversation do for us in the present about understanding what we mean to each other and what we owe to each other? As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 daily for more than 13 years. However, I've now found an even better vitamin mineral probiotic drink. That new and better drink is the new and improved AG1, which just launched this month. This nextgen formula from AG1 is a more advanced clinically backed version of the product that I've been taking daily for years. It includes new bioavailable nutrients and enhanced probiotics. The NextG formula is based on exciting new research on the effects of probiotics on the gut microbiome. And it now includes several specific clinically studied probiotic strains that have been shown to support both digestive health and immune system health, as well as to improve bowel regularity and to reduce bloating. As someone who's been involved in research science for more than three decades and in health and fitness for equally as long, I'm constantly looking for the best tools to improve my mental health, physical health, and performance. I discovered and started taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, and I've been taking it every day since. I find that it greatly improves all aspects of my health. I just feel so much better when I take it. With each passing year, and by the way, I'm turning 50 this September, I continue to feel better and better, and I attribute a lot of that to AG1. AG1 uses the highest quality ingredients in the right combinations, and they're constantly improving their formulas without increasing the cost. So, I'm honored to have them as a sponsor of this podcast. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. Right now, AG1 is giving away an AG1 welcome kit with five free travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Again, go to drinka1.com/huberman to claim the special welcome kit with five free travel packs and a free bottle of vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by ourplace. Our place makes my favorite pots, pans, and other cookware. Surprisingly, toxic compounds such as PASES or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans as well as utensils, appliances, and countless other kitchen products. As I've discussed before in this podcast, these PASES or forever chemicals like Teflon have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption, gut microbiome disruption, fertility issues, and many other health problems. So, it's really important to try and avoid them. This is why I'm a huge fan of our place. Our Place products are made with the highest quality materials and are all completely PAS and toxin-free. I especially love their Titanium Always Pan Pro. It's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating. Instead, it uses pure titanium. This means it has no harmful forever chemicals and does not degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time. It's also beautiful to look at. I cook eggs in my Titanium Always Pan Pro almost every morning. The design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan. I also cook burgers and steaks in it, and it puts a really nice sear on the meat, but again, nothing sticks to it, so it's really easy to clean, and it's even dishwasher safe. I love it, and I basically use it constantly. Our place now has a full line of titanium pro cookware that uses its firstofits-kind titanium non-stick technology. So, if you're looking for non-toxic, long-lasting pots and pans, go to fromourplace.com/huberman and use the code huberman at checkout. Right now, ourplace is having their biggest sale of the season. You can get up to 30% off all products now through May 12th, 2025. With a 100-day risk-free trial, free shipping, and free returns, you can try ourplace with zero risk and see why more than 1 million people have made the switch to ourplace kitchenware. Again, that's fromourplace.com/huberman to get up to 30% off. I'm beginning to adopt a mindset around contracts that they are a tool to embrace reality, both potential negatives, but also to enrich the positives and imagination. I think imagination too. I think that marriage is about an imagined future, right? Like it's about we're going to build this thing. What's it look like? Like when you and your business partner sat down together, you had an imagination together. Like you weren't just like, "Okay, what are we going to do today? What are we building? What do we want it to be?" You know, and by the way, it never ends up being what you thought it would be. It it it's turns into something completely different. There was no premonition. I mean, that's a very different scenario. But but I don't think it's really even that different. I think that, you know, if you want to make God laugh, tell him your plans. Like, I think the best thing is this vague idea of like, what do we want to do? I don't know. some we wanted to do something exciting together. I don't know what exactly what's going to look like. I think this is the loose structure, but I don't know exactly what it is. Like, you know, you and I are friends. Like, we didn't talk about what we're going to talk about today, right? You know, we talked a dozen times, but we didn't go say, "So, what should we talk about when we're Why?" Because I think if we did, it wouldn't be authentic. Like, there's something so much better about like, yeah, we want to have a good conversation, something of value, something we'll both enjoy and then maybe the people watching would enjoy, you know? So, that's so much better. And and I think that's what you're doing with with a prenup or with a marriage is you're imagining a future together. Okay. What does it look like? Tell me. So it's not just about the rule outs. Like I think about um you know certain guidelines like in uh in the octagon it's you know no groin shots you know no thumbing eyes. Um so there's all the this is not going to happen type stuff and there's reasons for each of those. No matter what, X, Y, and Z are off the table. That makes people feel safe, right? Because you want to know that certain very dangerous things are off the table. But what you're talking about are a number of optins through contracts and prenups. Sure. And also markers like markers of Look, you spend so much time, one of the reasons I I I consume so much of what you put out there is I like to know the markers before I have the problem. Like I like to know like what are the things what are the you know measure what matters right like I want to look at what what has changed and then what can I do to adjust at that point and I think relationships it's the same thing like by the time you're in my office it's too late like it is so much harder to take a broken relationship and try to make it good again than it is to take a good relationship and keep it good and keep it strong. Like it's so much harder to g, you know, gain a bunch of weight and then try to lose all of it than it is to maintain a healthy body mass. Like it's just easier. So I think the same concept applies, which is be honest with yourself about what it is we're moving towards and what it is we're building and how do we stay at this place. I I don't like to just have it's not just about the opt outs like, okay, if we're split up, we're not going to have to hire lawyers and we're not going to have to go through the court system. we're going to know what the rules are. There's value to that, but there's also tremendous value to the conversation about what do we owe each other? What are we bringing to this rel because that's where the economy piece of it comes in, which is, you know, and this is the part it's so laden with gender stuff and it's laden that no one wants to talk about it or it doesn't feel safe to talk about it or to talk about it honestly. Hence 56%. Yeah, I think so. I think we are poorer for that dishonesty because I think I understand it's an uncomfortable truth. I understand that it's difficult to say like yeah I don't know there's something in me that wants it this way. Like I don't know what it is. I don't know if it's biology. I don't know if it's hormones. I don't know. But like I this is important to me. Like yeah I I want to have a fulfilling sexual relationship with you but we want different things sexually. Like I want frequency. You want you know you want intensity. like whatever it might be like the male sex drive, the female sex drive, like I I I they're not the same. Hormonally, they're not the same. So, is it okay to have a conversation about, hey, if we're marrying each other, we have a sexual relationship usually. And so, where it's at right now is good, I'd imagine. So, how do we know when we're slipping off baseline? And how do we know where and by the way, how do we know where when we slip off baseline? It's not a sign of disaster, right? Like if if I'm 8 years old and my eyesight starts to get really bad, it's probably more alarming than if I'm 52 and now I need reading glasses. Like these are more normal things, right? So why not say like, hey, I'm not saying the amount of sex we're having when we're dating or engaged is the baseline and if we ever slip off of that, it means that the relationship's in trouble. That's an insane statement. So do prenups include discussions or agreements about sex, money? They can money for sure, sex they can. And and I think the overall conversation that should surround prenups and the reason why I think people who get prenups in my observation are less likely to get divorced is at the front of this thing. You are having conversations about what do we owe each other? What do we expect from each other? What is meaningful to us about each other? What value do you bring to my life? Like, why can we do that in in any other relationship? Like, if right now you as my friend, someone said, "Why do you like Andrew Huberman as a friend?" I I could run off a list of things. He's super interesting. He's super interested. He knows a lot of cool workout stuff. He's a lot of fun to hang out with. He eats the same way that I do, like kind of boring. He doesn't drink just like me, so we can hang out. I don't feel weird cuz I'm not drinking cuz he's not either. Like, there's a whole list of stuff I could say. I say the exact same things about you except you know a bunch of stuff I don't know in addition to that. But you know we're interested we're interesting. Our friendship makes sense, right? So why? And by the way, isn't it lovely to hear what someone likes about you? Like I think it's one of the nicest things in the world when somebody says, "You know what I like about you, Jim? I'm all ears. Tell me." You know, or if someone who I love and trust and know, like I know you're my friend. So if you called me and you said, you know, Jim, can I give you some constructive feedback? like something I think you're doing that's getting in your own way. Dude, I would be all ears. I would be all ears. I would want to hear that. You've made that call to me a couple of times. Yes. Turning client privilege. I can't bring it up. But yeah, I mean I I think there's something that's an event in a couple's life, right? So why why in this in this romantic context would you squander the opportunity to have that conversation? Here's what you bring to my life. Here's how you make me feel. Here's when I feel the most loved. Here's when I feel not as loved by you. I think it's because when people hear the word prenup, they're thinking ending. It's about the ending. It's what you It's the contract that is going to divide the resources so we don't have to give a certain amount to the lawyers. Everyone's going to feel safe. You don't have to worry that you're going to end up with whatever less than there is value to that. But I don't think I don't think I could be wrong, but I don't think most people associate the word prenup with anything about the success of the marriage, which is probably why so few people get them. Is there any idea roughly what percentage? No. What's amazing about a prenup is a prenup is not filed anywhere. It's just you have one in your safe, the lawyer has one in their safe. It's a contract. And is it as binding as as anything else? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Because we know nowadays things like NDAs are kind of fluid. No, NDAs are fluid because NDAs are a relatively new construct and they haven't really been tested. Just like non-competes, there was a period of time where non-competes were like they were overly broad and they weren't worth the paper they were printed on and then people tried to tailor them. And now, you know, non-competes that are specific as to geography and duration like, you know, the court system, the living law figures out, okay, here's how we have to tweak it. Prenups, the same thing happened. There was a lot of prenups back in the day used to get tossed out, but for the 25 years I've been practicing, trust me, I've had a couple of prenups I've tried to set aside and I've been unsuccessful and I'm a good lawyer, but it's very hard to set aside a properly drafted prenup, you know, and I think that that's a good thing because again, the framing needs to change, which is everyone has a prenup. It's either written by the government and subject to change by the government without notice to you and then you can't opt out of the new rule set or it's one that you and your partner draft together. I want to return to prenups um and unfortunately to divorce but uh I'd like to talk about love and the contracts both emotional and practical around love a bit more. Sure. Do you think people are completely honest with themselves and with the other person when they decide to get married or simply to become quote unquote life partners or to just become partners? I mean, do you think that part of the um the allure of the dopamine oxytocin pheromone social crow uh cloud, excuse me, and all that goes with it? I mean, what's more fun than leaving the bedroom with someone you're totally crazy about, showering up, and heading out. Yeah. And going to see friends. Yeah. And you're happy, they're happy, and then going back home again. Repeat. Like, there are very few things that that are as um from the other side of of the fence to uh to see a couple that's really happy and in love. And you don't need to know or care about what they do in private. You just you can feel how much they adore one another. You feel the vibe off of them. Yeah. I mean, I think there's a pheromone effect of that. I mean, and there's really serious primate biology that supports all that that we don't even have to discuss. We can just kind of like put that one on the shelf and everyone knows what we're talking about. But, you know, underneath there is um like you said, our needs. Needs that in the future um somebody might not feel are being met. Sure. And that sort of thing. It's hard to anticipate one's needs too, especially if it's a first relationship or third relationship. You know, you need some And sometimes you know you meet the right person at 18 and that's a beautiful thing. Oh yeah. So to ext Yeah. and let alone express them. Yeah. I I think I've always said that the most dangerous lies are the lies we tell ourselves. And I' I say in my book that that all marriage problems stem from two underlying problems. We don't know what we want and we don't know how to express what we want. Even if we know what we want, we don't know how to express it to our partner. And I think those are two really different but but deeply correlated problems. I think one of the great mistakes we make is I think we fall in love very fast in what we call love. Right? I mean, I'm fuzzy on the whole love concept because a lot of what's described as love is like something that, you know, was designed in the 1950s to sell shampoo. Like I I don't I don't this idea of like you meet this one person and then that person you're going to be your soulmate. Like whoever created the term soulmate, I owe them a tremendous amount of money. Well, in some religions, there's actually a word for the god the god designated choice. Yeah. Like my bashert, my fate, right? The god-given choice. singular person that is going to meet that need. But even even if you were to say, okay, this is person's been selected by an omnipotent creator deity, that's at least more reasonable than saying, I've met this one person and they are now going to be the best friend, best co-parent, best roommate, best travel partner, best sexual partner, best confidant, best financial partner. Wait, all of those? like all they're gonna they're gonna check all of those and they happen to live three miles from you like and go to the same coffee shop in a world of eight billion people. Like what are the odds? Like I would definitely believe in God if that's the reality. But the truth is I I don't think it's like that. I think it's a combination of pherommones and it's a combination of dopamine. And look, I like I get it. Like I get it. I get it. But why do we have to look at it like those early days of a relationship where you look, we've both been in love, we've both been in a romantic relationship where just the person brushes up next to you or the scent of them hits you and it's like an electric shock through you. It's magic. It's It's just the greatest drug in the world. And And you ju But if that stayed forever, you would never get anything done. Like civilization would perish because we would all just want to sit there smelling someone's hair all day. Like we would just want to be around each other all day. And by the way, not just how we feel about them, how they make us feel about ourselves. Like why do you think affairs are so intoxicating? because you've been in this relationship with this person and they don't even see you anymore and you don't even see them anymore. And then you meet this other person and they're like, "You're fascinating. You're brilliant. You're handsome. You're" and and all of a sudden you start to feel brilliant and handsome again. Why? Because the observed, right? Like you're you're seeing yourself through the lens of this person's gaze. Esther Pel when she was sitting in the same seat you're sitting in now said that 90% of affairs um people describe as um they did them they had those affairs because they made them feel quote unquote alive. There was an aliveness that was in stark contrast to the deadness or lack of aliveness in the in the and it's not a justification. She was we were discussing the you know so what what is the underlying thing that they're seeking? Is it sex? Is it adventure? And in some cases it might be well her book you redefining infidelity like all of her writing I she and I were on a panel together some years ago and um I mean I think she's a brilliant brilliant mind and she has an insight into the nature of infidelity and human relationships, romantic relationships. But again she's saying the quiet part out loud and I again I don't think she's not a romantic. I don't think that she doesn't believe in love. Like when someone says to me, "Well, do you believe in love?" It's like it's like do you believe in oxygen? Like it's all around me. Love like love's all around me. It's everywhere. It's I guess the question is do you believe in the in the potential permanence of romance and love? Yes. Yes. Because with the same person. Yes. Cuz I've seen it just like you have. It's just it's a rare and special thing. You know, one of the things I' I've said before and I get pillaried for it every time I say it because people want to misinterpret it intentionally is that marriage is like the lottery. You are probably not going to win. But if you win, what you win is so good that you might as well buy a ticket. Like give it a try. Like give it a shot. Again, with a prenup, then your downside is controlled to some degree. But I I am offend now. People take that quote and go, "Oh, well, so you're saying that it's random. Like you can't do anything to increase your chances of winning the lottery of buying more tickets. Like marriage is it's a practice. It's work. It's" And when people say to me like, "Well, marriage is hard work. Marriage is hard." Like I I don't know what you're talking about. I don't know that love has to be hard work. Like there's so much that we put on love that romantic love that just doesn't make sense as far as I'm concerned by observable experience. If you watch people who are happily married, they're cheering for each other. They enjoy each other's company. But again, are they dealing with those early days intoxication to the point where if the other person starts speaking, they lose their train of thought? No. because they're building the life and a family and an ecosystem in the home together and you know they have to divide responsibilities as but that those two things do not have to be incompatible with each other. But you cannot throw into that equation ignorance and refu willful blindness to the reality of the impermanence of love and the fragility of love. Like my career is about the fragility of love. And why why can't we talk about this fragile thing and treat it like you treat a fragile thing? Like why not treat love like what it is? It's something that's so amazing, powerful, and beautiful that it takes sucks the reason right out of our heads. And all you want to do is be with this person and tuck in and just what what do you want to do tonight? Do you want to go to the greatest concert in the greatest venue and sit in the front row or just sit with this person and like watch something on Netflix and eat some popcorn? Yep. I'll take that. I'll take that cuz it's the best thing. Right. Well, the friendship piece is something that I've heard you talk about before and you know, you know, with all the discussion that we're having here about, you know, pheromone clouds and dopamine and romance and sex, I think that um, you know, I'll I'll put in a strong vote for saying all that's wonderful, but the mellow times just hanging out on the couch are different, you know, you know, starkly different, but um, are as bonding in many ways, especially on a backdrop of a world that especially now is, you know, chaos otic uncertain um threatening to many people even if you're successful in the world like the world world's a lot pretty overwhelming now there's a lot coming at us all the time through devices and through and through things you know there's a lot of uncertainty about our whole species at some point and criticism I mean there's so much criticism from the outside world so much self-criticism and comparison that there's something about having someone who sees the beauty in you and is cheering for you and that when you fall down their their response is okay you fell down like come on people fall down it's okay I'm come on get up you got it you got this you know something about that to me is that's the best thing like that's that's when I see successful married couples they're not taking the piss out of each other like that old all the tropes now of like you know like women just being like oh yeah he's just such an idiot Yeah, like you know that it's like cute somehow to like talk crap about your husband or your wife. Men as children. Men as children and women is the most loathome harpies ever to castrate a man, you know, like, oh yeah, well, please, you know, and she's this one, you know, there's nothing we're not like. I don't find that cute. I don't find it charming. It's sort of an American theme, you know. I I've noticed like I've half my family's in South America. Completely different picture. Now, one could argue there problems with the picture there, and I'm sure they exist. Um, but it's not the same, you know, men are children, women are uh women are cutthroat. Yeah. Yeah. And and the I guess for me, especially in this increasingly performative and curated age that we live in where, you know, we're watching on on you know, Instagram and all these other social media, we're watching everyone's greatest hits while we live our gag reel. And we're sort of comparing ourselves to like this curated version of other people's relationships and lives. And so a lot of the time we're just not feeling good about what we're doing or where we're at, our bodies, you know, like our minds, our success, our accomplishments. Like we're looking at everybody else's curated greatest hits. And I think there's something really valuable about having another human being next to you who's not criticizing you. Like even constructive criticism is criticism. Like there's some something about having another person. I'm not saying, by the way, that part of being in a good relationship is not criticism, you know, or the ability to like give feedback to a person, but it's like I said earlier about our friendship. Like if if a if you know it's coming from a place of love of like, hey, man, I know you're great and I feel like this is dampening your greatness or this is shining light in the wrong place. Like I think there's so much value in that but but again it requires these two people to have you know a conversation early on I think about what do we expect what do we feel towards each other and again you know to look at that as a I mean marriage is a contract divorce is a different contract a prenup is a contract like we're living in this world of contracts whether we want to admit it or not so why not admit it say it out loud It's not I promise it is not going to take away the beauty and the romance of this thing. Like I've been a divorce lawyer 25 years. I still get misty eyed at weddings. I still watch love stories. Like I watch Love on the Spectrum. I I literally cry every episode because it ever want to just feel the most affirmed you'll ever feel in your life because these are people who are struggling with tremendous difficulties and challenges in life. challenges you and I don't have and all they want is connection with another person. Beautiful. And there's something about like how they both at like oh my god I want this like a oh do you like ice cream? Oh I like ice cream too. Like and it's just oh okay good. Like we found a thing. We found a connection point. Like and you're just watching it on the edge of your seat going oh my god. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Good. Good. Okay. Good. You're doing so good. You're doing so good. Okay. They ran out of things to talk about. Okay. It's okay. It just, you know, and I I watch it like I imagine some people watch the Super Bowl like just on the edge of my seat. Like you'd think I had money on what happens to Tanner, you know, like I'm watching it and and it because there's something so pure about I just want to find love. Like I just want to find another person that I'm going to feel loved by and safe with and who likes me and who the way they look at me makes me look at myself in a more positive way. There's something so beautiful about that. And maybe you have to strip away a lot of this intellectual crap to like be able to really see that that's what this comes down to and to make it its purest distilled version. But again, I think that's something that's easiest and best to do when you're at the beginning of that journey, not midway through, not definitely not where it's gone off the rails. I'm thinking about standards of expectation. Uh and obviously social media plays an important role in that. Uh you mentioned that people showing their best lives, best selves, best everything. I have a friend who uh is very high up in one of the social media platforms, you know, let's just say in the in the original 10, okay? Um who told me um social media is 99% about women and female biology and psychology communicating to one another and to men and getting men to communicate to the world. things that um support kind of an ideal. Mhm. Some people are going to hear that and get upset and then I'm going to tell you that the person that told me that is a woman, which kind of bends people's brains around it. Um men will show their workouts. Men will compete with other men. Men will you know uh you know just show their their halfcourt shot prowess etc. Is that for women? Maybe. Is it for men? more likely in some cases more both all of it. But the argument is that this idea of ideals being presented as something to keep striving toward is very much the modern version of the Disney movie, the wedding at the end. Yeah. Right. The bride and groom and everything's perfect that it that there's a a subconscious text there we're all kind of aiming for and hoping for. And so we see the the the top veneer. I mean, let let me put it this way. I don't think I've seen a movie or an Instagram account for that matter of a couple resolving a really hard um challenge. Yeah. That wasn't like cancer or something like like a a psych like a a discussion, a hard discussion, a real one in real time. I've seen some staged ones that are just ridiculous where somebody listens. I hear you. I hear you. Okay. But that doesn't get to the underlying emotions at all. And so I think what's happening is um people are getting more and more entranced by this ideal and losing track of what you just described, which maybe the real ideal, this one from this show, uh Love on the Spectrum, right? That you're trying to find connection along the lines of simple everyday things that you can bask in over and over without the fear of them disappearing. Yeah. because they're not that hard to attain and they're not dependent on some transient dopamine wave that you just can't get back. But I I I think what you're saying is spot on. But but so I've always interpreted social media as a form of advertising. Mhm. It's really what it is. It's advertising. And there's two things about advertising that I think should be said out loud. One is that advertising is the dream life of a culture. Like it's it's the ideal It's the dream life. It's this idea of like this is what a Bud Light drinker looks like. You know, they're having a good time. They're with their friends. This is what a guy who drinks this beer looks like. Like, and which guy are you? This is what a BMW driver looks like versus this is what a Hyundai or a Subaru or Jeep driver looks like. Like, so it's the dream life of a culture. And I think there's tremendous value to that. Tremendous value to like what do we imagine ourselves to be? Like cuz whenever I'm talking to someone in a negotiation, as someone who negotiates for a living and litigates for a living, like I I'm not just interested in who you are. I'm interested in who you want me to think you are and who you think you are and who you want to be. Right? So advertising, social media, it's the dream life of a culture. But here's the thing we don't like to talk about. Advertising at its core is the opposite of therapy. If the goal of therapy is to create a sense of wellness and wholeness in a person, okay, advertising is the opposite, you're not okay. You're not okay. You could be you could be you could if you had you would have then you would be better. You're you're good. You're good now. It is true. It's actually delicious. But if if you know the purpose of advertising is essentially to say you're not okay. You're not okay. You could be redemption is available to you. Subtext. you're not okay. And if you did X, Y, or Z or God, then maybe you'll be better. You'll be much better. So, so, so social media is the same thing. You're not okay. Maybe if you did contrast therapy, saunas, cold plunge, you'd be better. You know, maybe if you took more creatine, you'd be better. Like, you're good now, but you could be better. And so, that constant barrage of our dream life, our our imagination, I mean, again, it's inspiring. It's really good for people in some ways, but to be inundated on a daily basis with you're not okay, you're not o over and over again. This is not a normal condition for humans to be in. And that is why I think to some degree, we find that like romantic relationships so appealing because you're closing the door and this person, you're okay. You're good. You're good. You're I have you. That's what I need. Yeah. Well, I have you. That's what I need. Yeah. And what a warm, wonderful place to be. Particularly like it's really nice to be in a warm house when it's cold outside. It's really nice to be in a dry house when it's raining outside. Well, when you're living in a ecosystem where information has become a form of garbage that comes at you from every possible angle all the time, devoid of context, and everything is an advertisement telling you there's something wrong with you. Why wouldn't you want to slam the door, close the windows, and be with someone and ideally a couple of dogs where you guys can just be warm and happy and love each other? And by the way, it's right there. It's so accessible. You don't have to buy much of anything. You don't have to like you don't need that much. If you have love and you have each other, you don't need And but that's why I think our society I think capitalism likes love in so far as it sells Hyundai and it'll get people to buy like the wedding industrial complex. Like it'll get you to go out and do all the stuff you do. But like the idea that hey, if we just find another person that we might realize that this is all the matrix like that I don't need all of that to be loved and I don't need all of that to feel love. I like the fullness you feel when you love someone and are loved by them. Like again, it doesn't even have to be a human. Your dog, why people are always like, "Man, we don't deserve dogs." Yeah. Cuz your dog doesn't give a what car you drive or what you do or how if you got six-pack abs. Like, they don't care. Like, they just love you. and you love them in a way that is like mindblowing in that again, do you ever look like people are always like, "Oh, well, you know, this person I'm in a romantic relationship with, like they're aging, their body is not as jacked as it was or they're not as Do you ever look at your dog and go like like I got to get a puppy, man? Like this dog is old now. Like this dog's like, you know, it's just more and more appreciated. It's just deeper and deeper. It's like the pair of jeans that you're like, "Oh my god, it gets more comfortable every year." Like and like love that's how love can be and should be. But again, it requires to some degree that that noise of that ecosystem, that constant you're not okay. You're not okay. That we can figure out a way to turn the volume down on that and turn up the volume on what are we feeding here together. Again, it may not sell as many cars. It may not sell as much beer. It may not, you know, but that's okay. Like that's the wholeness. that sense of wholeness, like that depth of connection to me, like that makes all the sense in the world. What you're describing is very alluring. And um when you said, you know, two people together in the cocoon, maybe some dogs as well, if one were just to inject a smartphone in there, completely different picture. Totally changes the EOS. You know, and I'm not trying to be a buzzkill here, but what you describe is so beautiful. And you know, if I look back on the best moments in romantic relationships that I've had, it was well, in recent years, driving a segment of the California Coast where there was no Yeah. phone reception. Yeah. Like the amount like the kind of peace that comes from that, you know, it's always moments of simplicity. Yeah. Always. Um almost anybody if you ask them you know genuinely ask them like what was a moment where you felt the most loved like their answer will surprise you like it rarely cost anything. It really, you know, I was on you and I both done Diary of a CEO, you know, Steve Bartlett, and you we both have a friendship with Steve and one of the questions he asked me was, "When when did you feel in your life the most loved and I instantly knew the answer and it was the silliest answer and yet the most honest and it I told the story about how my when I was a kid, we used to get pizza every once in a while and you know, pizza's cut in a certain number of slices And I remember my friend Tommy and I were having pizza and my dad like there was an odd number of slices and my dad had one slice and we like two young boys just devoured you know like three four slices a piece so there's only one more slice left and of course he and I are both looking at it even though we'd had like three or four slices of pizza and my dad had only had one and my dad went like yeah you guys can have it and we split that last piece my friend and I and a couple of weeks later I was at his house and ordered pizza And the his father just like ate the last slice of pizza. He ate like more slices than we did. And I remember looking at him and thinking, "My dad would never do that." And I remember thinking, "Oh, he loves me." Like I I just felt it to my core that like he loves me so much. Like I know he wanted that other piece of pizza, but the joy he felt in watching me eat another piece of pizza was bigger than the hunger he had for another piece of pizza. That is the purest expression of love. And like most people, if you say to them like, "What was a moment in your romantic relationship where you felt loved or you just felt joy inside yourself?" Like they like, "God, I'd rather be here than anywhere in the world." The answer is not going to be we were at the most expensive restaurant and we were or we were having the most mind-blowing sex like that. Listen, you'll have fond memories of all those things, but it's some little moment of just connection or just the feeling of like holding this person's hand or like the way that the light hit them at the particular sunset when you were sitting outside together. Like, and to me, like, of course, modern consumer culture doesn't shove that down your throat because you don't need anything. You don't need to buy anything to experience that. You don't need to do anything to experience that other than find another person and love them, you know, and let them love you. And that's not doesn't require a lot of purchases. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with Function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by function simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Huberman podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. You got my mind going to a number of of uh pleasant memories and examples, but I love I love your your pizza example. I'll just quickly give one. I uh I was in a long relationship with somebody. We're still on on very good terms, and we still laugh um and delight in this one moment. There's there's a a a diner here in Los Angeles that we had come to that uh it's closed now, but it's still there. Yeah. Every time I drive past it, I think about this. Yeah. Like I I I think about this and you think about her. I think about her and we were on a it was a early early days of of dating and um I remember she asked for cream for her coffee and put like a little bit more cream than one would normally put in the coffee. And I was like, "A little cream with your coffee?" She's like, "Well, actually, I want to put the whole thing in here, but I'm trying to be polite." And I said, "Put the whole thing in." And without hesitating, she just went and put the entire beaker of of cream in there. And we still laugh about that. And I remember that moment being so freeing for me because it was this moment where I knew she was relaxed enough to do it. It was hilarious for reasons that were only clear to us. Um, and people are probably bewildered about why it would be so meaningful now. And I don't think they will be. And to me, it it was a moment where I was like, I I I don't want to reveal who this person is. people in my life will know, but she has such a lust for life, like like full blast, all gas pedal on everything. Um, and it was like, I love cream. I want the entire beaker of of cream. And it was this this permission that she gave herself. So, I still delight in that. So, these little things, right? And I think as you were describing the pizza example or this my my example, what what clear to me is that the memory of say like the incredible early stage of a relationship or um some big vacation or event which is wonderful. That stuff can set a kind of yearning as much as an appreciation like you want it again. Whereas the for me this probably silly sounding uh thing about the the creamer the cream in the coffee or the pizza thing, you still have that like it's not like you want it again. You've got that. It's yours. It's never going away. And I think there's something very deeply biological and psychological about those kinds of things because I think they drive really deep pillars into our memory. It's like we still have them. I mean, look at the way you describe it or the way that I Well, first of all, there's nothing silly about that. Just the fact that you say like, "Well, that silly example I gave." Like, there's absolutely nothing silly about that. Like there there's there's I completely got it. I completely was smiling while you were telling that story because it's lovely. Because what is it? It's intimacy. Like the definition of intimacy has nothing to do with sex. Intimacy is defined as the ability to be completely yourself with another person. And what was she doing there? She was doing what we all do on a date. Those first few days, those early days, we have spanks on our personality. You know, everything is like, "Okay, I'm gonna" And again, is it lying? No. Is makeup lying? No. It accentuates the positive, decentuates the negative. It's not a lie. If someone was wearing makeup and then they take their makeup off, I don't go, "You're a liar. Your eyelashes don't look like that. You're a liar." No. Look, you're trying to impress me. I get it. Like, you're trying to be this, but eventually you're going to see this person without makeup. Like, eventually you're going to find out she puts an insane amount of cream into her coffee. But these are the things we love about people. It's what makes them human is that you're just you're she puts so much cream in her coffee. Like it's so weird to me. It's ridiculous. But it's but but let me tell you something. You still think of her when you drive it. You think of that moment like that was an investment that that paid dividends forever. You'll remember that forever. And by the way, it's not a betrayal to future relationships that you fondly recall this moment of intimacy where this person felt loved enough and comfortable enough with you to go, "Yeah, I'm going to take that mask off. I'm going to show you I like an insane amount of cream. I have no idea why I like that much cream, but I just do." Like, is that make me weird? Is that okay? And you going like, "Yeah, go to town. Like, whatever, man. Like, I like like I don't even use cream, but like go to town. Like, be you." Like that's the feeling we all want is that feeling of like yeah you're not crazy you make sense to me you make s you're not just like me we're very different but you make sense to me you know I feel understood and that to me like that that's the whole thing and so if you say well this is where we were in early days and that's the baseline and if we don't continue to feel that intoxicated by each other that we're doing it wrong okay then then it's You've said an impossible stand. That's like saying I'm not in the shape I was in when I was 25, so I must be doing something wrong. No, like that the the organism doesn't change. It doesn't evolve that way. Like this is the nature of things is that it's supposed to be what it is. Like it's supposed to merge or evolve into something different. But again, having conversations about what that is and what it looks like, that that's the best possible way to preserve what's best in it. And I think starting a marriage with we're not going to talk about any of that. We're not going to look at any of it. We're just in love. That's all that matters. We're just in love. That's all that matters. Let's talk about any of this other stuff. Like that's not that's that to me, you're doing yourself a disservice. Start early. by creating the pattern of we're just going to say it. We're just going to say it. We're just going to say what we're doing right, what we're doing that that hit the wrong way. Like, cuz here's the thing, like you and I are friends. If if if you hurt my feelings, if we had a conversation and you said something and it just hurt my feelings, I know you didn't mean to. We're friends. I know you don't want to hurt me. I don't want to hurt you. You're my friend. Like, I get it. But I'm going to probably say something sometime that hurts you. and I didn't mean to, you know. So, what do you do? Carry that around? Just don't say it out loud because it's uncomfortable to say that to Jim. He's going to feel badly that he said that to me and that it upset me, so I'm just going to carry it around. That's how if you've been in a long-term romantic relationship, which we both have in our lives. That's how you're having some very benal sort of argument about like what's the best way to get from here to Calabasas or whatever and 5 minutes later it's like you know I never liked your mother and like you you never respected me and you're like where how did we get there? Like how long have you had that in the chamber? Like how long you been holding on to that? And the answer is since the day it happened. So why not create a framework early where if we something blips the wrong way, like I'm not saying dwell on it. I'm not saying put a person in a defensive situation by immediately calling it out, but like if you if I said I'm telling you right now as my friend, if I say something to you at some point that hurts you, I know I didn't mean to. I know I didn't mean to. So I'm I'll tell you in advance, I'm sorry. I'm sorry cuz I know I didn't mean to hurt you. Doesn't mean what I said isn't true. It might be true. It might be fair criticism, but I know I didn't mean to hurt you. I know cuz I love you. And so if you're my friend and I love you, I didn't mean to hurt you. I know that for sure. So why can't we from the beginning? And that's why I like prenups because from the beginning, let's talk about this. What do we mean to each other? What do we owe to each other? What what are the benchmarks of this economy? Like what are the what are the exchanges of value between us? And as we grow and change, how will we hold on to the part that's most meaningful to both of us? Can you give some examples of what a prenup kind of the scaffold of a prenup might might look like? Um, barring the extremes of like billionaires and and um, you know, and and they have 19 Chihuahua or whatever it is. Good lord, who has 19 Chihuahua? But ambitious for actually one of my jiu-jitsu teachers, Paul Shriner, is he's got a remarkable number of Chihuahua. He rescues Chihuahua. I I admire it tremendously. I think Steven Cutotler who um is involved in a lot a lot of the literature and popular writing around flow. Yeah. Has a lot of Chihuahua and he told me that in in some country other than the United States where they translate book, someone did played a joke or something where the on the title of the book it translates as Chihuahua man. Love that or something like that. Well, I mean if you think about Chihuahua it's fair because if you if you glued like 20 of them together it's still not a great dance. You know what I mean? size-wise, just mass in terms of volume of it. I like all dogs. I I like all dogs. I like all dogs. For the record, I'm not being politically correct. I'm partial to hounds, but I like all dogs. Well, you and I are friends for a reason. Um, some some of the basic scaffold of our prenup cuz I How like I can imagine that if we break up, you'll get x amount of uh blah blah blah. Yeah. Maybe list off some like like core core tenants. So, so to do that, you know what you're what you're doing is we're going to do we're going to do a consultation for a prenuptual agreement right here. I do I do them all the time. Great. So, the first thing that Yeah, you're getting it for free. I mean, that's pretty good. It's usually $850. So, what I'll say is the following to understand what a contract does. The first thing you have to understand is what are your rights in the absence of that contract, right? Most contracts, that's pretty easy. Like, I'm going to lease a car. I know in the absence of that car lease, they have the car and I have the money, right? So, that's a really easy contract because whatever the contract is, we both want the same thing. They want my money and I want their car. So, now we're just trying to figure out what are the terms and how do we codify them? And then we'll come up with what are some things that could go wrong. What if I stop making the payments? What if I drive the car off the lot and the wheels fall off? Like, okay, now we have to start using some imagination about what do we do in these contingencies? But at its core, simple contract, which is I want the car, you got a car, you want money, I've got money. Let's figure this out. And if we can't, somebody else will get the car and somebody else will take my money. We'll be all right. We'll be okay scheme of things, right? So, this is the same thing. Okay? It's the same thing. So, if we don't marry, we both know that's easy, right? We both know we're in love, we're happy, we're together, we're enjoying each other's company. Now we're not gonna get married. What happens? So you suddenly the love goes out the window. The whole thing falls apart. I don't think so. That's kind of weird, right? So again, first order of business is why are we getting married? Why? Like what is the problem to which marriage is a solution? Like why is it so strange to say to another human being if I said to you, Andrew, great news. I'm getting married. If you said, really? Why? Like why would that be like what kind of jerk is Andrew today? Like it's why? Well, my parents it's really important to them that I get married and you know we're having a great time she and I but like you know her parents are very religious and they say oh that's a good reason. It's a good reason to get married. Like we do things to make our parents happy or our partner's parents happy. That's okay. That makes sense to me. I genuinely think that there's a valid thing there which is this is the reason why we're getting married or I want the tax break that comes with getting married. There's a tax break. There's a significant tax break. Yeah. Yeah. On federal and state, you get you different dependency exemptions. You get different schedules of how much you have to make to pay at a different town. Yeah. There's there's a whole bunch of purely financial reasons to get married. Like again, with a prenup, you can take away the risk but still have all those benefits. You can file married joint returns. You have all kinds of inheritance rights if you want them. Like there's all kinds of potential perks to getting married, right? There's also certain cultural legitimacy like that. Again, another good reason for people to say they're getting married, isn't it? Yeah, we'll return to that one. I want to make sure we flag that because things are changing. But I I agree. There's always the have they ever been married? Why aren't they married? There's this. We'll get back to that. If you say this is my girlfriend, that could mean a week. We've been together a week. Or it could mean we've been together 10 years and we have kids together. It implies you say my wife. Now that's a fallacy. That's insane, right? just just cuz we went and did like we 20 bucks Elvis will marry you in Vegas and you're telling me that that gives more legitimacy than someone who's got two children with someone has lived with them for 10 years but just didn't get the government involved like that doesn't make any sense to me but we've decided it's like presto change you're married that means now you're a totally legitimate relationship a family member told me that years ago I won't tell you what the course of their relationship was um said the reason to get married is because it's an additional buff buffer against uh walking out when things get tough and they're going to get tough. Yeah. See, I want to hear that a lot. And I you know what if we what if we closed emergency rooms from 1000 p.m. until like 500 a.m. Do you think people would do less risky Do you think people would go like, "Hey, you know what? If I break my leg skateboarding, sorry to pick on skateboarding. if the ER is closed, I won't be like that's insane to think that people in this dopamine state, you know, intoxicated by pherommones that they're going to say like, oh, you know, like we are legally married, I might have to guess. Like it's it's the numbers don't bear it out. Like with with the divorce rate what it is, it doesn't work. You want to create barriers, create barriers to entry. Like how bad do you want it? Like how bad do you want to get married? You have to there's a waiting period or you have to take a test or you have to whatever something some barrier to entry you have to pay some amount of money to get m I don't know create barrier if you believe in the barrier concept barriers to exit makes no sense barriers to entry might make sense again still don't think it would make that much sense but to tie it back to the prenup question so the first question is why are you getting married okay what's the purpose what is the problem to which marriage is a solution the next question is okay if we marry without a prenup what will govern mhm our relationship in the event that it doesn't end in death okay so if it ends by some other reason either I divorce you you divorce me we come to the joint decision that this isn't working some intervening circumstance occurs that changes the dynamic between us in a way that we couldn't possibly have antic anticipated whatever that might be a medical issue something with a child like I've had cases where and these are tragic cases but I've had maybe a in a 25 year career I've maybe had a dozen cases where people lost a child by usually some kind of tragic accident so kid falls in the pool drowns and they they cannot be together anymore like they are a reminder to the other person of this immeasurable loss that they can't wrap their brains around like and so they lose each other, you know, and it's not anyone's fault. Like it's not either of their fault that this horrible tragedy occurred, but it's just too painful. Like they just remind each other of this loss. They can't ever, you know, they can't ever extricate that from their feelings. So now I don't look at that person and go, "Well, you have you should never get divorced. divorces, dude. Who the who am I to say to that person? No, no, continue to feel that torturous pain or oh, go to therapy and that'll get rid of that. Like, like it's not it's not that simple. So, if that person who's been through that exquisite unique kind of torture, that person says, "Yeah, we just can't do that. Like, we love each other, but we just can't. Like, we have to start over and reboot our lives separately so that we have no memory of that anymore or as few reminders as possible. I have nothing I can say to that except of that's not a choice I could tell you is wrong. I I don't have the right to tell you that. So there are circumstances that can end a marriage that were not anticipated by or caused by either person's males. Right? So okay now what? Right? So so if we know in the absence of a rule set in the absence of a prenup what happens if we divorce? Well most people never even get to that step. Like most people never when they get married, they never sit down with anyone and go, "What's legally going to happen to me right now?" Like what just changed? You know, like what? Like you buy a house, you get a HUD one that tells you the nature of the loan and how much you're paying in interest so that nobody can like claim they didn't know that. You get a lead paint disclosure. You get all kinds of things. You get married, you didn't get a pamphlet. You just did the most legally significant thing you're ever going to do other than dying. And no one told you anything about what just happened. So, you've opted out of the title system. So, like right now, if you and I buy a house together, right, title controls, whose name is it in? If it's in your name, it's yours. If it's in my name, it's mine. If it's in our joint names, we own it 50/50 unless there's a contract that says otherwise, right? So, there are defaults in the absence of a contract. There are legal defaults. Again, lawyers make a ton of money over people's aversion to contracts. Like, it's great. Like the worst thing when I got involved and trusted prenup and I told people, "Oh, I'm doing this thing. I want to democratize prenups." All my colleagues were like, "Are you nuts?" Like a prenups are the easiest thing we do. And and we make pure profit on them. We can charge 5 $10,000 for basically a document that you go into Word and change the names and it's the same one for a lot of people. Okay? Or we've done so many of them that we just go, "Oh, this is just like that one." And you just change the and here it is and I can charge you5$10,000 for it. And if it's successful, I'm taking hundreds of thousands of dollars in council fees out of my pocket because now you're not going to have a litigated divorce. It's not going to be a knockdown dragout with whatever the government's current way of handling things happens to be, which by the way is going to be different 5 years from now than it was 5 years ago. I know that because I've been doing this 25 years and the law is completely different than it was 25 years ago, 10 years ago, 15 years ago. It changes constantly because politicians change constantly. So fundamentally what happens with a prenup is simple. We're creating a rule set together, whatever that might be. And it can be as detailed as you want it to be. So I've seen ones that have very specific things about how often we're going to have sex and um if we split up, what'll happen? Requirements. Well, what they are is either aspirational guidelines or it is tied in some way to some incentive or disincentive like some penalty. Oh, yeah. You're kidding me. I'm not kidding you. I I don't advocate for that. I don't think it's a good idea. But I mean, the story I tell pretty frequently is I I did a a prenup defense where I didn't write the prenup, so don't blame me, but I defended the prenup successfully where um for every 10 pounds the bride gained, she would lose $10,000 a month in alimony when they split up. Yeah. And a court upheld it. A court upheld it. The court in its decision actually said, "This is borish. This is disgusting. I don't know why you married this person who insisted on this being in the contract, but it's a contract. You signed it. He signed it. You're adults. You were both represented by counsel. And I'm It's enforceable." Whoa. Yeah. But did the marriage last? No. No, they divorced. Yeah, they divorced. And And she lost She lost $20,000 a month in alimony. He gained little around 20 20 pounds during Do you think that was the the Well, he was rich and she was gorgeous. I mean, you know, and he got richer and she got less gorgeous. But there are a lot of rich gorgeous matchups. Um pretty common. And that's by the way, it's gender blind, too. Like the seauite executive founder that you're talking about, like female founder, they very often don't marry. I know like some people in the red pill community want to say like hypergamy and stuff like that that like seauite women only marry like even more successful men than that. I have a lot of female clients who I have to tell them they owe alimony and they're like wait why do I have to pay I'm a woman he's a man he's got a strong back why do I have to pay alimony I'm like because you are a seuite executive who makes millions and you married the like super hot unsuccessful musician who has the like oops I didn't know I was sexy stubble cuz he looks really good like and that's you you married the equivalent of me marrying like the hot yoga teacher like I get it like but you know you you did the thing and gender has nothing to do with it. If you marry someone who earns significantly less money than you do and they have a diminished lifetime earning capacity, then you owe them alimony most likely. Is it always 50/50 of assets? Generally, yeah, there's a presumption that e equitable distribution, equitable meaning fair, is really the law, but equitable is presumed to mean equal. There are some reasons and some circumstances where where equitable does not mean equal. There can be things called wasteful dissipation of marital assets where a person has squandered money that should have stayed in the marital estate, gambling, having a paramore, a girlfriend or a boyfriend. So there's there's rule. But again, like to tie it back to prenups, what you're doing with a prenup as a fundamental is just saying, okay, there's yours, there's mine, and there's ours, right? like in terms of assets and liabilities, which by the way, I think is an excellent analog to the nature of relationships themselves, right? There's you, there's me, and there's we, right? And and a healthy relationship, there's still you, there's still me, and then there's this ven diagram of we, right? And of course, you don't want you and me to be subsumed by the Wii because I fell in love with you. You fell in love with me. Why would we want those to go away completely? But of course, the the Wii is like, you know, it's it's a it's intoxicating and you want to become the Wii more. But there's value in staying you and me and having a healthy we having a healthy, you know, intersection there. So why not in your structure of the marriage have okay yours, mine, and ours. So at a fundamental level, if you're going to have a basic prenuptual agreement, it's just going to say, "Hey, we're staying in that system. You, me, we, right? Yours, mine, ours. If it's yours, you keep it. Asset or liability. If it's in mine, I keep it. Asset or liability. If it's ours, we divide it 50/50." Fair enough. And now we're going into this relationship with knowing the rule set. So I get a big bonus at work. Okay. If I put it in my account in my sole name, I've protected it. We also need to have a conversation. Hey babe, you just got that big bonus at work and you didn't put any of it in the joint account. Like what's that about? Something going on that we need to talk about? Like and again, I understand people don't want to have uncomfortable conversations. Well, you can have like a series of mildly uncomfortable conversations throughout the course of a relationship or you can duck that and then have some really difficult conversations in divorce court. And to me, that's pretty easy like which of those two things I'd choose. So, at its core, a prenuptual agreement can cover as many like people put in infidelity clauses where there are financial penalties if someone cheats. Again, I discourage it. financial penalties. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Liquidated damages, whether it's a lump sum or a waiver of alimony if you're caught cheating. I mean, it used to be the law of the land that if you could prove adultery, a a person at that point, typically women because the workforce was predominantly male at that time. If you could catch, that's why like the picture of a divorce lawyer with a private investigator with a telephoto lens taking pictures of someone coming out of the hotel. It's like in everyone's mind forever because, and by the way, people still come in to my office and they're like, "I've got him. I've got photos of him coming out of this hotel with his girlfriend." I'm like, "Okay." Like you, you know, there's no like good spouse bonus and bad spouse penalty, right? Like you don't get like extra stuff because you were a super good spouse who never cheated. And you don't lose stuff because you cheated. like other than maybe the marriage, you don't lose like you don't get anything less. It's not like you don't get it. Used to be if you could prove adultery, you waved alimony. So if this person cheated, they weren't allowed to ask for alimony. That was abolished in the 1970s by statute. So it's gone now. It's not divorce. No fault divorce is the law of the land according to the prenup or according to the law again according to the law as it stands, which has changed dramatically over 25 years and varies stateto state. Whereas with a prenuptual agreement, you're agreeing on a rule set. You're agreeing and again, if people want to agree to weird clauses like infidelity penalties and things like you can do that and lawyers, we can draft stuff like that. No problem. who gets the listen pet clauses the level of it was very funny because when the team at at trusted prenup I you know I was the legal advisor piece of it obviously and so I was really feeding them so they could feed to this AI kind of all of these prenups I had done and uh Ben who's our tech guy uh he lives in Australia uh he he he called me up and he was like you do know like the pet clauses are actually the most complicated and diverse out of all of the things. I believe it. And I said, "Yeah, do you have pets?" I said, "Because I'll tell you right now, because there are people that go so hard in the paint on pet stuff like that, it's like they have custody rotation schedules for the pets. They have clauses about what to do if there's a conflict about veterary decisions. And unlike children, you are most likely going to outlive your pet. And so you have to have clauses in for if this pet has to be euthanized, can we both be there? What do we do with the cremated remains of this pet? You know, if we can't agree on a park or whatever that it's going to be sprinkled at, should we each get half and then we can do what we want with it? Like these are things that again have that convers because here's the thing. If we have that conversation when we are now angry at each other and breaking up, right? When when hell hath no fury like a woman or a man scorned, do you think the answer is going to be a compassionate and thoughtful one that honors the relationship we both had with this companion animal? No. It's going to be I'm keeping the ashes. Why? Cuz you. That's why. Like that's the answer. Like I've had people explicitly say I had a case a couple weeks ago where we went in and had like it was supposed to be a four-way discussion, but I was doing like shuttle stuff. So, I'm talking to the wife and her counsel, and I've got my client in another conference room, and these people own like 12 properties, like really high netw worth case, and I said, "Look, which which of these properties do you want to keep?" And she was like, "Well, which ones does he want?" And I said, "Well, why why does that matter? Why don't you tell me?" And she's like, "Well, because I want to know which ones he wants." And I said, "Right, but why?" And she's like, "Because whichever one he wants, I want those." Wow. And I said, "Well, that feels like you're just trying to be contrarian." And she goes, "Well, no, like he's actually a pretty shrewd investor, so whichever ones he wants are probably the best ones, so that's actually why I want them." Now, look, whether that's true, which seems like a fair logic, or whether it was cuz you, that's why. Like, the time to have that conversation was not that moment where we're at odds and we both lawyered up. The conversation should have been had back in the day. you know, back when there was still an abundance of optimism and affection between these people. And so, pet clauses, great example. Like, I think there's tremendous value in putting that stuff in there because let me tell you something, heartbreak is hard enough. Breaking up cohabitation with someone, like I don't care if you're married or not, you live with someone and now you're not cohabitating anymore. It sucks. It sucks. We've all been there. It sucks, man. Like, who keeps what? And like but even if I keep a thing like I don't want that anymore. Like it just reminds me of you. Like we got that on that trip. I don't want to look at it, you know? Like and I don't want to throw it out cuz it's like it was special. But I also want to look at it. So I'm going to put in a box somewhere and hope that someday I'm going to open that box and smile and no one else opens that box and no one else opens that box and goes, "Oh, where'd you get?" Oh, nothing. You know what I mean? Like and that's, you know, like this is the challenge of this. But that's why having that conversation earlier, that's the way it is. So for me, what prenups combined is a long list of things you can bind with prenups. What's important is what's the prenup that's right for this couple. What issues are important to you? The simplest one, yours, mine, ours. 50/50 divide on the hours. Yours and mine. We each keep our own. Whether that's the stuff we had before the marriage or what because even like states like California that have community property. Okay, community property just to give you like a cliffnotes on it. And there's a couple of community property states. California is not the only one. So when you marry, what you own at the time of marriage is your separate property. Okay? And then everything you acquire from the date of marriage forward is presumed to be marital property. You're one person in the eyes of the law. So if you buy your wife a Rolex watch, you bought yourself one half of a Rolex watch. Okay? It doesn't matter. Title is irrelevant. If you win the lottery, she won half the lottery. Okay? So that's how it works. In the absence of a prenuptual agreement, community property is after a certain period of time, and that period of time varies from state to state. In California, 7 years. Once you hit that benchmark, all the separate property is now marital property. You're considered like fully married. You're one person in the eyes of the law. All the mind becomes ours. All the mind becomes ours. So the you and the me both becomes part of the Wii. Now in theory, the legislative intent, okay, was yeah, after a certain number of years, you're like the tree that's grown in the way that now it's inextricably. There's no more you and me. There's just we, right? Love that idea. Love that idea. Cool. Like very romantic concept, right? In reality, do you know what it did? It spiked the divorce rate at 6 and 1/2 years. Cuz why? Cuz 6 and 1/2 years, honeymoon's over. Like that intoxication's passed. You know, that early days intoxication's passed. The the creamer is no longer like Look at how much creamer she uses. It's like Jesus Christ, you need that much creamer. Like, I got to go buy more creamer now. I don't throw my story, man. No, I'm not trying. I'm not trying to divorce. I'm the skunk in the picture. She'll listen to this and she'll be like, wait a second. I know I'm kidding. No, you were still speaking of it fondly. So, I'm the divorce. There's nothing I'm just joking as if I don't bring a little black cloud to the conversation. There's nothing you can do to take away to puncture that memory for me. I love that. And by the way, all the more reason why it's not silly or stupid. It's incredible. That's an incredible thing, you know, and that's and we all have those things if we're being honest in every relationship we've ever had. In every single one. Nina, my girlfriend in high school, loved Skid Row. She loved the band Skid Row. She was madly in love with Sebastian Bach from Skid Row. And I was so jealous because I looked absolutely nothing like him. And I just remember that about her that she had a poster of Skid Row on her wall. Like how many years ago that was like she's a mother of two. Like she's a, you know, but I still remember very fondly like sort of like being so insecure about Sebastian Bach from Skid Row and her like kind of reassuring me like, "Oh, that's okay. I think you're much more handsome than him. And me being like, that is so not true. He's so good-looking. But like it, we all have those memories of every single, no matter how short the relationship was, we have a memory like that. And many of them, it's been eclipsed by the that happened at the end, the negative stuff that happened at the end. And and by the way, that's another good reason to control that downside because you can destroy 20 years of amazing, beautiful memories with six months of litigation. All you're going to remember is that last six months. Like that's it. Like whoever said that money can't buy love, you know, they they didn't know it's like a restaurant. The check comes at the end. Like that's when you got to pay the bill is at the end, right? if you do it the old-fashioned way, which is we're just going to submit ourselves to a game that we don't know the rule set of, and then when it's ending, we're going to let lawyers just go at each other, or we're going to rely on the the hope that we won't use the adversarial system, and we'll be able to sit across each other from a table with a mediator and hold hands and sing kumbaya. what you're saying is really important uh as forgive me um for interrupting but because I think that nowadays there's kind of a a growing I hear more often like yeah we were these are colleagues of mine typically like oh yeah you know we we were married we got divorced but you know we had 15 really great years we raised our daughter and they're still friends or at least friendly and they look they look on those years or at least speak about them I I believe them um with a ton of fond and without the kind the major injury of what you're talking about, which is this rough litigation at the end. So, that's another reason to have a prenup. Another great reason to have a prenup because look, I have an ex-wife. I've been divorced for 20 years. She's been remarried for 15. Like, she's a wonderful person. She's a friend. I care deeply about her. She will always be There's a lot of people I love I wouldn't want to be married to. And she would describe me that way. She she'd be like, "I love Jim. He's a great guy. He's a great ex-husband. I'm a much better ex-husband than I am husband. Totally different skill set, totally different resume. I'm an excellent ex-husband. I do not have the patience to be a good husband, but I have the patience to be a good ex-husband. I can be a great co-parent, too. I'm a really good father. You know, you don't have to be a great husband to be a great father. It's a different skill set. Like, just because you cook doesn't mean you can farm. You know, like those are two different things. Yes, they both deal with food, but they're two totally different skill sets. So fundamentally I think how things end very often impacts your perception and memory of the entire thing. And you as the brain scientist would be able to tell me why that works in terms of what actually imprints on us. But I believe and I'm sure there's some chemical reason for it. Pain, we remember pain more than pleasure. Well, you know all this stuff about 28 days to form a habit or adult neuroplasticity. There's something called one trial learning and it comes fast and it sticks around forever unless you do something to reverse it. And that's the basis of trauma. Yeah. Bad, hard, painful stuff. Yeah. Is etched into our nervous system in one trial. Uh sadly in some cases and it shakes you. Yeah. And it changes your memory of everything that precedes it. The truth is divorce of the ugly kind is trauma. Period. Like I am involved in a tremendous amount of trauma. Trauma for each of the parties, trauma for their children. Like it's a tremendous trauma. And it does not have to be like, but here's the problem. No one comes into my office and sits down in front of me and says, "I want this to be complicated and expensive and awful. I want it to last a really long time. I want to put your kids through college instead of mine. And I just I want it to just be just miserable. I want it to be a show. Everybody comes in and says the same thing. I want to be fair. I just want to be I want this over with quickly. And I want to be fair. Problem is their definition of fair and their spouse's definition of fair are completely different. Completely different. And what they think they owe each other is completely different. And now you both got guns on each other. You both hired lawyers and I've argued both sides of every single issue you could argue in a divorce. I have argued both sid probably in front of the same judges. I've had days where in front of the same judge I argue complete opposite positions on different cases because that's the nature of our job, right? And a weapon in the hands of of a of a virtuous person protects and a weapon in the hands of the villain causes tremendous harm. But the weapon is neutral. Like like and I'm the weapon like and there's plenty of me out there and we get paid by the hour and we get paid whether we win or lose. By the way, like personal injury lawyers and everything is no fee unless we recover for you. Not divorce lawyers. Yeah. You're 56% uh statistic reminded me of like Marines sometimes you'll see them with the tattoo like killing is my business and on the other arm it's and business is good. You say divorce is at 56%. And business is good. Business is good. Business is really good. And and and the truth is like I don't need to make it rain just cuz I sell umbrellas. Like I'm not at a bar saying to people like, "Hey man, you could do better than her." Like I don't need to. Like people are doing a fine job of their relationships up all by themselves. No, you're the love guy. Yeah. Oh, well I happen to be, but even my colleagues like we're not cheering for divorce any more than an oncologist is cheering for cancer. And like when people say to me, "Oh, you make your how could you? this guy, he makes his living in in people's ruined lives and heartbreak. It's like, okay, like my mom had cancer. Like, I didn't look at the oncologist and go, "Well, I bet you feel good about yourselves making money on my mom's cancer." Like, no, I understand what they're not. They're there cuz this exists and they're there to try to do what they can to help. And by the way, like there are so many people that divorce the way that you described your friend's divorce and the way that I described mine. You just don't hear about it. You know why? It's the least interesting thing. Like, do you think that's interesting? Like, if if you invited me to a party and somebody said, "Oh, what do you do for a living?" I said, "I'm a divorce lawyer." And they said, "Oh my god, you must have some stories." And I went, "Oh my god, I've got this one." So, there's this couple. And they fell in love with each other and they were quite young when it happened. And then, um, gradually like they just wanted different things. They matured into different people and they sort of lost the plot of what they were together. in the ven diagram of their their overlapping interests and joys kind of got smaller and smaller. So they decided amicably that you know they should end the relationship but they wanted to continue to co-parent really well. Dude, you'd be like that is the worst story. Whereas if I go like and then he took a chainsaw and he cut the car in half and he was like pick which half you want Like that's one that you're going to be like oh my god Jim you got to tell the story to this guy. Like you want to hear that story. It's so much more interesting. And by the way, people who have an ugly divorce, it's so traumatic that it becomes part of who they are. Like it becomes a lens that that they see the whole world through. It damages their trust so much and they're so wounded by it. And it's the fight. I mean, I Yeah. And they almost don't know what to do with themselves when it's over. And the and the impact on the kids and the pets. Yeah. And by the way, like most human beings, you and I both know, when they tell you the story of their life, they're the hero of the story or the victim or the victim, right? Like one of one of the things I like about our friendship is that like you and I are very aware of our own flaws and cognitive biases. And so we're when we talk to each other that, you know, like all of the people I like best are people that like reality, you know, and that see themselves with a certain level of reality, you know, and and so I don't have to be afraid to like talk to them candidly and blunt. And I think that that in marriage like and in divorce, if you tell the story and you're like, "Yeah, I could have done better. Like I really screwed that up, but you know, I did get this right and you know, she's being unfair when it comes to that." Like I when you tell the story and you're not the hero of the story, it's much more credible as far as I'm concerned. And I say that as someone who tells stories for a living, you know, in a courtroom to try to be as persuasive as possible. I always tell my clients, I'm like, if you make yourself the hero and you make the other person the villain, like you lose credibility tremendously. Everybody has to be like a flawed hero, a villain that has some traits of positive to them. Like it's a much more believable real story. The cookie cut that's why little kids TV shows there's like the villain and the music gets dark when the villain comes on and the hero is all good and all. But as adults, that's not what we want. We want Breaking Bad. We want anti-heroes. We want complicated heroes. We want villains that we kind of feel a little bad for like the Joker. We get it, you know, like because we can relate, right? Because we know that's what we actually are. And by the way, that's what our partners are. So this idea that let's just put a tux on him and a white dress on her and then everybody's heroes. Like that's kind of silly, you know? And and that's where I think that anger that becomes toxic and def definitional to a person. It doesn't have to be that way. If early in the discourse about love, we just normalize this idea of you're a human being. I'm a human being. We're flawed. We have hopes. We have fears. We have things we got right, things we get wrong. We're going to change. We're going to change in good and bad ways. if you want to parse it that way. So, how do we water the plant? Like, how do we keep this thing healthy and vibrant? How do we check in with each? You have a job. You have performance reviews, right? You have some system whereby there's feedback about what you're doing right and doing wrong or there's a bonus structure so that there's skin in the game. Like, why why does it make it less romantic to look at our relationship that way to say like, "Hey, it's important to check in on this stuff. It's important to have like routine preventative maintenance on this thing. Like if you said to me like, "I'm taking my car for an oil change." You'd be like, "What? You don't have faith in your car?" Like, "No, what? You have a cheap car?" Like, no. Like, of course, preventative maintenance makes sense. It's a whole lot better than waiting for there to be a problem, then trying to fix the problem. Well, I think it's this uh business of egos, right? It's there's something in the quote unquote traditional courtship dance that is about, you know, sort of um before people are critiquing one another, before people are commenting on the things that aren't working. Um where, you know, it's it's a it's a false reality, right? That you're only seeing the good, they're only seeing the good. Um and it feels good. And um well, sure, what wouldn't feel good about only seeing the good? Like the previews is the best part of the movie. If you watch the previews and you go, "Oh my god, that preview was good." Haven't you ever seen a preview and gone, "Oh my god, I can't wait to see that movie." And then you see the movie and you're like, "That sucked." Like the only good scenes were the things that were in the preview and that two-minute preview. Like, okay, well, what do you think courtship is? Courtship's the preview. By the way, if the preview sucks, the movie's really going to suck. Yeah. The relationships are more like the deer hunter or something. really they're long and they're complicated and there's and there's moments in it that you kind of go like I don't know what the point of this is but I'm in for the ride so let's do it right yeah hats off to anyone that got through the deer hunter it's great movie but it's yeah it takes some time to get through it let's talk about movies and and as a serious thing um couple years ago I saw you on a podcast and you were talking about the movie True Romance Oh sure uh love that movie anyone that was a a teener in their 20s in the '9s uh will remember that movie everyone should see that movie who's old enough and I get so excited when anybody knows that movie. It's just such an awesome movie and the cast is amazing. Um uh Gary Oldman, Gary Oldman, greatest scene in history. U Michael Rapaort's hilarious. Um Brad Pitt is in it. He has a little scene in it. I think Quinton Tarantino makes a Quinton Tarantino might make a cameo. He wrote it. Makes a cameo. Um anyway, incredible movie and Patricia Arquette who's just awesome and Christian Slater at his coolest. Yeah, very very uh cool movie and you you made the excellent point which uh doesn't give away the plot uh so no spoiler alert uh necessary which is that you know the essence of the movie is really about someone seeing something or a collection of things uh in somebody and just thinking that they're awesome. Yeah, I don't want to give away any more than that. you know, and just that that kind of um appreciation for quirkiness and uniqueness. The two protagonists of the film, without giving anything away, are deeply flawed. Mhm. Like they're deeply flawed by any traditional definition. Yeah. They are not something that you would go, "Oh, this is the perfect romantic partner." It's actually quite the opposite. Like, yeah, their histories alone are a reason to walk away. On paper, there's a lot of reasons to to just walk away from this person. and they meet and there is this instant true romance. There is this sense of like I see you for what you actually are and all that negative stuff on paper that means nothing cuz that's not who you are. I see who you are and I'm cheering for you and you you are so cool. Like that's that's the reality and that to me movie still stands up for that reason cuz it's this it's this sense of being seen with all your warts and all and just being I see you and you see me and it's you and me. It's you and me. Let's do this. Like you know let's hold hands and walk this thing together and it's a game you cannot win and we're going to play it to the utmost. like let's just play this thing through and and it's it doesn't get better than that. Yeah, you nailed it. Uh you nailed the description. I I feel that in contrast to how you described I think very aptly social media as an advertisement of of a um of a life to aspire to even if it's not um possible to have. I felt for a long while that movies and television and books and music were advertisements for exactly what you just described. The uniqueness and the quirkiness of a of relationships that are not typical. Um there's nothing generic about them. Even if the decision to um the the bond the legal bond that the marriage, you know, marriage is marriage is marriage is is marriage. I mean there's some subtleties depending on state and conditions but um but each one of those is unique that the right people found one another. So, so there's something really quite beautiful and special about that picture, right? True romance, right? As as seeing the quirkiness, the everyday things, and as you said, a a teammate perspective. Yeah. Right. 1 plus 1 equals three. There's tremendous value to that. Tremendous value. That's in very stark contrast to um what I think many people experience now where they have their relationship, but then they also have visual and movie access to all these other relationships in the form of social media. They're always being presented with other options of at least how things exist for other people. Yeah. And so I believe again the biologist in me thinks this sets a kind of a yearning for something that one doesn't have because ultimately all the good stuff we've talked about whether or not it's dogs or a person or the pizza story, the creamer story, whatever is about um basking in the completeness of what one already has. Yeah. As opposed to needing more or wanting more. So would you say that social media um not to I mean I teach on social media, you're on social media, but let's be honest that it um in some way maybe poisonous to things like appreciation, fidelity, not just because you can meet people there, but because of the yearning that it creates. Look, I you know, you you while you were while you were saying that, all I could reflect on was a prior conversation you had on a podcast about pornography and the effect that it has on us and our perception of sex, our dopamine, all these other things. Yeah, because young guys are writing to me about this all the time. Roms are porn. That's all rom listen, I'm not saying that there's not a purpose in having an ideal, a romanticized ideal, but but most romantic comedies are not true romance. a story about two flawed characters who you know like f most romcoms are like an ideal right they're a romanticized ideal that by the way ends before reality can kick in so like if you think Jack I forget what the her charact's character was on Titanic but like if you think he'd lived at the end of Titanic that a few years later she wouldn't be like all right enough painting the French girls like you got to get a job buddy like you're telling me like most of these movies, you know, these romcoms, they end at like the high I love you, I've always loved you, I love you, too. And then it ends. They don't ever have to live together. They don't ever have to You don't have to ever see like the actual reality of them at Trader Joe's waiting on the line like arguing over what, you know, like he doesn't find someone else. He doesn't find somebody else. He's not on sitting on the couch scrolling when she's trying to talk. So, she would have expired the age limit, right? Absolutely. It's like Manudo. He like you turn 20, you're out. I think it's not public knowledge. So, I I I think at the end of the day, what's really core here is look, I'm not saying let's get rid of pornography. Like, I have two sons. They're adults now, but when they were young, they got to a certain age, they had phones, they had iPads, we had the internet, and I was like, they're going to encounter pornography cuz it's coming at them in a way that it did not come at me when I was that age. Like, I was that age, you had to like trade like a bunch of things. You had to get someone's dad's porn magazine for like a day so that you could look at it. You couldn't just log on to any device and be inundated with any kind of kink you wanted to see. Yeah, it's inconceivable. It's it's not it's not even fathomable. And I don't know what effect I mean, you know better than I do and you've spoken eloquently about it about the effect that has on the organism. But here's what I will tell you. It definitely creates in people a per if sex if your sex education is pornography, you're going to have a really hard time navigating an actual sexual relationship. And by the way, like I've seen pornography and I've had sex. Sex is not like it is in pornography, but it's great. Like it's still so fun. It's like the most fun thing. So I I don't know why like anybody, oh, we got to make it better. Like sex is great. Like it's great. Sex sells sex. You don't need to put all that on it. Like I understand why. Yes, of course. It's like you want to you want it's just like what what they do to French fries at a fast food restaurant. They figure out ways to make them more addictive, you know? I get it. But but same thing with romcoms. Like romcoms is an idealized stylized version of the best part of all of it. Just like porn. So like if you make your relationship like your sexual relationship based on pornography or what looks good in movies, you're setting yourself up for heartbreak. So same thing with romcoms. Same thing with like I've met my soulmate and that's my soulmate and then it's perfect and it stays perfect and if it's not perfect then they mustn't have been my soulmate. Like all that is is pornography. All that is is taking the dream life, the stylized perfect parts, showing just that and then convincing people that's what it's supposed to look like. And if it doesn't look like that, you're not having a satisfying time. Like the reality is is that people are flawed but we want the same thing. We want love. I don't believe that the path of like I'm going to own 50 like you and I both know men who own every car you could ever want and could sleep with any number of gorgeous women three four at a time if they want to and they're unhappy. They're desperately unhappy. Like I represent people who have a net worth of you and I combined times a hundred and they're miserable because they don't have love. They don't have this basic connection with another person. They don't have the sense of who they are as an object of someone's love and the worth that comes from which by the way is foundational. Like look at a baby. Like look at a baby and look at how they look at their mother. Like mom is the name of God on the lips of children. Like there's something about like this thing loves me and and wants what's best for me. Like we come out halfformed and there's this person that just loves us, right? Like and and so of course we're always looking to find that again, that kind of love and that kind of connection. And there are people that find it, but the way they find it is not through fairy tales. It's not through the romanticized version of pornography. It's through realism. I think one of the reasons why, you know, I hear from so many young men about their challenges with pornography, which tells me that they've defaulted to pornography or that there are elements of it that have gotten them quote unquote addicted or at least in a compulsive way with it. Um, and I also frankly hear from a lot of women that are um frustrated with uh men dating apps and this kind of thing is that uh people are very afraid I think in large part because of what you're describing with social media and uh and other forms of media, but also just by virtue of the way that everything is um shared so much now that people are afraid to reveal any kind of flaws or authenticity in themselves. Unless it's the kind that they can leverage to make themselves seem more attractive or something because, you know, if they go out on a date or um let's say they share a first kiss or something that if they're not a great kisser that that you know, she's going to tell all her friends or or worse put it on an app or something that you know where his name is named. Um or he's going to sleep with her and and then might even share photos of it with people covertly. I mean things that are illegal slash just just breaches of trust like the the contract of of trust that is um purely I don't know for lack of a better word it's kind of a spiritual contract where you say hey listen like I don't know if this is going to work you don't know if this is going to work I'm willing to wager in a healthy way some of my own safety by revealing some things that aren't aren't like super great about myself and maybe you'll do the same or maybe you won't and I'll just feel okay just with the way it lands. That seems more rare nowadays. Sure. Um because it's brave. It's brave. Like I I grew up I wanted to be brave. Like I aspired to being brave. Like I my heroes growing up were from Last of the Moheakans, right? L Longon Caribbean, you know, the the like they were samurai like in in the films like the Moy Mashi films, you know, all those kinds of films. And so if you're not scared, it's not brave. Like it's only brave if you're scared and you do it anyway. Like that's the thing that makes it brave. Like and that's the thing we're we're not teaching young men anymore is it's like, yeah, it's scary. It's so much easier to just be like, "Yeah, women don't mean anything. Women just they're disposable. They're like iPhones. I'll get a new one. It'll have different features. It'll be great. Like you think Andrew Tate's brave? Like Andrew Tate's brave because he fights Muay Thai. That's brave. That's brave. Like even ground with another man, bare hands. Let's do this thing. Yeah, that's brave. But having a bunch of women and sort of not committing to any of them, not having being vulnerable to any of them. This is what's brave about there's nothing brave about that. Like what's brave is I'm going to give you the ammo to hurt me. Like I'm going to give you the ability to hurt me. like and and I'm and I'm gonna do it anyway. Like, and I'm I'm scared, but but I'm gonna do it anyway. And that's what makes it brave. And I think that that's the thing we've just lost in this culture is this. And and that's where I think it's so backwards like that we go, well, a prenup a prenup's antithet like it goes to the opposite direction. Like because a prenup is you're saying, well, I don't believe in this thing. It only works if you oppon That's insane. That's insane to say that, you know, if you don't if you take any precautions at all or give anything or by the way, more accurately, that if you don't trust it to the legislature of your state that you're not being brave, like that's insane. It's brave to merge your destiny with that of another person. It's brave to let someone see what you're afraid of, what you hope for and aspire to. Those are all like divorce is intimacy weaponized. Like it's it's it's and I say it as someone who's been in the room with thousands of people going through it. And I mean the pain and terror of this person who in hushed tones you whispered to them all the things you're most afraid of when you trusted them more than anyone. And now they're going to use that against you in a public forum in a courtroom. Like my god, man. I thank God. I have no idea what that feels like to have done to me. Like it must be horrible. But but again, like it's is it worth it to try? Is it worth it? Yes. But I think having conversations from the beginning about listen, we've got to figure out like is this the kind of person who's going to hurt? Are you going to hurt if you're mad at me? If I tell you something you don't want to hear, are you going to throw at me these intimate things I shared with you? Because if you are, pull the rip cord now and get out. Like, get out. Like if you tell I've had guys come to me, successful people come to me and say, "Yeah, I told her I want a prenup." And she was like, you know, "Well, if you have if we have now, I'm leaving. That's it." I'm like, "Okay, then let her leave, man." Like, because if if that's all if you're saying, "I love you. I love you more than anyone in the world and I'll love you forever." Great. Could you we sign this contract? Absolutely not. But then that's it. I don't even want to see you again. Wow, that changed fast. Cuz like a minute ago, you loved me more than anything in the world. and you would never let me go under any circumstances and you never hurt me. And now I just told you that there's a financial concern I have about letting the legislature make decisions about our future and you've now decided you don't even like me anymore and we're out. That's a hell of a jump. Yeah, good data there. Yeah. Real. But but I mean that how do you reconcile that? Like if they say, "Wow, why are you why do you want that? Do you not have faith in our relationship?" Now let's have a conversation. No, of course. Of course I have faith in our Why would I want to marry you otherwise? Like and what is it you're afraid of? Are you afraid that the contract will be lopsided? Because here's the thing. I want it to not be like I want to know what you're like, you know, I I was having a conversation with with the trusted prenup guys when we were talking about marketing prenups. Like how do you market prenups to people? And they were saying like, you know, like yeah, when you talk about it deepens the relationship and connection, okay, that's a very feminine a aspiration. Like that's a good way to sell prenups to women, right? is to say it's going to the conversations are going to deepen the connection and there's going to be this sense of like hey we're talking about what we expect of each other what we're afraid of and I was saying well for for me I think a great entry point for men in heterosexual relationships is to say hey you want your woman to feel safe right like she's with you she's safe you know her heart is safe her body is safe like you're going to keep her safe yeah provide protector yeah provide protector right so the one of the best things about being a man right is the feeling of like I love that. Like I you don't test that theory like say to any man, I can't open this jar. We go, "Okay, give me look at that. Here you go." Like, you know, we're thrilled for that opportunity. We all want to provide and protect. So, okay, why do we not turn the conversation about prenups into how can she feel loved if she doesn't feel safe? So, okay, in that situation where he has more resources than her and she says, you know, I'd like to be a mom someday or there's a good chance I'd be a mom someday. So, if I'm going to be the primary caretaker of our children and your career is going to stay your focus so you can provide, right? Then you're going to get way ahead of me in the race in terms of economics. So, we need to figure out like how we would deal with that imbalance. Who would say that's not a fair conversation? Who would say that? Now, look, if you bring it up when we've decided we hate each other and the relationship is over and I've been sleeping with my secretary. Okay. Yeah, now I get why you don't want to have a fair conversation about that. But at the beginning, when we're still abundance of optimism, we're still feeling positive about this, would any man say, "Well, you're being greedy. You're being a gold digger." No, you'd say, "Hey, listen. Of course, like you're going to make certain sacrifices and focus on certain things." And you know, I rarely have ever met a couple, a happy couple, that they go, "We brought the exact same things to the relationship. She's a great provider and I'm a great provider." No. Complimentarity is what it's of course, right? And so say that out loud to each other. I maybe you don't want to announce it to everybody and put it on your social media, but you can talk to each other privately about, hey, what do we owe each other? What do we expect of each other? If we split up, what should it look like? What would you need? What would I need? And you can talk about that in very practical ways. And I don't think that that I think that's actually quite romantic because what you're saying is I want you to feel safe. I want you to feel safe that even if cuz I don't I'll tell you for me even just selfishly I don't want you here cuz you don't know what you're going to do economically if we split up. It's not a good reason to stay with me. I want you to want me next to you because you like me. You like having me around. your life is better for my presence in it on a day-to-day basis. Not that well, who's going to pay my rent? You know, I'd want you know what? I'll pay your rent. You can have your rent paid. Are you still here? Because if someone says if I say, hey, if I paid you, like somebody said to me the other day, if somebody gave you a $100 million, would you still do your job? Would you still be a lawyer? And I was like, absolutely. Absolutely. Would I do it at the level I'm doing it currently, would I be as stressed about it as I currently am? Probably not. But I would still do the job because I love the job, you know. And the answer is if you had hund00 million tomorrow, would you still do the podcast? If the answer is no, stop. I've said this before, it's still true. I check in with myself now and again. If you offered me a billion dollars to quit the podcast, no way. No, I just love it. I love my team. I love the I love learning. I love teaching. Um, end of story, right? And so, so, and by the way, let's take that further, right? You get tremendous value out of it and the people who are participating in it, audience and the co-producers of it all get something out of it too. This is a totally wonderful economy. Everyone's getting some advertisers getting something out of it. Everyone's getting something out of it. It's like win-winwin for everybody involved, right? Okay. So, in the relationship between a a man and a woman or a man and a man and a woman and a woman because of marriage equality, in a in a romantic relationship, in a marriage, what if you said to your partner, "I'll give you $10 million to give up this person." If the answer is see you, then that's not the person to be with. Definitely not. Okay. So, so I would rather have that conversation early on. Like if you want to talk about barriers to exit, by the way, you can put anything you want in a prenup. So you could put in financial terms in a prenup that will give this person a financial windfall. I had a client who was a a young man in his 30s. He was a Goldman. I can say that. And uh he was worth like 30 40 million bucks at the age of 30. So he was in the beginning of his career. I mean he was going to do well in life. That's a lot of money. And he was marrying a yoga teacher who made like no money at all. Stunningly beautiful, funny, brilliant, like just insightful, spiritual. He was very quant, very analytical. And she just lightened him up and was adventurous and fun. It was very barefoot in the park. It was very like he kind of reeled her in a little and she pulled him out of his comfort zone and it was like a really nice coupling. and they did this prenup and of course they both lawyered up with good lawyers, right? So he hired me and she hired a a colleague of mine at a great firm in the city who I have a lot of cases with and um the lawyers went at our thing, you know, and so I put in a waiver of any alimony, spousal support, and the other side came back and said, "No, no, if they're married this many years, it's this percent, and if it's this many years, it's that percent." So, I go to my client because this is kind of a negotiation, but it's with a person who he's been going home to every night because they're cohabitating already, you know, and I say to him like, "Listen, they want this structure and this amount for and he goes, yeah, just like put like 5 million bucks." I was like, "I'm so wait, what?" And he goes, "Yeah, like if we get divorced, she gets 5 million bucks." I was like, "Wait, if you get divorced in a month cuz she's sleeping with a her tennis instructor, she gets 5 million bucks." And he's like, "Yeah, you know what? ific if we get divorced, I got bigger problems. Like just, you know, like, yeah, just like, you know, I'll know that if she's staying, I'll know she likes me more than 5 million bucks, so that's good. Good for him. And I thought, you know what? Like, that is gangster in a good way. Like, I loved that. And they're still married. Like, and that was probably 10 years ago, you know, and and and they're tra they got a couple kids now. Like, and I I when in that moment, I remember thinking, "Yeah, they're going to be fine probably these two." Yeah. You know, it never hurts and it often helps to be generous. I mean, I mean, sometimes generosity, people will look back on their generosity and actually no, I can't think of a single instance where, you know, I was maybe even pushed myself to be a bit more generous than I my impulse at the time would have had me be and and didn't think like in retrospect that was the right thing to do. I mean, I I've uh you know, haven't dealt with circumstances of a having that much money or b uh doing a prenup. Um, well, if you have that much money, it doesn't really mean anything anymore. Like I represent I have a couple of billionaire clients. Like one of my clients worth eight billion dollars. You know, it's like Stalin said, "The death of one is a tragedy. The death of a million is a statistic." Like I think if I said to you, Andrew, great news. You've won $150 million. I'm sorry, $130 million. You wouldn't go, "Ah, like the numbers on a page are numbers on a page." Start to feel like a drop in the ocean. There's just no, you couldn't possibly spend that amount of money, right? The the amount of money that money makes on an annual basis just in interest alone is insane. So, well, the joy in being generous is the opportunity, at least in this instance, or something parallel to it is the opportunity to do something that for someone else would be quite meaningful and for you just feels good to do. Yeah. You know, one would hope that he didn't say give her five because five didn't feel like anything. I mean, if he's got I think he felt he felt that was not his roomion. This is not a man who did not take money seriously. He he made his bones in it. But I I think what he was saying is, well, there's no way that $5 million isn't enough for her to be okay. And I want her to be okay. I want her to be safe. I want her to feel right. And he was saying, you know, cuz look, when you marry someone the right way or even cohabitate with someone or even get in a relationship with someone, you're kind of handing them a dagger and saying, "Okay, here you go. Here you go." Like, you can if you want to. It's yours. Like, if you want to stab me with that, you got here it is. Here's my soft spots. I'm going to show you where they all are. Like, and I'm giving you that. And again, I think that's the bravest thing in the world. And I think it's the coolest thing in the world. Oh man, I've done it a number of times. Sometimes it ends well, sometimes it doesn't end well. But I'll tell you, um, and by the way, with enough time, both of those, there's something really like beautiful about that. I mean, look, I'm I I've been reflecting on this a lot lately, and I don't want to pivot to my unique circumstances, but you know, since I was um probably since I was an embryo, but since I was old enough to remember, I'm interested and on the adventure of life. Yeah. And you and you're a romantic at heart. I mean, that's a function of our like our friendship is born of the fact that I think you're a romantic at heart. And I think you're I I think the people who have had their ass kicked by love and still go, "Yeah, I'm going to do it again. Let's do it. Put me back in." Like I love that. Put me back in. I love that. And by the way, that's the statistic that everybody forgets. Which is 56% of marriages end in divorce. And 85% of people who get divorced are remarried within 5 years. That's an incredible statistic. And it's an incredible statistic. And I And I And I've usually I do their prenup. I tell all of my clients, by the way, that if I did your litigated divorce, I will do any prenup for you for any subsequent marriage for free. And I've only had three clients take me up on it. So people are braver than one might think, I think. So I think, look, I think discretion is the better part of all valor. So I think I'm a fan of bravery but I'm also a pragmatic human being and I think there is value in saying okay let's dive into this thing let's do it brave let's do it but see again I think bravery on the front end which is bravely having a conversation about what does this look like if we hurt each other what if we end up like the majority of people what do we do like what do we You know, and there's there's value in that conversation. Come on. Any heterosexual man is going to tell you they've been in a conversation with the woman in their life where she goes, "If I was missing a leg, would you still love me?" And you're like, "What? Where did that come from?" Like, you know, like, cuz what's the person saying? They're saying, "Hey, you know, like if I wasn't exactly who I am, like what parts of me would you have to lose for for me to you to not love me anymore?" Like, I understand that question for what it is. I mean, to some degree, it's a thought exercise. It's anecdotal. It's funny, you know, and my response to it is always like, "A whole leg? Forget it." Like, you break a nail amount. You know, my response? Yeah. I'd love you more. Yeah. Yeah. And then they go, "Wait, what are you what are you into?" Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You be like, "Well, we we play hopscotch. I don't know." No, I just The idea is I mean, I think the the the question is such a beautiful one because it's a it's a question of vulnerability, right? It's saying if I were cuz generally people aren't asking hey if I um you know gained 50 lb would you still love me? Yeah. You know a missing leg is is more dramatic but at the same time it it's so it preserves certain things while it um while it removes a certain thing. It's very it's very well defined. I think that there's another way to look at it. You know there was a so I grew up watching LA Law. I think it's part of the reason why I became a lawyer is I loved that show. I I tried watching it recently. It's up on one of the streaming services and it it didn't age well. Um, but I I grew up watching like because of a lack of political correctness by today's and also like some of the plots like there's gender stuff in there that you're like, "Oh my god." You know, and it's also as a lawyer. I It's very hard as a lawyer to watch lawyer shows cuz you're like, "That would never happen." Objection leading like you find yourself going like this. None of my friends that were in a special operations can watch a movie that they just you can't physically painful to do it. But but I grew up watching it and I wanted to be Jimmy Smiths played this really cool criminal defense attorney called Victor Sephuentes and he had an earring and I was like I'm going to be him. Instead I ended up becoming Arie Becker which was the divorce lawyer on the show that you know like no Corbin Bernson played him and uh I'd never imagined that's who I would grow up to be but it definitely created in me this love of the law. But there was a character on the show named Benny and he was developmentally disabled and he worked in like the copy room and he um has a crush on this secretary and she says something to him about well I'm I'm trying like she's eating a salad and he says why are you eating that for lunch like you know that's doesn't look very good and she says well I I want to be skinnier and he says why do you want to be skinnier and she says well because if if you know if I lost 20 pounds you know I'd be prettier and he says no you'd just be smaller. smaller. And there's a simplicity to that that's completely honest. Like, no, there'd just be less of you. You know, like when someone says, "If I gained 50 pounds, would you still love me?" I hear that as both a a thought experiment, b uh you're looking for me to reassure you how much I love you. But also, what you're saying is if something changed, like what about me can change and what about me can't? Like what would be the things about me that could change? Cuz by the way, sometimes things change totally beyond our control. You know that the tumor is what made you gain weight. It wasn't that you liked Big Macs. Like so if it if if you gained weight because you were irresponsible in your eating habits versus you gained weight because of the tumor. These are two very different circumstance. But if what the person is saying is what do you love about me and what about me could change and and I would lose your love potentially. Again, what is that conversation but the prenup conversation? It's what do we mean to each other? What do we owe to each other? Where do we store value in this relationship? And when it changes, not if, when it changes, what changes, can we communi how can we communicate about what those changes feel like? Because here's the thing. If we're having less sex 10 years into the relationship, I don't think that's abnormal. Like when you're first dating, the amount of sex you're having and the amount of sex you're having 10 years later with two kids is probably going to be different and probably less. Does that mean something's wrong in your relationship? Not necessarily. Like you're also aging. That might change. Your testosterone levels change. Maybe her body changes when you had kids. Who knows? By the way, if you're having more sex, does it mean your relationship's healthy? Not necessarily. Right? So the question becomes is when things change, how will we check in about it? Because I don't think let's just pretend everything's exactly the same and it's fine. It's fine. It's fine. I don't think that's the answer. I think that's what gets us a 56% divorce rate. I've heard it said that um men marry women thinking that they're not going to change. Women marry men thinking they will change. And there in lies the the challenge. I I think there's a saying, but yeah, I mean, there's a lot of good axioms. The one I've heard before that I think is is similar is that um women marry the man they want to spend the rest of their life with and men marry the woman they don't want to imagine the rest of their life without. That's a more romantic version. Women are women are parsing it in the imagined future with this person and men are thinking about the imagined future loss. I've spent a lot of time in the room with people who have recently been caught or caught their spouse cheating. And the most common question the man wants to know is, "Did you him?" And the most common question the women want to know is, "Do you love her?" And that says something about value for those two people. Because for the man it's like the the the did did did you like did you betray me physically, right? And for the woman it's like do you not do I have no value to you anymore? Do you not love me? Do you want this person more than you want me? It's more about the the value than the sex necessarily. Right? And again, I'm not saying all men. I'm not saying all women, but I think there there is a sense in men, a lot of the men, I say this even my personal relationships with with male friends that they're like, "Yeah, like they once they find someone that they're like, "Yeah, I just can't imagine like her not being here." And they they marry because they're like, "I got to marry her or else I'm going to lose her." You know, like I never met a guy who's like, "I can't wait for my wedding day and I've imagined my tux and I just can't wait." Like that's not it's just not something men I I don't know a lot of men that like could dreaming of their wedding day. Whereas I know a lot of women again some of that's cultural that we've been shoving weddings down women's throats and you get to be a princess for a day and wear the dress and everyone's paying attention to you because the bride's the star of the show. You know I get it. But but there is also something about the idea that like you know most of the men I know they're like yeah we got married cuz like you know like that's what you do like you make an honest woman of her you know like that's her parents would have killed me if we didn't get married her friends were all getting married so it was like you know all of her friends she's been a bridesmaid eight times like I was like it's about time you know whereas women very often it's like where is this going where is this going are we moving and again there's probably a myriad of reasons evolutionary biological having to do with procreation There's lots of cultural, religious, there's all kinds of but at the end we are where we are in that equation. And I think marriage is something most men are like, okay, if that's the price, like if I got to buy that ticket to take the ride, I like the ride. I don't want to lose the ride. I don't want to lose this person. Oh man, I'm just uh I'm not I'm not necess sorry I'm not necessarily agreeing with you, but like I can just hear the the voices in people's heads about the really is that passive for men? You know, this sort of like it it sounds like almost like a a passive response like yeah, I guess there's really no other path here, right? I've had a lot Let me tell you something. People lie to their therapist. They don't lie to their divorce lawyer. Like I have had 25 years of conversations with men who are ending a marriage or starting a marriage and getting a prenup or thinking about getting a prenup, but they're too afraid to say anything to her about it. I've had those same things with women. I've represented roughly half half men, half women. And and I'm telling you, like you don't have to like the truth. The truth is the truth. Like you don't have to like like I get it, man. Like don't shoot the messenger. Like that's how it is, you know? And every time I speak about these things because they're so tied in with gender stuff and they're so I I know I'm putting a huge target and everyone's like, "Oh, this guy I I don't care because here's the thing. Sit in my office for a week." Well, you're an equal opportunity assassin when it comes to these conversations. I mean, sure. Sure. What you just said kind of puts a target on men in the sense that it makes them sound like, well, they kind of went into it cuz there really wasn't another like trail on the on the mountain. Sure. On the other hand, there's something kind of um both romantic and uh and actually very honorable about yeah, look, there might be other options, but this is the one I like and she really wanted this and I wanted her and so that's the contract. I mean, there's there's something pretty nice. How is that passive? How is that passive? That's love. It's it's love economy of love. What you like going to antique shows? I don't. But you know what? if she wants to go to if that's something she enjoys. You think she enjoys Brazilian jiu-jitsu tournaments? Have you smelled one? Like, trust me, that's not But she, you know what? I love it. And she's excited to see me be so excited. One. I've never been to one, but I can imagine. Trust me, you can smell it from here. It's unbelievable. The funk is like you'd never believe in your whole life. The only other thing is like equestrian is maybe the only other habit that could smell as bad as that. But the truth is part of love is you you know, yeah, you you want that slice of pizza more than I do. Like part of it is like the okay like this is important to you. Yeah. The pleasure and sacrifice, right? Well, because listen, if it's important to me and it's important to you, am I doing it for you or am I doing it for me or both of us? Like what's beautiful is when you're not sacrificing to give, you know, when there's this feeling of like if this is important to you, it just became important to me. Like, and that but that's at the core of any healthy relationship. You know, if you say to me as my friend like, "Jim, this upsets me." Okay. Or I'm scared of this. If I go, "Well, I'm not scared of that." You know, like, "Thanks. That didn't do anything for me." Yeah. It sort of ceases to be a friendship at that point, right? When you say to someone like, "Hey, I get that, man. You know what? Honestly, like I understand that. Like, I don't I'm not afraid of that. And here's here's how I think about it, which is why I'm not afraid of it." like and I hope that maybe helps, you know, like and and that's what or just hearing the person and going like, "Yeah, I get that, man. Hey, that's fair. Like people are afraid of I got some stuff I'm afraid of that you're probably not afraid of. Like that's okay." So why is it I don't think there's something passive about a man saying, "Yeah, marriage was not that important to me, but it was important to her, and what's important to her becomes important to me because she's important to me." Like that's beautiful. Yeah. I didn't want to imply it was it was passive. I want to be very clear. I think that some people might be surprised to learn that many men, because I agree with you, by the way. Yeah. Uh will agree to do things um not out of the sheer joy and delight of the thing, but the deeper delight of making the person that they care about happy. I feel like that's love. Like that's a big piece of love. And so I think marriage can be one of those things where just look whether you wanted it or the other person wanted it. Like there's something wonderful about you're excited about this. Okay, let's do it. But get a prenup. Of course get a prenup. Why would you not get a prenup? Listen, man. I love you and I trust you're a good driver. We get in the car. I'm putting on a seat belt. Putting on a seat belt. Why wouldn't I? Cuz there are other drivers on the road. There's other drivers on the road. You're damn right. There's other drivers on the road. And by the way, like again, this is a situation where there are rules in place whether you accept it or not. Like that's the thing about the truth, right? Like my beliefs don't require you to believe them. Like this is the you don't have to believe the truth if it's the truth. It's the truth. Like the there is a rule set governing every single marriage. It was written by the state legislature. Period. I want to discuss relationships that start earlier in life versus later in life. When I was an undergraduate, I took a course uh several courses actually from a professor um who was just phenomenal. Learned neuro anatomy from him, developmental neurobiology, gave me the only B+ after my freshman year. That's not to boast about my other grades, but that's the course that I learned the most from. Um I still remember the questions I got wrong. I still remember him explaining exactly why I got it wrong. was the best learning, right? Yeah. It was amazing. Um, years later, I went back to visit him just for social reasons and he had kids now. He was married. He had a new baby. And he said to me something. I don't know why he felt compelled to tell me um stuff about um his personal life and giving me advice, but he did. Uh because he was known for being a pretty rigid guy, very particular, which is part of what made him such an excellent neuroanatomist. Sure. And he said to me, "You know, I don't know what your personal life is like, but you should get married as young as possible within reason." And I said, "Oh, yeah. Why?" And he said, "Because there's this thing that happens when you reach a certain age that you need to have the toothpaste on the right hand side of the sink." And when the toothpaste isn't on the right hand side of the sink, then you it irritates you. and and but if you get married and and kind of merge lives with somebody early, you develop a flexibility and you go through a lot of developmental milestones with them. And um I found it both amusing and and and interesting that he would share that. I know examples uh of people who merged lives early and are still together. I know some that merged life early early lives early, excuse me, and diverged later, got divorced. Um I know people that get married, have kids later in life. Um I'm almost 50 in September, so this question isn't about me, but um certainly pertains to me in some sense. In your observation of successful versus unsuccessful marriages, is there a tendency for people who marry younger, Yeah. to despite the fact that they quote unquote might not know themselves as well, etc. for those marriages to be more successful because they go through a lot of these life milestones together. um setting aside here whether the toothpaste is on the right hand side or the left hand side of the so I've given this a lot of thought because the nature of my constitution is to look at patterns and look for patterns we're similar in that regard and so I'm always looking at that for 25 years I've been looking at like same religion different religion cohabitated before marriage didn't cohabitate before marriage age gap no age gap female age gap like she's older he's younger versus the other way like I try to find patterns And I try to the patterns that can't be tracked by the government in a certificate of dissolution of marriage. The patterns that can only be tracked by someone who's observing this, right? And I I I've really tried to look at that from every angle, including the angle that you just said, which is people that connect in the romantic setting or enter a monogous relationship or make a romantic connection even if it doesn't stay monogous throughout that whole journey. So, like they met in high school, dated in high school, or dated and then went off to college, dated other people, and then they reconnect to each other, you know, after they played in the other fields, and then they go, "Okay, now we're going to be together." Um, I've looked at all of that, and what I will tell you is in my experience, in my observation, what he said is certainly true, but it also ignores the the negative, which is also true. So yes, there is a scenario where people meet at a relatively young age, teens, 20s, whatever it might be. They marry or they become monogous with each other and then they eventually marry or stay in a romantic relationship together and they grow in that like tree that the roots become intertwined and they they just know each and they build a history together that is just irreplaceable, you know, because who like you were there when my mom was still alive, you know, like you were there when I, you know, got into law school, you know, like not just when I passed the bar, not just when I built like you were here for this whole trajectory and there's this shared history. I mean, you have old friends. I have old friends. There's something about someone who was with you when there was just no like no I have some friends that it's like dude there was no reason to be friends with me other than like I had nothing to offer you. I had no money. I had no status. I was a C student like and something about you still was like no that's my buddy you know and I love that. So there is a tremendous beauty in that and when it works there is also that people who have known each other since the beginning as they grow and age and mature and they reach the stage in life where they start to as we can call it a midlife crisis which by the way is not reserved for men like men and women both have a form of that that they start to say hey like have I really felt everything there is to feel. Have I I've only slept with this person for the last 15 years? Like there's so many other things out there. There's so many other experiences out there and I haven't had them. So there's a sense and by the way there's also a a a uh you know mistaking correlation for causation in the sense of saying you know I'm dissatisfied with my life and you've been here for the whole thing. So, it must be you that I'm unhappy with as opposed to the choices I've made and where they've led me or the person who I've become rather than who you be. It's much easier to point to the other person and say, "Oh, you're the reason why I'm so unhappy. I gave you my skinny years, you know, like it's over now, you know, like." And so, I think it ignores that. I I have not found, and if believe me, I'd be the first to say it. If I could find a pattern where I would say, okay, live together or don't live together or like these are ways to to prevent divorce is like this is what you should be looking for in a partner. Same religious structure, same whatever. You were both raised in households with alcoholics or you were neither of you whatever. I I don't see it. I don't see it. I think everything that's virtue can be vice. I think that there's lots of ways that being together from an early age can add depth and beauty to your relationship and there are ways that it can cause people to to not value each other the same way or view each other the same way. I think familiarity can breed contempt and I think that you know no man is a hero to his butler. Like I think that when people have been together through a lot of those things sometimes there is a familiarity that comes whereas again I think the opposite is true also which is having had someone who's in your corner for an extended period of time solidifies and deepens that relationship. There is no simple answer to that. I think there are a lot of things people can do in the relationship to heighten the bonds created by a long shared history and keep everyone's eye on that ball than to have them distracted by novelty. I also think realism becomes really important like looking at it and saying like you know if you've been with the same partner for 15 20 years that the fact your eye might wander to a shiny object like not being afraid to admit that and figure out ways to like hey I feel this now it's a human way to feel that's okay you know like how do we deal with that like what do we do with that is it an ethical non- monogamy which is what a lot of like younger I don't want to say younger but like a modern generation is certainly there are people coming up with different permutations of relationships where there's ethical nominogamy where there's a sense of okay we're going to have certain open things in our relationship like a lot of my gay male friends have been doing that for years where they had you know because again a societ like a a culture that has been ostracized and told that what you're doing is an aberration and you're not like which is what it was when I was growing up like the gay community was like had to hide to some degree because you could be literally killed for for for for expressing your sexual orientation. So, what did that do? Well, there's a freedom that comes with that to some degree. If you're on the outskirts of society, you're like, "All right, well, we just make up our own rules." I guess they're like relationship outlaws. Yeah, they really are. They're like, "Listen, like we're already told we're awful, terrible people for being who we are. So, we might as well come up with our own ways of doing stuff." So, I knew lots of of gay men from the 80s on who, you know, were like, "Yeah, like we have certain rules in the relationship. Like, we can hook up, but the other person has to be transparent about it or there's certain boundaries you can't cross in terms of, you know, how sexually you interact with this person or it's something that we'll only do together in the form of a threesome." Well, again, I it's a permutation of relationship that is between those two people. It's up to them. That's their that's the conversation the two of them can have. So I think there are things any couple can do to feed what's good in the relationship and dampen the negative impact of the things that are challenging in a relationship. I I don't think there's anything but but again the solution to that problem is not just pretend we don't have a problem. Just shut your mouth because if you say it out loud it's going to make it real. It's real. Living in the delusion. Yeah. The living in the illusion is is should really be called living in the delusion. Delusion. Yeah. Because I think these are precious illusions that people have and they cling to them and I understand why. Like it's it's nice to pretend everything's fine, you know, but it's not honest. And and I think there's tremendous value in saying these things to your partner, sharing them, hearing them, which by the way, that's a two-way transaction. Like if you're going to be in a relationship where you're able to say things that might be hard for your partner to hear but are important for them to hear, you have to be prepared to let them do the same thing. So again, that's why it's brave because there's this sense of I would like an uncomfortable truth more than a comfortable lie. I realize you've examined every permutation of the relationship structure and tried to correlate that with outcome whether or not the relationship survives happily or not you know divorce etc amicably or not there is one question that um I do think might fall into a distinct category. Sure. U which is the amount of time that people know one another before they decide to get engaged. Yeah. We hear about and it's been romanticized somewhat. you know, people, you know, met on vacation. I mean, you still see these in like in uh traditional media. I don't look at traditional media too much anymore, but um you'll see, you know, they met in Cabo for 4 days, went back, realized, and then there they are married or um but they might have been together 50 years, you know, or um you know, people were together a very long time. I mean, to me, nothing sadder. Here's the kind of like the Disney thing, right? When you hear about a couple like in their late 70s having been married very long time grandchildren, you know, they decide to get divorced and we all reflexively go a like there because we have the and everyone romanticizes the couple sitting together is all over Instagram, right? The old couple he still does this for her, she still adores him, he adores her. Um, so amount of time that people have known one another prior to engagement, any correlation with outcome? Yeah. So, what I'll say is a couple of things. Again, not a clear correlation. Like, we all have anecdotal stories we can tell of people who were together for extended periods of time and then split up. And we all have a couple of stories of people who like I have a dear friend who got a woman pregnant on the first date, like first date, like they went to movie and dinner and then they had sex and she got pregnant and she called him like a couple of weeks later and was like, "I'm pregnant. And he was like, "I'm marrying her." And I was like, "I'm sorry. Is it 1950?" Like, "What? No. Like, you don't even know her. You went on one date with her." And he's like, "Nope. I'm going to do the right thing." I'm like, "The right thing is to marry a stranger because you had sex with her and got her pregnant." Like, are you serious? You know, they've been married 28 years. 28 years, three kids. Happily. Yeah. 28 years, three kids. That's wonderful to hear. It's a warming story. Yeah. It's a warming story. It's an it's an anecdotal, you know, it's not it's not proof of anything. It's not a playbook. I'm not suggesting people go out and knock somebody up on the first date and then just take the take the chances. If you do, get a prenup. That's all I'm going to say. But, you know, I think that again, it depends on what like if I said to you, I go to the gym for an hour every day. Is that good for me? If your answer is anything other than, I don't know, what do you do there? Because if what I do is I walk on the treadmill for three minutes and then I sit in the steam room for a half an hour and then the rest of the time I'm on my phone, then I might as well have stayed home probably, right? Whereas if I say, "Oh, I never go to the gym." Does that mean that's bad? No. Maybe I do bodyweight workouts at home all the time and I never set foot in a gym. Like, so I I don't think it tells the story. So the truth is is a couple that's together for an extended period of time and has the kind of relationship where they're learning about each other through that process. Like practice doesn't make perfect. Perfect. Practice makes perfect. Look, time is good. Time is good in the sense that you're going to see some good things and some bad things. You're going to see this person at their best and at their worst. You're going to see them through some difficult times. They're going to see you in some difficult times. And hopefully you'll you'll know what you're like. If you got to drive a car for 6 months before you decided if you were going to buy it or not, like you know, you would know, you'd make a much more informed choice. Why do you think they don't let you drive a car for 6 months before you buy it? Like there's a reason for that cuz you'd see the whole thing. Like that's that's again I think it's a great idea. Like but you drive test drive any car. It's going to be fun, you know? I mean maybe you'll see like oh this is boxy. I don't really like it. Look, I've seen again successful and unsuccessful, brief pairings, long what I will say is when people have had a long court, I'll call it courtship period or pre-marital period that they used to deepen their connection to each other and get to know the good and bad of each other and see each other in good circumstances and bad circumstances and with and without makeup. And when you're mad and got cut off in traffic and when you're happy and blissed out. Yeah. They're making an informed choice. Like they're buying something that they understand what it's like. You know, like friends of mine say to me all the time like, "I'm thinking about getting a dog." Like, sorry to make this analogy for romance and and dogs, but it works for me. Somebody says they want to get a dog. Well, it's a beautiful day out and I want to go running with the dog in the park. Who wouldn't? But if you're not ready to have the dog when it ate something and now has diarrhea and it's raining outside and you've got to keep taking it outside and you've got to keep washing your c, then don't get a dog, man. Cuz you know what? It's not playing in the park all day long. It's I've got to get home. Why? Cuz the dog's been alone for 4 and 1/2 hours and I don't want the dog to be alone for that long. Like you've got to you got to change your life for this thing. So again, is it worth it? 100%. 200%. Are you kidding me? Because one of those sunny days is worth everything. And by the way, if you love it enough, even that stupid part with the like it's an act of love. It's like I don't care. Like I don't care. I'll clean up after this thing. I love it. Dogs the diarrhea. They they have this they feel bad about it. They feel bad cuz they're out of And by the way, you love them so much that all you care about is like, "It's okay, buddy. It's okay. You're like my dog throws up and I'm like, "It's okay. Get it out. It's okay. Get it out." And I'd give my entire left hand to have like one more week with diarrhea. Except that would Yeah. One more week. And And you know what? Like I think that that a romantic relationship there is no reason why you can't use the courtship period to sort of test all those permutations. And I don't think, by the way, that people would just stop buying cars if you had a six-month trial period on the vehicle. I I think there's something really okay like you would still find maybe you would when you made a choice you would really be picking one that you really like. So what I will say in response to the question I made a long answer is I don't think that a long courtship period if for example if the courtship period the length of it is a function of one of them being super reluctant to commit to the other person that might not be a good indicator. But if if the purpose of that courtship period, that extended engagement or that extended dating period is to really get a feel of each other in a variety of conditions, you know, like to know a thing, know its limits. When it's pushed beyond its tolerances, its nature emerges. So, I think there's value in seeing like I don't want to just see you with makeup on like because you're going to not be wearing makeup for a lot of this relationship. I want to see what you look like coming out of the shower, you know? And and by the way, like you should want that. You should want that, too. You want me to look at you with no makeup on and go, "Oh, you're beautiful. You look great." Like, do I love it when you put on makeup? Of course. But do I love it when you've got the flu and like I can take care of you? Yeah, I love that, too. That's beautiful in a different way. So, I think that if you use the time the right way, there's tremendous value in that. Much better than just throwing a dart at the board. Like, I find this person attractive, they find me attractive. it. let's do this thing. Like I don't think that that is a good recipe. I've seen a lot of divorces that come from a very brief courtship. But is that the death? No. No. I think sometimes people just get it right. I mean, listen, you and I both know people take it out of the romantic context who just get rich quick. Like they make one cool decision and it just pays off. They make one good bet and it pays off. And I know other people, man, they had to take the stairs. like they had to take they 15 versions of it and it went bankrupt three times and then one of the things hit and that was the one and then everybody goes I always knew you were going to be successful you know I always knew that really cuz I didn't like it was a series of near misses until I hit so I think it's the same thing I think there how you use the time is what really matters love it last question oh boy some people listening to this are in relationships some are married some are divorced some are not in relationships. Is there such a thing as a postnup for the people who have already been married? And what are the pros and cons of opening up that conversation and um the the contract itself? And for people who are still in the you know looking for partner exploring a relationship uh or relationships what whatever their life structure happens to be. um what do you think are the questions that they might ask themselves and the other person that would give some insight into um into not necessarily like should there be a a prenup for the dating um period but you know a lot of the things you're talking about are are in the circles of like close intimacy like what are your real flaws what are you afraid of what are you afraid I'm going to do that's not the kind of conversation maybe nowadays people do that that typically people will have on their you know uh fifth date or sixth date, but at some point it makes sense to have real conversation with somebody to try and make sense of whether or not you go forward. So, I just threw a lot at you. I realiz shot. No, but those are all really important questions, but for the for the uh committed and non-committed folks out there. Yeah. I mean, I I'm paraphrasing Jung when I say that the thing you seek most is in the place you least want to look. So, I think that, you know, a friend of mine once said to me that um the the most important or really the only question that therapy is designed to answer is what is it that you're afraid to feel? And so, I think that there's tremendous value in sharing with a partner and learning about a partner what it is they're afraid to feel. and and looking at the things about yourself that you're afraid to share. I I think in my own experience and I think in that of most of my clients, you know, I'm not religious like I'm not religious anymore. I was raised religious, so I don't really believe in the devil. Like I don't I don't think that there's like this malevolent creature that's out there trying to convince people to be evil. But if there was a devil, I think the principal function of the devil would be to convince us that we're so beastial that God couldn't possibly love us. Like I think I think the the the greatest mistakes of my life I always made. And the most selfish awful decisions I made, I made because I convinced myself that I wasn't good. Like I convinced myself that what does it matter? like nothing means anything like just do whatever who cares no one's looking just do it doesn't matter and when I when I look at whether you want to call it the presence of God in me Buddha nature call it anything you want to call it but when I when I hold to the the angels of my better nature like the part of my heart that is good and loving and compassionate and I let that be my compass right that's when the greatest victories the greatest joys like the best things happen. And I'm not suggesting being like ignorant and being like, "Oh, the whole world's full of like puppies and sunshine." It's listen, I I'm a divorce lawyer, man. I I live in the world of misery. But it it has not robbed me of the belief in the good and and the depth of the power of love, right? And how badly I want it and how bad we all want it. And so I think the most valuable thing that people can do is when you're not in a relationship or whether you're in a relationship is when do you feel the most loved and when do you feel the most loving, right? And then when you connect to another person, find out the answer for them cuz it's probably different. Like it might be some things that are the same, but there might be some things that are completely different. You know, there's a good possibility if you told the creamer story that she would be like, "Oh my god, I don't even remember that." Like, "I don't even remember that happening." And yet for you was such a So I think there's a lot of those things. Like sometimes when you ask somebody, "What's your favorite memory of me?" Like the thing they'll tell you, you'll go, "I don't even remember saying that." Like I've had people say to me like, "Oh my god, you said this thing on this podcast." And I'm like, "What? What was it?" And they say it. I'm like, "I said that?" I'm like, I mean, it sounds like I agree with it. Like, I I have absolutely no recollection of saying. I mean, partly I talk so much it's hard to remember what's important. But I I really think that there's tremendous value in being brave in the conversations we have with ourselves about love. I I I think that lying to yourself, because here's the thing, if you can be authentically yourself with another person, then you're going to feel their love. Like that's what I mean about the devil is the idea that like if I just show my partner the best parts of myself and I don't admit to them or or or let share with them the things I'm afraid of the I need to work on all that kind of stuff then I'm never going to feel their love because they don't love me like they love the character I'm playing like they love the persona that I've developed in this relationship and I'll never feel their love you know whereas if I if I'm brave enough to share with this person, the parts of me that I don't understand, I'm afraid of, I'm I'm I'm unhappy with, I'm I'm ashamed of and they love me anyway, like then I'm going to really feel that love and that love can be a transformative kind of love. Like that's a love worth having, you know? So I think anything that deepens your ability to know yourself and deepens your ability to know your partner and let your partner know that you want to know them. Like the whole thing like I want to know what you need to work on. I want to be here to help. Like I'm here for you. I'm here. It's just like friendship. Friendship's easier. You know, friendship's easier than romantic love. Like it's super easy to say like, "Hey man, I you know I'm cheering for you. You know I am. I wouldn't be here. I don't have to be here. Like, I don't have to be. That's part of why I like prenups. Like, I don't want you here cuz you have to be here. I want you here cuz you want to be here. Cuz you're in, man. Like, there was a time where we were in and we decided to do this thing. And that to me, like that's the whole thing. So I I think that's the secret in terms of a if you're already in a relationship and you go okay like postnups there's problems with postnups because from a contractual legal standpoint contracts fail for what's called want of consideration meaning that that in every contract there has to be an exchange of value like so to use the car thing again I'm giving you money you're giving me a car like we're each exchanging we're each giving and receiving value the The consideration for a prenup is we don't have to get married but I'm willing to marry you if we amend the rule set in the following way. So that has a mutuality of consideration. There are some courts that have held that a postnup there is no consideration and it fails as a contract because staying married is not consideration. It's assumed that you would stay married legally. So that's why postnups can fail. Now that being said, do I think the message that I have about connection and how to interact with your partner and the things I wrote in my book, like you know, my book, How to Stay in Love: Practical Wisdom from an Unlikely Source, the idea was not to to to just talk about people in troubled relationships or to approach people who were not yet in relationships and give them a rule set to start with Like I trained Brazilian jiu-jitsu for many years and people will often say because you know people are 30 40 50 and they want to get into Brazilian jiu-jitsu and you know there's an old joke I don't know it was one of the Gracies who first said it I don't I don't want to offend Her or or I think it was Hiler but I'm not sure might have been Hixon where someone said um what's the best age to start jiu-jitsu and he said five or now. And I think that's the answer. Like, so all these techniques, all these things we're talking about, what's the best time to implement them? The day you meet this person or now. Like, I don't care if you're married 10 years, 20 years, 30 years. You're you're telling me that right now there wouldn't be value in seeing your partner, allowing yourself to be seen by your partner. like a lot of the the practical wisdom I think that's so simple of like like in my book there's a chapter where I just talk about it's called leave a note and it basically just says like leave your partner a note like when you leave for the office in the morning leave a note like hey you know it's so fun on the couch with you last night watching TV I I married the prettiest girl in the world can't wait to see you again what does that take 30 seconds 30 seconds right nothing such a minimal investment didn't cost you anything. You That's why you won't see it on TV advertised, by the way, because it didn't cost anything. You don't have to buy anything. You don't need anything to do that thing. But what does it say to your partner? I see you. You're important to me. I took the time in the middle of the things I'm doing to to to to let you know you're important to me. Like, and who wouldn't want that? Who wouldn't want their partner, even after 20 years of marriage, especially after 20 years of marriage, to say, "God, you're handsome. Hey, like I'm just I don't know something about you. Like who wouldn't want to hear that? Like who wouldn't have their day brightened by that a little bit? And again, maybe at first your partner would go, "Are you all right? What what what are you doing?" Like I had a buddy who actually did the note thing and he said he was like, "Yeah, for like the first week she was like, "What's going on? Are you having an affair? Like are you dying? What's going on?" And he said, "But after like and I just said,"No, I, you know, I just I want to make more of a point of like being present, you know, and he said after like three weeks, four weeks, he was like, "Dude, I'm having like we're like having the best chapter. Like we're having more sex. We're having more fun." Like he's like, "And now she's like texting me in the middle of the day." Like, by the way, like again, not to gender things, but like leaving a note or sending a text in the middle of the day that just goes, "I was just thinking of you." Like I just wanted you to know I was thinking of you. It's the equivalent of sending a man nudes. Like it it because what does it say? It says, "Hey, like I know that the world's crazy and everything's kind of but like it's you and me. It's you and me and you're this special person that gets to hear these things from me or see these things of me that other people don't get to see cuz I'm yours and you're mine." Like and that what is better than that? And what is the downside to trying to giving that because worst case you spent 30 seconds of your life and you didn't get a return on your investment. Okay, you're no worse off than you were. So even though you may not be able to avail yourself of the rule set concept that can happen when you haven't married yet and you have a prenup and you have that discussion, I think you can still have that core conversation. Again, not about if we split up, how do we divide our assets? That's not what this is about. It's about what do we owe each other? What do we bring to this economy, this relationship of the two of us, this exchange of value? What what I have a I have a a a friend who's been married probably about 10 years, happily, really happily. And he was telling me how they they call it a walk and talk that once a week they just go for a walk, like a hike together. They live in Colorado and they made a practice of telling each other like two or three things that they did that week that like were a big win, like two or three things that like made them feel loved or whatever it might be. And then they try to have at least one or two things that they could have done better or where they might have crossed wires and they kind of do a praise sandwich, you know, like so they do the good and then a few of the bad and then back to the good again. And I said to him like, "Is there a discernable impact?" And he's like, "It's like the best thing we do." He's like, "Because it it really helps us course correct in real time." But the most valuable part is actually not the here's what you got wrong. It's the here's what you did right. Like here's the stuff that made me feel loved. And and cuz that death spiral that people get into in relationships where it's like, well, I'm not happy. Why should they be happy? And like, well, I didn't get to go out with my friends. Why should she get to go out with her friends? You know, and why I had a miserable day. Well, I had a miserable day, too. Well, it's like, well, why is your miserable day more important than my miserable day? You know, like that death spiral. You can reverse that. It can it can work the other way which is like just keep meeting this with an abundance of love, affection, compassion, positive reinforcement. It can and again not always like there are believe me I I work in the clay of domestic violence, intimate partner abuse. Like I've seen it up close and personal. I know there are toxic awful people who are just not going to be able to have a functional relationship. But find that out sooner rather than later and then cut your losses and get out. Like cuz I have to tell you something. I you you say how you know you see like a couple that's 70 or 80 and they're getting divorced and it's the saddest thing. It is. But it also begs the question like what would have happened if they were ills suited for each other. How long did they hold on? Cuz I got to tell you man, I'm not impressed when somebody says, "Oh, we were married for 60 years. We were miserable for 45 of them, but we did it." Like, oh great. Like great. Like I don't that's like that race they run in Death Valley where it's like I ran 150 miles in a okay like what do you that's great that's insane like but okay like congratulations you did something that sounds horribly painful and in no way positive like but if you feel good about it cool like that's not to me a successful marriage. A successful marriage to me is we made each other's lives better. We made our our our own lives and each other's lives better for our coupling for the fact that we were together. Maybe we created life and cultivated life together by birth or adoption. Or maybe we just radiated joy to the people around us, you know, or maybe we had pets and we gave them a wonderful existence together. Or maybe some combination of all those wonderful things like but do I think that the solution is like longevity and say no because I I I don't think that the duration of something is the success or failure of it. Listen, if you make a six-hour shitty movie, I'm not going to be like, "Well, but it was six full hours. That is pretty good." Like, no. Whereas, if you if you make a six-hour movie that holds my attention the entire six hours, that's a damn good movie. That's a that's a movie worth making, you know? Like, I'll watch Casino or Good Fellas every time it's on and it's like a full three hours almost, you know, and I don't care because it's that good. So, I think that longevity, like endings and how relationships end, the fact that something ends does not mean that it wasn't valuable, like at all. I think that's a really crazy thing. Like, every movie I've ever enjoyed ended. And if somebody said to me threequarters way through it, you know, this is going to end, I wouldn't be like, what's the point, you know? No, I want to watch the whole thing. I want to And knowing that it's going to end is part of what makes it beautiful. So, I I think that protections are really important. Prenups are really important. It's ideal as early in a relationship as possible to have some of these conversations about the painful things that I have to help people wrestle with every single day. But I I think the value received from that conversation is immeasurable. Jim, what I love about you so much is that you're willing to and maybe you just reflexively look at things through every possible lens. So if it's something dark like divorce, you look at it through the lens of that, but also does it always have to be dark? You look at it through the lens of a a lawyer's eyes. Well, I think that's part of lawyering is you have to argue both sides of everything. But I would also say that, you know, if ever uh, you know, people had the stereotype in mind that all lawyers are heartless and cutthroat and it's all just about money, I mean, you clearly shatter that because I mean, so much of what we talked about today wasn't about divorce. It was about contracts. And it wasn't just about contracts. You know, really what I kept hearing over and over is that by asking what at first are practical questions, you can really get to the emotional layers underneath those that really speak to what people need most in order to make things work, even if the relationship doesn't last forever. And I think that's such a an important lens on, you know, the kind of overwhelming thing that we call relationships and marriage and prenups and divorces. And, you know, I think it's enough to make anyone terrified. It's also enough um as you said to make some people bitter and I think we didn't talk about it too much because it's such a potent word didn't have to but this notion of bitterness is really the thing to avoid most right because it contaminates the thing that uh that you embody so much which is you just have such a a huge forward center of mass full tilt arms around all of it love of of life and people and dogs and and it's it just comes through over over and over in everything you do. And in every way that you describe it. So I see you as a Yes. a lawyer. Sure. Um not just a divorce, but a lawyer. You're certainly a psychologist. You're definitely on the adventure of life. There's no question about that. For sure. You're an anthropologist, which reflects some of your prior prior training. And you're just a really amazing human being in the way that you're willing to just launch yourself into all of it and consider all of this. And like you said, you see some really unfortunate things, but it's clear that you also see a lot of really wonderful and beautiful things. And I think some of the awful things are really beautiful. There's a line from U. Hemingway from uh a farewell to arms where he says the world breaks everyone and and some are stronger in the broken places. And I think divorce and and and heartbreak like heartbreak is like that. Like it heartbreak breaks everyone. And and sometimes we're stronger in the broken places. Like I I think I've learned so much through love and I've learned so much through loss. And I don't want my love of love to make me forget that loss exists. And I don't want the pain of loss to make me forget that love exists. Well, I and everyone listening uh really appreciate you taking the time to come here. Look, you you make a living doing something else. You make a you know, a fulltime day job. Yeah. You don't need to do this. um traveling across country. I Well, I so appreciate it on I love talking to you in general, but but we've never done it on mic, which is really funny. You know, we had some good conversations and you've been a wonderful uh and trusted friend to me. I also trust that if I'm going to make a dumb decision or if uh um or if I've made a dumb decision that you'll let me know. I'm there. I promise. Right back at you. I will in the future. Yeah. Well, you have for me. I don't have your legal wisdom, but right back at Well, I haven't yet. You have plenty of wisdom. a trusted and and amazing friend and uh you just have so much wisdom to share. You know, my dad has this saying uh that you know some people when they speak they just might as well have exhaled. He's Argentine. He's a little cynical but he also says but some people when they speak just wisdom falls out of them. And that's how I feel every time I'm in your presence or I hear you on a podcast or even a short clip. I I prepared a lot for today's uh episode by just watching as much content of yours as as I could possibly consume and I was like, "Wow, the density of value per unit time for your for your speech is it is unbelievably high." So that was the most humor description of me. I love it. So the density of value within the I I love your your uh the scientific lens through which you even look at the un unscientific although I guess everything is scientific in some ways. So, but no, man. I I I'm really glad we had a chance to do this and uh um you know, I I love all of our conversations and I thought to myself, it's going to be interesting and odd to have one, but I sort of immediately forgot that the microphone's here and the camera's here and and that's really lovely. Like that's the best thing, you know, is is when um like if you said to me, "How long have we been talking?" I would imagine it's like an hour, but I know it's way longer than that. I have no idea, though. I've completely and that's that flow state, you know, that happens when when we're wrestling with these ideas that are the most human ideas. And and I love um I I want to pay you a compliment. Um, you know, I've before we were friends, I I listened to your your program in the earlier days of it and I love how the journey of becoming fully human and exploring the depth of our full humanity has become like because something that was always very science-based tools and it's very easy to sort of just keep yourself in that box. you've really stepped out of your comfort zone, especially in recent years and brought in these things that really are the totality of the human experience. All these relationship things, the pet thing I just listened to, I loved. Like, and I think that that um we're coming to a time where we realize that like, you know, we're we're what's the old saying that we're uh you know, we're not uh thinking machines that sometimes feel. We're feeling machines that sometimes think. You know, I think that you're really starting to get deeply into the totality of our humanity, the physical state, the emotional, spiritual, all of those things. And I think that's what we need that if there is a cure to the ailment of our time, the partisan hyperartisan environment, the misery and anxiety that so many people are feeling and the yearning, the spiritual hunger that has people consuming opinions and podcasts like deeply. I mean, who would have ever thought podcasts would be what it is, right? like long form audio conversations like we would go back to the radio like when we have when we can world build with AI now and make anything visual for us that we would go back to finding wisdom in this and the fact that like we that hunger is being fed by people like you who are saying hey like this isn't science won't save us spirituality won't save us. Love won't save us. Anger won't save us. All of it. We need all of it. And we need to try to wrestle with it and figure it out. And and no one is necessarily better at this. Like you can whatever car you drive, whatever profession, how much money you have in the bank, you may not be better or worse at this. So I think it's really beautiful that you're you're you're the pallet of things that you're discussing has become so broad, but you have remained very much you and very able to like bring it to a lens that is authentically yourself and I I love that about the show. I like I I remain a friend, but I also remain a fan. So thank you. I'll take that in and right back at you. Thanks, man. And please come back again. you have a very exciting project that we didn't get to today. So save that for a future episode. It's super cool. It's completely different than this. And um like everything you touch, it turns to platinum. So thanks, brother. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with James Ston. To learn more about James' work and to find links to his book and other resources, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools. Some of which overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of 1 to three page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with James Ston. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]

========================================

--- Video 4 ---
Video ID: v2YTJBKLLY0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v2YTJBKLLY0
Title: Why Reading (Books) Makes Us Better at Speaking
Published: 2025-05-04 18:16:11 UTC
Description:
As we read, the muscles that generate speech engage. The same phenomenon does not occur when we hear or listen to sentences. In other words, reading is a form of speech practice.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 5 ---
Video ID: _eDg9yOvvrQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_eDg9yOvvrQ
Title: How Smell, Taste & Pheromones Shape Behavior | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-05-01 12:01:00 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I explore how your sense of smell (olfaction), taste, and chemical sensing influence memory, alertness, focus, and even communication between people.

I explain how these senses help us detect chemicals in the environment and respond to a variety of environmental cues. I discuss the connection between the olfactory system and cognitive performance, and I provide practical tools to enhance learning, sensory function, and brain health. Additionally, I examine how chemical signals exchanged between people subtly influence emotions, biology, and social bonds.

Huberman Lab Essentials episodes are approximately 30 minutes long and focus on key science and protocol takeaways from past Huberman Lab episodes. Essentials are released every Thursday, while full-length episodes continue to air every Monday.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/kMvy0Rh

More Huberman Lab Essentials: https://go.hubermanlab.com/essentials

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
X: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Smell & Taste
00:02:04 Tears, Biological Response & Communication
00:05:05 Smell, Innate vs Learned Response, Memory
00:08:31 Accessory Olfactory Pathway, Pheromones, Vandenbergh effect
00:10:41 Smell & Alertness, Smelling Salts, Tool: Nasal Breathing & Learning
00:14:06 Tool: Increase Sense of Smell; Brain Health, Olfactory Neurons
00:16:54 Traumatic Brain Injury & Olfactory Dysfunction
00:19:07 Smell, Alertness, Smelling Salts, Tool: Peppermint
00:21:15 Taste Modalities & Functions; Taste & Digestive System
00:27:30 Pheromones, Coolidge Effect, Humans & Chemical Communication
00:33:34 Recap & Key Takeaways

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stamford. Today we're going to talk about chemical sensing. We're going to talk about the sense of smell, our ability to detect odors in our environment. We're also going to talk about taste, our ability to detect chemicals and make sense of chemicals that are put in our mouth and into our digestive tract. And we are going to talk about chemicals that are made by other human beings that powerfully modulate the way that we feel, our hormones, and our health. Now, that last category are sometimes called pherommones. However, whether or not pherommones exist in humans is rather controversial. There actually hasn't been a clear example of a true human pherommonal effect. But what is absolutely clear, what is undeniable is that there are chemicals that human beings make and release in things like tears onto our skin and sweat and even breath that powerfully modulate or control the biology of other individuals. There are things floating around in the environment which we call volatile chemicals. So when you actually smell something like let's say you smell a wonderfully smelling rose or cake. Yes, you are inhaling the particles into your nose. They're literally little particles of those chemicals are going up into your nose and being detected by your brain. Other ways of getting chemicals into our system is by putting them in our mouth. by literally taking foods and chewing them or sucking on them and breaking them down into their component parts. And that's one way that we sense chemicals with a thing, our tongue. So these chemicals we sometimes bring into our body, into our biology through deliberate action. We select a food, we chew that food, and we do it intentionally. Sometimes they're coming into our body through non-deliberate action. We enter an environment and there's smoke and we smell the smoke and as a consequence we take action. Sometimes however other people are actively making chemicals with their body. Typically this would be with their breath, with their tears or possibly I want to underscore possibly by making what are called pherommones. molecules that they release into the environment typically through the breath that enter our system through our nose or our eyes or our mouth that fundamentally change our biology. I'll just give an example which is a very salient and interesting one that was published about 10 years ago in the journal science showing that humans men in particular in this study have a strong biological response and hormonal response to the tears of women. What they did is they had women and in this case it was only women for whatever reason cry and they collected their tears. Then those tears were smelled by male subjects or male subjects got what was essentially the control which was the saline. Men that smelled these tears that were evoked by sadness had a reduction in their testosterone levels that was significant. They also had a reduction in brain areas that were associated with sexual arousal. They actually recruited subjects that had a high propensity for crying at sad movies, which was not all women. What they were really trying to do is just just get tears that were authentically cried in response to sadness as opposed to um you know putting some irritant in the eye and collecting tears that were uh evoked by something else like just having the eyes irritated. Nonetheless, what this study illustrates is that there are chemicals in tears that are evoking or changing the biology of other individuals. Now, I didn't select this study as an example because I want to focus on the effects of tears on hormones per se, although I do find the results really interesting. I chose it because I wanted to just emphasize or underscore the fact that chemicals that are made by other individuals are powerfully modulating our internal state. And that's something that most of us don't appreciate. I think most of us can appreciate the fact that if we smell something putrid, we tend to retract or if we smell something delicious, we tend to lean into it. But there are all these ways in which chemicals are affecting our biology and interpersonal communication using chemicals is not something that we hear that often about but it's super interesting. So let's talk about smell and what smell is and how it works. I'm going to make this very basic but I am going to touch on some of the core elements of the neurobiology. So here's how smell works. Smell starts with sniffing. Now, that may come as no surprise, but no volatile chemicals can enter our nose unless we inhale them. If our nose is oluded or if we're actively exhaling, it's much more difficult for smells to enter our nose, which is why people cover their nose when something smells bad. Now, the way that these volatile odors come into the nose is interesting. The the nose has a mucosal lining, mucus that is designed to trap things to actually bring things in and get stuck there at the base of your brain. So, um you could actually imagine this or if you wanted you could you could touch the roof of your mouth but right about 2 cm is your olfactory bulb. The alactory bulb is a collection of neurons and those neurons actually extend out of the skull out of your skull into your nose into the mucosal lining. So what this means in kind of a literal sense is that you have neurons that extend their little little dendrites and axilly like things or little processes as we call them out into the mucus and they respond to different odorant compounds. Now the alactory neurons also send a branch deeper into the brain and they split off into three different paths. So one path is for what we call innate odor responses. So you have some hardwired aspects to the way that you smell the world that were there from the day you were born and that will be there until the day you die. These are the pathways and the neurons that respond to things like smoke, which as you can imagine, there's a highly adaptive function to being able to detect burning things because burning things generally means lack of safety or impending threat of some kind. It calls for action and indeed these neurons project to a central area of the brain called the amygdala, which is often discussed in terms of fear, but it's really fear and threat detection. You also have neurons in your nose that respond to odorants or combinations of odorants that evoke a sense of desire and what we call appetitive behaviors, approach behaviors that make you want to move toward something. So when you smell a delicious cookie or some dish that's really savory that you really like, that's because of these innate pathway, these pathways that require no learning whatsoever. Now, some of the pathways from the nose, these alactory neurons into the brain are involved in learned associations with odors. Many people have this experience that they can remember the smell of their grandmother's home or the smell of particular items baking or on the stove in a particular environment. Typically these memories tend to be of a kind of nurturing sort of feeling safe and protected. But one of the reasons why olfaction smell is so closely tied to memory is because olfaction is the most ancient sense that we have. So we have pathway for innate responses and a pathway for learned responses. And then we have this other pathway. And in humans, it's a little bit controversial as to whether or not it sits truly separate from the standard olfactory system or whether or not it's its own system embedded in there, but that they call the accessory olfactory pathway. Accessory olfactory pathway is what in other animals is responsible for true pheromone effects. For example, in rodents and in some primates, including mandrels. If you've ever seen a mandrel, they have these like big beak noses things. You may have seen them at the zoo. Look them up if you haven't seen them already. M A N D R I L S. Mandrels. There are strong pheromone effects. Some of those include things like if you take a pregnant female rodent or mandrel, you take away the father that created those fetuses or fetus and you introduce the scent of the urine or the fur of a novel male, she will spontaneously abort or misaryry those fetuses. It's a very powerful effect. Another example of the of a pheromone effect is called the Vandenberg effect named after the person who discovered this effect where you take a female of a given species that has not entered puberty. You expose her to the scent or the urine from a sexually competent meaning post pubertal male and she spontaneously goes into puberty earlier. So something about the scent triggers something through this accessory factory system. This is a true pherommonal effect and creates ovulation right and menration or in rodents it's an estrus cycle not a menstrual cycle. So this is not to say that the exact same things happen in humans. In humans as I mentioned earlier there are chemical sensing between individuals that may be independent of the nose but those are basically the three paths by which smells odors impact us. So, I want to talk about the act of smelling. And if you are not somebody who's very interested in smell, but you are somebody who's interested in making your brain work better, learning faster, remembering more things, this next little segment is for you. Because it turns out that how you smell, meaning the act of smelling, not how good or bad you smell, but the act of smelling, sniffing, and inhalation powerfully impacts how your brain functions and what you can learn and what you can't learn. Nome Soil's group originally at UC Berkeley and then at the Whitesman Institute has published a number of papers that I'd like to discuss today. One of them human non-olfactory cognition phase locked with inhalation. This was published in nature human behavior an excellent journal as we inhale. What this paper shows is that the level of alertness goes up in the brain. And this makes sense because as the most primitive and primordial sense by which we interact with our environment and bring chemicals into our system and detect our environment. Inhaling is a cue for the rest of the brain to essentially to pay attention to what's happening, not just to the odors. And as the name of this paper suggests, human non-olfactory cognition phase locked with inhalation. What that means is that the act of inhaling itself wakes up the brain. It's not about what you're perceiving or what you're smelling. And indeed, sniffing as an action, inhaling as an action has a powerful effect on your ability to be alert, your ability to attend, to focus, and your ability to remember information. When we exhale, the brain goes through a subtle but nonetheless significant dip in level of arousal and ability to learn. How should you use this knowledge? Well, you could imagine, and I think this would be beneficial for most people, to focus on nasal breathing while doing any kind of focused work that doesn't require that you speak or eat or ingest something. There is a separate paper published in the journal of neuroscience that showed that indeed if subjects human subjects are restricted to breathing through their nose, they learn better than if they have the option of breathing through their mouth or a combination of their nose and mouth. Now, there are other ways to wake up your brain more as well. For instance, the use of smelling salts. I'm not recommending that you do this necessarily, but there are excellent peer-reviewed data showing that indeed if you use smelling salts, which are mostly of the sort um that include ammonia, ammonia is a very toxic scent, but it's toxic in a way that triggers this innate pathway, the pathway from the nose to the amydala and wakes up the brain and body in a major way. This is why they use smelling salts when people pass out. They work because they trigger the fear and kind of overall arousal systems of the brain. This is why I think most people probably shouldn't use ammonia or smelling salts to try and wake up. But they really do work. Now, inhaling through your nose and doing nasal breathing, it's going to be a more subtle version of waking up your system of alerting your brain overall. And for those of you that are interested in having a richer, a more deep connection to the things that you smell and taste, practicing or enhancing your sense of sniffing, your ability to sniff might sound like a kind of ridiculous protocol, but it's actually a kind of fun and cool experiment that you can do. You just do the simple experiment of taking, for instance, an orange. You smell it. Do 10 or 15 inhales followed by exhales of course or just through the nose. Not going to do all 10 or 15. and then smell it again and you'll notice that your perception of that smell, the the kind of richness of that smell will be significantly increased. So you can actually have a heightened experience of something and that of course will also be true for the taste system. You also can really train your sense of smell to get much much better. No other system that I'm aware of in our body is as amenable to these kinds of behavioral training shifts and allow them to happen so quickly. In fact, how well we can smell and taste things is actually a very strong indication of our brain health. So, our olfactory neurons, these neurons in our nose that detect odors, are really unique among other brain neurons because they get replenished throughout life. They don't just regenerate, but they get replenished. So, regeneration is when something is damaged and it regrows. These neurons are constantly turning over throughout our lifespan. They're constantly being replenished. They're dying off and they're being replaced by new ones. This is really interesting because other neurons in your cortex, in your retina, in your cerebellum, they do not do this. They are not continually replenished throughout life. But these neurons, these olfactory neurons are they are special. And there are a number of things that seem to increase the amount of olfactory neuron neurogenesis. There is evidence that exercise, blood flow can increase alactory neuron neurogenesis, although those data are fewer in comparison to things like social interactions or actually interacting with odorants of different kinds. But what I'd like to do is empower you with tools that will allow you to keep these systems tuned up. Last time we talked about tuning up and keeping your visual system tuned up and healthy regardless of age. Here we're talking about really enhancing the your alactory abilities, your taste abilities as well by interacting a lot with odors, preferably positive odors, and sniffing more, inhaling more, which almost sounds crazy, but now you understand why. Even though it might sound crazy, it's grounded in real me mechanistic biology of how the brain wakes up and responds to these chemicals. Now, speaking of brain injury, olfactory dysfunction is a common theme in traumatic brain injury for the following reason. These olfactory neurons, as I mentioned, extend wires into the mucosa of the nose, but they also extend a wire up into the skull. And they extend up into the skull through what's called the cribberform plate. It's like a Swiss cheese type plate where they're going through and if you get a head hit that bone, the cribform plate shears those little wires off and those neurons die. Now eventually they'll be replaced but there's a phenomenon by which concussion and the severity of concussion and the recovery from a head injury can actually be gauged in part in part not in whole but in part by how well or fully one recovers their sense of smell. So if you're somebody that unfortunately has suffered a concussion, your sense of smell is one readout by which you might evaluate whether or not you're regaining some of your sensory performance. Of course, there will be others like balance and cognition and sleep etc. But I'd like to refer you to a a really nice paper um which is entitledactory dysfunction in traumatic brain injury the role of neurogenesis. The first author is Marin M I N. Uh the paper was published in um current allergy and asthma report. This is 2020. I spent some time with this paper. It's quite good. It's a review article. I like reviews if they're um peer-reviewed reviews. What they discuss is, and I'll just read here briefly because they said it better than I could. Alactory functioning disturbances are common following traumatic brain injury, TBI, and can have a significant impact on the quality of life. Although there's no standard treatment for patients with um with the loss of smell. Now I'm paraphrasing um po post injury old factory training has shown promise for beneficial effects but what does this mean? This means that if you've had a head injury or repeated head injuries, that enhancing your sense of smell is one way by which you can create new neurons. And now you know how to enhance your sense of smell by interacting with things that have an odor very closely and by essentially inhaling more, focusing on the inhale to wake up the brain and to really focus on some of the nuance of those smells. As a last point about specific odors and compounds that can increase arousal and alertness and this is simply through sniffing them, not through ingesting them. There are data, believe it or not, there are good data on peppermint and the smell of peppermint. minty type scents, whether you like them or not, will increase attention, and they can create the same sort of arousal response, although not as intensely or as dramatically as ammonia salts can, for instance. By the way, please don't go sniff real ammonia. You could actually damage your alactory epithelium if you do that too close to the ammonia. If you're going to use smelling salts, be sure you work with someone or you know what you're getting and how you're using this. You can damage your alactory pathway in ways that are pretty severe. You can also damage your vision. If you've ever teared up because you inhaled something that was really noxious. That is not um a good thing, but it means that you have irritated the mucosal lining and you know possibly even the surfaces of your eye. So please be very very careful. scents like peppermint, like these ammonia smelling salts. The reason they wake you up is because they trigger specific alactory neurons that communicate with the specific centers of the brain, namely the amydala and associated neural circuitry and pathways that trigger alertness of the same sort that a cold shower or an ice bath or a sudden surprise or a stressful text message would evoke. Remember the systems of your body that produce arousal and alertness and attention and that cue you for optimal learning aka focus those are very general mechanisms. They involve very basic molecules like adrenaline and epinephrine same thing actually adrenaline epinephrine. The number of stimula, whether it's peppermint or ammonia or a loud blast, the number of stimula that can evoke that adrenaline response and that wake up response are near infinite. And that's the beauty of your nervous system. It was designed to take any variety of different stimula, place them into categories, and then evoke different categories of very general responses. Now, you know a lot about oldfaction and how the sense of smell works. Let's talk about taste, meaning how we sense chemicals in food and in drink. There are essentially five, but scientists now believe there may be six things that we taste alone or in combination. They are sweet tastes, salty tastes, bitter tastes, sour tastes, and umami taste. Most of you have probably heard of umami by now. It's u m a m i. Umami is actually the name for a particular receptor that you express on your tongue that ex that detects savory tastes. Each one has a particular group of neurons in your mouth in your tongue believe it or not that responds to particular chemicals and particular chemical structures. It is a total myth, complete fiction that different parts of your tongue harbor different taste receptors. You know that high school textbook diagram that you know sweet is in one part of the tongue and sour is in another and bitter is in another. They are completely intermixed along your tongue. So all these receptors in your tongue make up what are called the neurons that give rise to a nerve, a collection of wires, nerve bundles of what's called the gustatory nerve. The gustatory nerve from the tongue goes to the nucleus of the solitary tract and then to the phalamus and to insular cortex. And it is an insular cortex, this region of our cortex that we sort out and make sense of and perceive the various tastes. Now, it's amazing because just taking a little bit of sugar or something sour like a little bit of lemon juice and touching it to the tongue within 100 milliseconds, right? Just 100 milliseconds, far less than one second, you can immediately distinguish, ah, that's sour, that's sweet, that's bitter, that's umami. And that's an assessment that's made by the cortex. Now, what do these different five receptors encode for? Well, sweet, salty, bitter, mommy, sour. But what are they really looking for? What are they sensing? Well, sweet stuff signals the presence of energy of sugars. And while we're all trying or we're told that we should eat less sugar for a variety of reasons, the ability to sense whether or not a food has rapid energy source or could give rise to glucose is essential. So we have sweet receptors. The salty receptors, these neurons are trying to sense whether or not there are electrolytes in a given food or drink. Electrolytes are vitally important for the function of our nervous system and for our entire body. Bitter receptors are there to make sure we don't ingest things that are poisonous. The bitter receptors create a what we call labeled line, a unique trajectory to the neurons of the brain stem that control the the gag reflex. If we taste something very bitter, it automatically triggers the gag reflex. Putrid smells will also evoke these same neurons. The umami receptor isn't sensing savory because the body loves savory. It's because savory is a signal for the presence of amino acids. The presence of amino acids in our gut and in our digestive system and the presence of fatty acids is essential. The sour receptor, why would we have a sour receptor? It's there and we know it's there to detect the presence of spoiled or fermented food. Fermented fruit can be poisonous. Right? Alcohols are poisonous in many forms to our system. And these sour receptorbearing neurons communicate to an area of the brain stem that evokes the pucker response, closing of the eyes and essentially shutting of the mouth and cringing away. Now what's this sixth sense within the taste system? not sixth sense generally, but within the taste system. What's this putitive possible sixth receptor? There are now data to support the idea, although there's still more work that needs to be done, that we also have receptors on our tongue that sense fat and that because fat is so vital for the function of our nervous system and the other organs of our body that we are sensing the fat content in food. I want to talk about the tongue and the mouth as an extension of your digestive tract. We are essentially a series of tubes and that tube starts with your mouth and heads down into your stomach. And so that you would sense so much of the chemical constituents of the stuff that you might bring into your body or that you might want to expel and not swallow or not interact with by being able to smell it. Is it putrid? Does it smell good? Does it taste good? Is this safe? Is it salty? Is it so sour that it's fermented and is going to poison me? Is it so bitter that it could poison me? Is it so savory that m um yes, I want more and more of this? Well, then you'd want to trigger dopamine. That's all starting in the mouth. So, you have to understand that you were equipped with this amazing chemical sensing apparatus we call your mouth and your tongue. And those little bumps on your tongue that they call the papill, those are not your taste buds. surrounding those little papill like little rivers are these little dents and indentations. And what dents and indentations do in a tissue is they allow more surface area. They allow you to pack more receptors. So down in those grooves are where all these little neurons and their uh and their little processes are with these little receptors for sweet, salty, bitter, umami, sour, and maybe fat as well. Remember, even though we can enjoy food and we can evolve our sense of what's tasty or not tasty depending on life decisions, environmental changes, etc., the taste system, just like the old factory system and the visual system was laid down for the purpose of moving towards things that are good for us and moving away from things that are bad for us. That's the kind of core function of the nervous system. Now, I'd like to return to pherommones. As I mentioned earlier, true pherommonal effects are well established in animals. And one of the most remarkable pheromone effects that's ever been described is one that actually I've mentioned before on this podcast, but I'll mention again just briefly, which is the coolage effect. The coolage effect is the effect of a male of a given species. In most cases, it tended to be a rodent or a rooster mating and at some point reaching exhaustion or the inability to mate again because they just simply couldn't for whatever reason. The coolage effect establishes that if you swap out the hen with a new hen or the female rat or mouse with a new one, then the rat or the rooster spontaneously regains their ability to mate. Somehow their vigor is returned. The refractory period after mating that normally occurs is abolished and they can mate again. But it turns out that females also will female rodents will mate to exhaustion and at some point at some point excuse me they will refuse to mate any longer unless you swap in a new male. And then because mating in rodents involves the female being receptive. There are certain number of behaviors that mean that she that tell you that she's willing and wanting to mate so-called lordosis reflex. Then if there's a new male, she will spontaneously regain the lordosis reflex and the desire to mate. How do we know it's a pherommonal effect? Well, this recovery of the desire and ability to mate, both in males and in females, can be evoked completely by the odor of a new male or female. It doesn't even have to be the presentation of the actual animal. And that's how you know that it's not some visual interaction or some other interaction. It's a pherommonal interaction. Now as I mentioned earlier pherommonal effects humans have been debated for a long period of time. We are thought to have a vestigial meaning a kind of shrunken down uh miniature accessorial factory bulb called Jacobson's organ or the vulmerasal organ. Some people don't believe that Jacobson's organ exists. Some people do. So there's like little dents as you go up through your nasal passages and there is evidence of something that's vulmerike. Vulmer and nasal is the fermonal organ. They call it Jacobson's organ if it's present in humans kind of um tucked into some of the divots in the nasal passage. Even if that organ Jacobson's organ isn't there or is not responsible for the chemical signaling between individuals, there is chemical signaling between human beings. As I mentioned earlier, the effect of tears in suppressing the areas of the brain that are involved in sexual desire and testosterone of males. That's a concrete result. It's a very good result published by an excellent group. There is also evidence both for and against chemical signaling between females in terms of synchronization of menstrual cycles. Now the original paper on this was published in the 1970s by mccllintok and it essentially said that when women live together in group housing, dormitories and similar that their menstrual cycles were synchronized and that was due to what was hypothesized to be phmonal effects. Over the years that study has been challenged many many times. The more recent data point to the idea that there is chemical chemical signaling between women in ways that impact the timing of the menstrual cycle. Is that a pherommonal effect? Well, by the strict definition of a pheromone, a molecule that's released from one individual that impacts the biology of another individual. Yes. It's not clear what the chemical compound is. None of this surprises me. None of this should surprise you. It's very clear that hormones have a profound effect on a large number of systems in our biology and that smell and taste and the ability to sense the chemical states of others either consciously or subconsciously have a profound influence on whether or not we might want to spend time with them, whether or not this is somebody that we're pair bonded with, whether or not this is somebody that we just met and uh don't trust yet, things of this sort. And given what's at stake in terms of reproductive biology, it makes so much sense that much of our biology is wired toward detecting and sensing whether or not things and people are things that we should approach or avoid. You and every other human from the time you're born until the time you die are actively seeking out and sensing and evaluating the chemicals that come from other individuals. There's a really nice study that was done by the Whitesman Institute, a group there, I think it was also Nom So Sobel's group, but another group as well as I recall looking at human human interactions when they meet for the first time. It's a remarkable study because what they found was people would reach out and shake hands. And what they observed was almost every time within just a few seconds of having shaken hands with this new individual, people will touch their eyes. They are taking chemicals from the skin contact and they are placing it on a mucosal membrane of some sort. Typically not up their nose or in their mouth, typically on their eyes. Believe it or not, you're marking other people when you shake their hand. and they are then taking your mark and rubbing it on themselves subconsciously. So we all do these kinds of behaviors and now that you're aware of it, you can watch for it in your environment. You can, you know, pay attention to people. We are evaluating the molecules on people's breath. We are evaluating the molecules on people's skin by actively rubbing it rubbing it on ourselves and we are actively involved in sensing the chemicals that they are emitting, their hormone status, how they smell. We're detecting the pherommones possibly, but certainly the odors in their breath. So today we talked a lot about olfaction, taste, and chemical sensing between individuals. I like to think that you now know a lot about how your smell system works and why inhaling is a really good thing to do in general for waking up your brain and for cognitive function and for enhancing your sense of smell. And we talked about chemical signaling between individuals as a way of communicating some important aspects about biology. People are shaping each other's biology all the time by way of these chemicals that are being traded from one body to the next through air and skin-to-skin contact and tears. Last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention in your willingness to embrace new concepts and terms and to learn about science and biology and protocols that hopefully can benefit you and the people that you know. And of course, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]

========================================

--- Video 6 ---
Video ID: UpRsmu9xfJA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UpRsmu9xfJA
Title: How to Read Your Dog's Emotions
Published: 2025-04-29 18:11:21 UTC
Description:
Dog tail wags on the left side reflect different emotions than wags on the right side. Whether your cat looks at you with the left or right eye forward also reflects very different things, positive versus negative, toward you.

Transcript Language: English
Can we interpret dog wags of different types? Yeah. Is there a way to do that? So one very interesting thing is that the dog wagging with a predominant left wag- Left for the dog? Left for the dog. So he is wagging on the left-hand side of his body, tends to be associated with negative emotional states, and on the right tends to be associated with positive emotional states. And the same, cats tend to look at the world from the left when in a negative emotional state. So And from the right when in a positive emotional state.

========================================

--- Video 7 ---
Video ID: 6ck9fa6_C8c
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ck9fa6_C8c
Title: What Pets Actually Want & Need | Dr. Karolina Westlund
Published: 2025-04-28 12:00:18 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. Karolina Westlund, Ph.D., a professor of ethology at the University of Stockholm and an expert in animal emotions and behavior who uses science-based methods to improve the lives of animals in human care. We discuss the often overlooked needs of domesticated animals—primarily dogs and cats—and the things we can do to improve their well-being and our relationship with them.

We cover how to interpret animal body language, the unique needs of specific dog breeds, and the needs of cats and birds. We also discuss the pros and cons of spaying and neutering and how weaning age impacts a pet’s attachment style. Whether you’re a pet owner, trainer, or simply an animal lover, this episode teaches you how specific pet behaviors are rooted in their immutable biology—and the simple things you can do to vastly improve your pets’ health and well-being, as well as your relationship with them.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/mBbm5nJ

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: ⁠https://drinkag1.com.huberman⁠
Our Place: ⁠https://fromourplace.com/huberman⁠
Eight Sleep: ⁠https://eightsleep.com/huberman⁠
Joovv: ⁠https://joovv.com/huberman⁠
Function: ⁠https://functionhealth.com/huberman

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
X: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Dr. Karolina Westlund*
Website: https://illis.se/en
Online courses: https://illis.se/en/courses-menu
Blog: https://illis.se/en/blog
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/illis.se
LinkedIn: https://se.linkedin.com/in/karolina-westlund-friman 

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Karolina Westlund
00:02:19 Students & Animal Species; Horses
00:06:36 Dog Breeds & Interaction, Predatory Sequence, Smell, Domestication
00:12:42 Sponsors: Our Place & Eight Sleep
00:16:09 Dog Breeds & Domestication, Bulldogs
00:20:16 Core Affect Space, Petting, Tool: Consent Test; Polyvagal Theory
00:27:53 Space, Dominance, Resources, Leash Walking; Dog-Owner Training
00:37:13 Tail Wagging & Interpreting Body Signals, Facial Expressions
00:43:24 Play Bow, Tool: MARS & Playing; Dogs & Empathy
00:48:39 Sponsors: AG1 & Joovv
00:51:46 Fairness, Social Groups; Anthropomorphism vs Anthropodenial
00:57:45 Cats, Hunting, Bring Gifts?, Interaction & Socialization
01:03:56 Scent & Territorial Marking; Covering Waste, Tool: Litter Box Placement
01:08:17 “Pee Mail” & Communication; Wolves, Domestication
01:11:54 Zoos, Conservation; Tigers
01:18:53 Sponsor: Function
01:20:41 Stalking; Birds, Parrots
01:25:22 Nose Work, Wildlife Chasing, Tool: Dog Feeding & Challenge
01:31:01 Understanding & Choosing Dog for Your Lifestyle, Tool: Introducing Cats
01:34:27 Recognizing Self vs Other, Inbreeding Avoidance, Imprinting
01:40:51 Imprinting vs Attachment Bonds; Dogs, Weaning & Secure Attachment
01:48:36 Spaying & Neutering, Hormones, Tool: Neutering Alternatives
01:57:07 Humans as Animals, Tools, Cultural Learning
02:02:47 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Follow & Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Protocols Book, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 8 ---
Video ID: q-wRvsiGYIs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q-wRvsiGYIs
Title: AMA #19: Collagen vs. Whey Protein, Creatine, Smelling Salts, Stimulants & More
Published: 2025-04-25 17:15:06 UTC
Description:
Welcome to a preview of the 19th Ask Me Anything (AMA) episode, part of Huberman Lab Premium.

If you're an existing Huberman Lab Premium member, you can log in to access the full episode at https://hubermanlab.supercast.com. 

If you’re not a member, you can learn more and join Huberman Lab Premium at https://www.hubermanlab.com/premium.

ROKA Wind Down™: https://www.roka.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Essentials: https://go.hubermanlab.com/essentials

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:00:15 The Importance of Light Management for Sleep
00:00:58 Huberman Lab Premium 
00:01:33 Research Funding & Matching Donations  
00:03:05 Subscription Details & Benefits  
00:03:48 Protein Sources  
00:05:18 Comparing Whey Protein, Bone Broth, & Collagen  
00:10:08 Protein Intake Recommendations  
00:14:22 Whey Protein & Skin Health  
00:17:42 Conclusion

*In the full AMA episode, we cover:*

- Creatine & Water Retention
- Creatine for Brain Health
- Creatine Use in Teenagers
- Safety & Effects of Smelling Salts
- Other Stimulants: Caffeine & Nicotine
- Prescription Stimulants & Cognitive Enhancers

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman. And I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. I'm also wearing my ROKA red lens glasses, which block both blue light and green light, both of which are so-called short wavelength light. That's because we are recording this AMA at night. And the lights in here are very bright. And bright lights at night will quash your melatonin, which is the hormone of sleepiness. Bright lights at night also increase cortisol levels. And by blocking those short wavelengths of light, you offset the reductions in melatonin and the increases in cortisol that would otherwise occur. And I always make the general recommendation that whether or not you decide to wear blue/green blockers, or blue blockers, or simply no blockers, that you dim your lights at night. It will greatly facilitate your transition to sleep and the quality of your sleep. So this AMA is part of our premium subscriber channel. Our premium subscriber channel was started in order to provide support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which, of course, comes out every Monday. Those are our full length episodes. We also now have Huberman Lab Essentials episodes, which are 30 minute essentials only episodes, so just the actionable protocols and the key mechanisms behind those protocols. Those come out every Thursday. Both the full length episodes and essentials episodes are available at zero cost to everybody on all standard platforms, so YouTube, Apple, Spotify. We now have the full length episodes on X as well. We started the premium channel as a way to generate support for exciting research being done at Stanford School of Medicine, on the main campus at Stanford, and elsewhere. The research that we fund is largely applied research. We do fund some basic research. But it's largely applied research, meaning it's research that's geared toward developing novel therapeutics for mental health, physical health, and performance in humans as soon as possible. We've already done several rounds of research funding. And I'm excited to tell you about the results of those studies as they become available. I'm also pleased to inform you that for every dollar that the Huberman Lab Premium channel generates for research studies, there are now three matching donors that match that amount. The Tiny Foundation, along with two other generous anonymous donors, have agreed to do dollar for dollar match. So technically, given the number of dollar for dollar matches, it's now dollar for dollar for dollar for dollar match. That is for every dollar provided by the premium channel for research, we have $3 provided to the premium channels Research Fund. And then we distribute that to various investigators, as I mentioned, at Stanford and other universities throughout the United States. This is a 4x amplification of the total amount of funding given to studies of mental health, physical health, and performance. And of course, as those studies are completed and published, we will be sure to share the data and the actionable tools that emerge from those data with you. So for those of you that are already premium channel members, thank you. And for those of you that are considering becoming a premium channel subscriber, please keep in mind that 3-to-1 dollar match that greatly amplifies your contribution. To subscribe to the Huberman Lab Premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. It costs $10 a month to subscribe. Or you can pay $100 for an entire year's membership. We also have a lifetime membership. That, again, is a one-time payment. You can find out more about that lifetime membership at hubermanlab.com/premium. For those of you that are already premium channel members, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium to download the premium member feed in order to access the entire episode today. And for those of you who are not premium members, you can still hear the first 20 minutes of today's episode and determine whether or not becoming a premium member is right for you. And now, without further ado, I will answer your questions. The first question for today's AMA is quote, "is there a distinct health advantage to using bone broth or collagen protein versus whey protein?" I get this question pretty often, and I touched on this in the episode that I did with Dr. Lane Norton. But I think the key thing to remember here is that while protein is one of the three macronutrients, proteins, carbohydrates, and fats, not all proteins are created equal. Now, what differentiates different protein sources has a lot to do with how easily those proteins are assimilated into our body and their amino acid content. Now, in general, how bioavailable a protein is, as well as its quality or protein score relates to a number of things, not the least of which is the amount of leucine, which is a particular essential amino acid that we need to get from food. So why is leucine important? Well, leucine is an essential amino acid. You need to get it from food. And some protein sources, such as whey protein, for instance, but also beef, chicken, eggs, et cetera, have high levels of leucine as compared to other types of protein, for instance, collagen protein and some, not all, bone broths. And I'll explain what I mean by that in a moment. So if we just step back from this question and ask it in two parts, of remember the question was, is there a distinct health advantage to using bone broth or collagen protein versus whey protein? One can be very confident in the answer to that, which is whey protein contains relatively high amounts of the amino acid leucine, and therefore, is going to be the superior form of protein if your goal is to grow muscle and/or get stronger to repair muscle, either muscle damage caused by exercise or simply to engage protein synthesis. Remember, even if you haven't been exercising intensely or doing any resistance training, and by the way, you should be doing resistance training and cardiovascular training, but independent of exercise, dietary protein, in particular, dietary proteins that contain high amounts of leucine, or I should say, relatively high amounts of leucine, like whey protein, will help induce so-called muscle protein synthesis, which is generally good for us, again, and it's occurring even if we're not exercising, if we are exercising, especially if we're exercising very hard, and in particular, if we're doing a lot of resistance training, or frankly, any amount of resistance training that's taken near or to failure. So it doesn't even have to be heavy weight. But if you're stressing the muscles hard, then having a quality protein source that's bioavailable, that is you can assimilate it, and that has relatively high leucine content is going to be advantageous. So through that lens, I can confidently answer the question by saying that a quality whey protein would be a better choice for a protein as compared to bone broth or a collagen protein, which have relatively low amounts of leucine. And if you look at their essential amino acid profile, just sort of across the board, not just focusing on leucine, and compare that to whey protein, we would easily say that whey protein is the superior form of protein, again, both based on its bioavailability and its amino acid composition. Now, does that mean that bone broth and collagen protein are not valuable at all? No, I didn't say that. So when are bone broth and collagen proteins valuable? So this has also come up in several Huberman Lab podcast episodes, namely the episode that I did with Dr. Lane Norton, also the episode that I did about skin health. Because there are some data, not a ton, but there are some data showing that people who regularly ingest collagen protein can observe some improvements in skin elasticity and appearance. Now, are these dramatic effects? Not so much. But are these significant effects? That is, are they statistically significant as compared to a control condition of either no collagen protein or a different protein source? And there, one can find manuscripts that show, yes, indeed ingesting collagen protein, and by the way, bone broth has high amounts of collagen, so we're treating bone broth and collagen protein in combination here, or we are considering them in combination. And one would say that the amino acids that are contained in bone broth and collagen protein actually have been shown to support skin elasticity and appearance when ingested at levels of 15 grams per day over a period of about two weeks or more. OK so through the lens of which protein source might be best for improving skin health and appearance, the answer in this case would be that the bone broth and collagen protein is going to be superior to whey protein. However, keep in mind that bone broth and collagen protein contain calories, right? They contain protein and calories. Sometimes they contain calories also from fat, rarely from carbohydrate. But you need to check the packaging and see what else is in there. So that raises the question, should you be taking bone broth/collagen protein? I would say either/or maybe both, but either/or, and whey protein? Or rather, let's ask the question more scientifically. Will taking whey protein support skin health and appearance in a way that either mimics or can replace the positive effects that one gets from bone broth and collagen protein? And the answer there would be no, at least not in any direct way. There's no evidence, or at least there are no studies that I'm aware of, of people taking whey protein as a way to improve skin health and appearance. Now, that said, recovering from exercise inducing muscle protein synthesis, these are things that are generally good for your body. So they are going to support overall health, immune health, your general sense of vigor. There's all sorts of downstream things that happen when you stress your muscles and then recover them, or even if you just eat a protein like whey protein. And keep in mind, there are other proteins that have high leucine content that lend themselves, as whey protein does, to muscle protein synthesis. So that's going to create an overall milieu, an environment of health. It certainly isn't the only path to health, but it's going to create a general milieu of health in the right context, provided you're ingesting it at the right amounts and in the right times. And by the way, when I say that, I know people are thinking, well, how much is the right amount? I am of the belief that most people who are seeking muscle protein synthesis, recovery from exercise, and general health would do well to ingest approximately, I'm not super neurotic about these things, approximately 1 gram of quality, protein per pound of lean body weight or desired body weight. Or if you want to be a little looser about it, some people will just say 1 gram of quality protein per pound of body weight each day. So that's going to vary from person to person. So how much whey protein? Well, it depends on how much other protein you're ingesting. So let's simplify things here. If in trying to get that 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight, or so, you have a limited budget, as most people do. I would personally suggest that you get a significant portion of whatever that protein requirement is, maybe it's 150 grams, maybe it's 200 grams, maybe it's 100 grams, depending on your size. I would suggest getting 60% to 70% of that from whole food sources. So it could be quality lean meats, chicken, eggs, fish. If you're a vegetarian, yes, there are combinations of things like beans and rice that will allow you to achieve the proper combinations of essential amino acids. There are some sources of non-animal proteins that will meet all those amino acid needs. You can look these up. They're easy to find online now. There's also casein protein, you know, milk protein. I would suggest getting most of your protein for muscle protein synthesis and for recovery from exercise, from whole food sources. And then the remaining 30% or so, and I suppose this could be as high as 50% if you're having trouble eating enough during the day could come from a protein powder, so to speak, or a protein bar. And whey protein is an excellent source of protein in that instance. And those whey proteins are available out there with minimal amounts or zero amounts of carbohydrate in them. Some of them have sweeteners like stevia, some don't. They vary in cost a bit. They vary in flavor a bit, in mixability a bit. So you have to find what works for you. These are now pretty easy to find out there. You just have to pick the one that's right for you and for your budget. That's to meet your 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight sort of threshold. And again, you don't have to be super neurotic about reaching that threshold every single day. I'm about 100 kilograms, or about 220 pounds. I'm probably a little bit lighter now, maybe 210 pounds. I probably get anywhere from 175 to 210 grams of protein per day. I know that from having tracked it recently, but I'm not neurotic about making sure that every day I get 210 grams or 200 grams. I'll let it vary a little bit, and sometimes it gets a bit lower. And sometimes it gets a little bit higher. And at least that works for me. I'm also not in a mode of life where I'm trying to put on a lot of muscle or something like that. So if you are, maybe you need to pay a bit more attention to the details. So that's to get your protein ration per day. And of course, you also need to make sure you're getting sufficient-- I believe you should get sufficient vegetables, fruits, and if it's in your nutrition plan, starches, things like rice and oatmeal and things like that, if that's what you do. I realize today, people are doing a variety of different things. Now, the bone broth and collagen protein, yes, will factor into your total protein count, that protein ration of 1 gram per pound of body weight per day. But keep in mind that if you evaluate bone broth or especially powdered collagen proteins through the lens of what is high quality, bioavailable, high leucine content protein, collagen protein, or rather, powdered collagen protein doesn't scale up that well. And so I would say if you are interested in improving your skin health and appearance, sure, go ahead and add 15 grams of collagen protein in powdered form per day or have some bone broth. I happen to really like bone broth. It also has a fair amount of protein. And I believe, I need to double check this, but I believe that some of them actually have fair amounts of leucine, just not as high as whey protein. So I want to be clear about that because the question was about a comparison between bone broth collagen protein and whey protein. One last thing about skin health as it relates to whey protein. On the episode I did about skin health, I read a number of papers, and then we addressed these papers again, when I had Dr. Teo Soleymani on the podcast, he's actually a derm onc, or a dermatologist oncologist, specializes in skin cancers, but also the cosmetic aspects of skin care. You know, what makes skin have nice levels of elasticity, reducing things like rosacea, psoriasis, and acne? And in that discussion, and in the papers that I covered in the solo episode, it was clear that one of the things that has been shown to contribute to acne in some people, OK, not all, but in some people, is having a high leucine content in the diet. So this runs countercurrent to everything I've said before. But I would be remiss if I didn't say this. Whey protein has been evaluated for its tendency to increase acne in some people. And it seems to be related to leucine, which again, is quite present in whey protein, and leucine's ability to increase certain components of the cell growth pathway involving mTOR, mammalian Target of Rapamycin, there's a whole discussion to have about mTOR, but we don't have time to get into right now. I don't think you should be afraid of whey protein because you think it will induce acne. What seems to be the case here is that the high leucine content, and probably other things in whey protein, that are effective in increasing insulin lead to increases in mTOR, which, in turn, lead to changes in the skin that sometimes show up as increased acne. Again, I'm not saying that taking whey protein will increase your acne. What I am saying is if you have issues with acne, you might try taking out whey protein for a couple of days or weeks. And by doing so, see whether or not whey protein is causing or exacerbating those acne symptoms. I personally have never noticed that issue with whey protein, but others might. And indeed, there are some peer-reviewed manuscripts that point to that. And as a final point, one thing that became clear in offline discussions with Dr. Teo Soleimani about this whey protein, leucine, acne thing is that for women in particular, whose hormone cycle across the month, they may find that whey protein and other high leucine protein sources will exacerbate or create acne at particular phases of their cycle because of the interaction between that mTOR pathway and some of the hormones that fluctuate during different phases of the menstrual cycle. So we all have to learn to be scientists of ourselves, that is, to try something, see if we like it, see if we don't ask ourselves why. If you get stomach discomfort from a given brand of whey protein, please don't take that one again. You have to find what works for you and then pay attention to whether or not, for instance, if you're a woman and you're seeing some increase in acne or other skin symptoms by taking whey protein at a particular phase of your cycle, maybe you stop taking it during that phase and take it only in other phases. Or if you have no issues, go ahead and take it. For men, whose hormones obviously don't cycle as much throughout the month, if at all, they're going to cycle depending on sleep, et cetera, stress, et cetera but you get the idea, if you are experiencing troubling levels of acne, take whey protein out altogether. Maybe replace it with a casein protein or other high quality protein and see how you react. Again, become a scientist of yourself. You'll be glad you did. Thank you for joining me for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future AMAs, go to hubermanlab.com/premium to become a premium member. Other membership benefits include access to transcripts of Huberman Lab episodes, early access to Huberman Lab events, and a discount on all items in the Huberman Lab store, along with special gifts from our sponsors. To learn more, go to hubermanlab.com/premium. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 9 ---
Video ID: ssmwxKPFMFU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ssmwxKPFMFU
Title: Protocols to Improve Vision & Eyesight | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-04-24 12:01:39 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I discuss the science of vision and share simple, effective tools to enhance eyesight and preserve eye health.

I explain how the eyes and brain work together to process light, color and motion using specialized structures such as the retina and photoreceptors, and why conditions like nearsightedness, visual hallucinations and lazy eye occur. I also cover specific visual protocols to increase alertness and focus during work, improve sleep, and support visual health. Additionally, I highlight key vitamins essential for vision and discuss supplements such as lutein and astaxanthin for maintaining long-term eye health.

Huberman Lab Essentials are short episodes—approximately 30 minutes—focused on essential science and protocol takeaways from past Huberman Lab episodes. Essentials will be released every Thursday, and full-length episodes will continue to be released every Monday.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/FYmmr1L

More Huberman Lab Essentials: https://go.hubermanlab.com/essentials

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
X: https://x.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Improve Vision
00:01:01 Eyes, Lens, Eyelashes
00:02:40 Retina, Photoreceptors & Brain
00:06:34 Eyesight & Subconscious Vision Effects
00:07:25 Time of Day & Retina, Tool: Morning Sunlight Exposure
00:10:25 Tool: Reduce Nearsightedness & Outdoor Time
00:10:56 Accommodation, Focus, Tools: Panoramic Vision; Upward Gaze
00:14:43 Improve Vision, Tools: View Distances; Smooth Pursuit; Accommodation
00:17:36 Binocular Vision, Lazy Eye, Children
00:20:25 Hallucinations & Visual System 
00:21:38 Improve & Test Vision, Tool: Snellen Chart
00:23:44 Support Vision, Tool: Vitamin A & Vegetables
00:25:11 Supplements, Lutein, Astaxanthin
00:27:32 Recap & Key Takeaways; Cardiovascular System

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stamford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stamford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zerocost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. Today's episode is going to be all about vision and eyesight. A topic that's very near and dear to my heart because it's the one that I've been focusing on for well over 25 years of my career. When we hear the word vision, we most often think about eyesight or our ability to perceive shapes and objects and faces and colors. However, our eyes are responsible for much more than that, including our mood, our level of alertness, and all of that is included in what we call vision. What is vision? Well, vision starts with the eyes. We have no what's called extraocular light perception. While it feels good to have light on our skin, while it feels good to be outside in the sunlight for most people, the only way that light information can get to the cells of your body is through these two little goodies on the front of your face. And for those of you listening, I'm just pointing to my eyes. As many of you have heard me say before on this and other podcasts, your eyes, in particular, your neural retinas, are part of your central nervous system. They are part of your brain. They are the only part of your brain that sits outside the cranial vault. In other words, you have two pieces of your brain that deliberately got squeezed out of the skull during development and placed in these things we call eye sockets. Now, the eyes have a lot of other goodies in them that are very important, and those are the goodies that we're going to focus on a lot today. There's a lens to focus light precisely to the retina. There are also other pieces of the eye that are designed to keep the eye lubricated. You also have these things that we call eyelashes. Most people don't know this, but eyelashes are there to trigger the blink reflex. They aren't just aesthetically nice. Eyelashes are there so that if a piece of dust or something starts to head towards the cornea, the eye blinks very, very fast. It's the fastest reflex you own. We also have these things called eyelids. Now, eyelids might seem like the most boring topic of all, but they are incredibly fascinating. And today we're going to talk about how you can actually use your visual system to increase your levels of alertness based on the neural circuits that link your brain stem with your eyelids. So let's talk about what the eyes do for vision. Basically the entire job of the eyes is to collect light information and send it off to the rest of the brain in a form that the brain can understand. Remember, no light actually gets in past those neural retinas. It gets to the neural retina. And we have specific cells in the eye called photo receptors. They come in two different types, rods and cones. Cones are mainly responsible for daytime vision. And the rods are mainly responsible for vision at night or under low light conditions generally speaking. These photo receptors, the rods and cones have chemical reactions inside them that involve things like vitamin A. And that chemical reaction converts the light into electricity within the eye, within the retina, there then a series of stages of processing and that information eventually gets sent into the brain by a very specific class of neurons. They're called retinal ganglen cells. Now, here's what's incredible. I just want you to ponder this for a second. This still blows my mind. Everything you see around you, you're not actually seeing those objects directly. What you're doing is you're making a best guess about what's there based on the pattern of electricity that arrives in your brain. Now, that might just seem totally wild and hard to wrap your head around, but think about it this way because this is the way it actually works. Let's take a an example of a color like green or blue. You have cones in your eye that respond best to the wavelength of light that is reflected off say a green apple. So you don't actually see the green apple. What you see is the light bouncing off that green apple and it goes into your eye and you see it and perceive it as round and green. But not because you see anything green. no green light arrives in your brain. What happens is your brain actually compares the amount of green reflection coming off that apple to the amount of red and blue around it. What the brain is receiving is a series of signals, electrical signals, and it's comparing electrical signals in order to come up with what we call these perceptions. Like I see something green, a green apple, or I see red. So that's what I'd like you to understand about the way the eye communicates with the brain. I would also like you to understand that the brain itself is making these guesses and that those guesses are largely right. How do I know that? Well, they're right because when you reach out to grab a glass, most of the time you grab the glass and you don't miss. Right? Most of the time when you make judgments about the world around you based on your visual impression of them, it allows you to move functionally through the world. So the brain is doing these incredible things. It's also creating depth, a sense of depth. Even though what arrives from the retina is essentially a readout of a two-dimensional flat image, your eyes are slightly offset from one another. So that for instance, if I look at you, if you were standing right in front of me right now and I were to look at you, the image of your face, the light bouncing off your face to be more precise, lands on one eye in a slightly different location than it does in the other eye. And then the brain does math. It basically does the equivalent of geometry and trigonometry and essentially figures out how far away you are from me, which is just incredible. So the brain does all this very very fast and the brain uses about 40 to 50% of its total real estate for vision. That's how important vision is. Now I want to talk about the other aspect of vision which is the stuff that you don't perceive the subconscious stuff. And then we'll transition directly into how you can use light and eyesight to control this other stuff because it's very important. And that other stuff is mood, sleep and appetite. And there are ways in which you can use these same protocols that I will describe in order to preserve and even enhance your vision, your ability to see things and consciously perceive them. So the protocols we will describe have a lot of carryover to both conscious eyesight and to these subconscious aspects of vision. And I just want you to understand a little bit more about the science of seeing of eyesight and vision and then all the protocols will make perfect sense. So as amazing as eyesight is, it actually did not evolve for us to see shapes and colors and motion and form. The most ancient cells in our eyes and the reason we have eyes is to communicate information about time of day to the rest of the brain and body. Remember, there's no extracular photo reception. There's no way for light information to get to all the cells of your body, but every cell in your body needs to know if it's night or day. Now, I talked a little bit about this on the in the episodes on sleep, and this episode is not about sleep, but I want to emphasize that there is a particular category of retinal ganglen cell. Remember the neurons that connect the retina to the brain. These are so-called melanopsin retinal gangling cells named after the opsin that they contain within them. They are essentially photo receptors. Remember before I said there are photo receptors and then these ganglen cells. Well, these melanopsin cells as the name suggests melanopsin have their own photo receptor built inside them. These cells retinal ganglin cells communicate to areas of the brain when particular qualities of light are present in your environment. and signal to the brain therefore that it's early day or late in the day. They regulate when you'll get sleepy, when you'll feel awake, how fast your metabolism metabolism is, excuse me, your blood sugar levels, your dopamine levels, and your pain threshold. These melanops and gangling cells have been shown to set the circadian clock and to respond best to the contrast between blue and yellow light of the sort that lands on these cells when you view the sun when it's at so-called low solar angle when it's low in the sky either in the morning or in the evening. What does all this mean? The most central and important aspect of our biology and perhaps our psychology as well is to anchor ourselves in time to know when we exist. We know time at a biological level based on where the sun is. What does this mean for a protocol? It means see get that light in your eyes early in the day and anytime you want to be awake. So try and get as much sunlight in your eyes during the day as you safely can. need a lot of this light in order to trigger these melanopsin cells which would then trigger your circadian clock which sits above the roof of your mouth which will signal every cell in your body including temperature rhythms etc. So first things first your visual system was not for seeing faces motion etc. The most ancient cells in your eye which are there right now as we speak are there to inform your body and brain about time of day. So, you want to get that bright light early in the day. Absolutely essential. 2 to 10 minutes. Now, here's another reason to do this. Getting two hours a day of outdoor time without sunglasses has a significant effect on reducing the probability that you will get myopia. Now, myopia or nearsightedness has to do with the way that the lens focuses light onto the retina. So, remember, your eye is an optical device. You have lenses in your eyes and those lenses need to move. It's not a It's not a rigid lens like a glass lens. It's a dynamic lens. The eye can dynamically adjust where light lands by moving the lens and changing the shape of the lens in your eye through a process called accommodation. And if you understand this process of accommodation, you not only can enhance the health of your eyes in the immediate and long term, but you also can work better. You'll be able to focus better on physical and mental work. You will be able to concentrate for longer. So much of our mental focus, whether or not it's for cognitive endeavors or physical endeavors, is grounded in where we place our visual focus. Okay? What we look at and our ability to hold our concentration there is critically determining how we think. Now, accommodation is our ability to accommodate to things that are up close here or further away. And the way this works is that the iris and a and the musculature and a structure called the siliary body move the lens. So, when you look far away, okay, when you see things far away, your lens actually relaxes. It can flatten out and you'll notice that it actually is relaxing to look at a horizon. Whereas, if I look at something up close to me, like this pen or my phone or a computer screen or this microphone, it takes effort. You'll sense the effort. Now, some of that effort is actually eye movements because you have muscles that can move your eyes within their sockets. But a lot of the work, quote unquote, is neural work of the muscles having to to move and contract such that the lens actually gets thicker in order to bring the light to the retina and not to a location in front of it or behind it. So-called accommodation. Now, you might say, why are you telling me about accommodation? Well, these days we're spending a lot of time looking at things, mainly our phones up close and computers up close and we are indoors. In other words, you are not giving your lens the opportunity to flatten out and for these muscles to relieve themselves of this work, but you are also training your eyes to be good at looking at things up close and not far away. And as a consequence, you are reshaping the neural circuitry in your brain. And it is not good. You want to get outside not just to lighten the load on your mind or to think about other things but to maintain the health of your visual system. In other words, you want to exercise these muscles. And that involves both the lens moving and getting kind of thicker and relaxing that lens. And the relaxation of the lens is actually one of the best things you can do for the musculature of the inner eye. So what's the protocol? You might be surprised, but for every 30 minutes of focused work, you probably want to look up every once in a while and just try and relax your face and eye muscles, including your jaw muscles, because all these things are closely linked in the brain stem, and allow your eyes to go into so-called panoramic vision where you're just not really focusing on anything. And then refocus on your work. If you are feeling tired, it actually can be beneficial to the wakefulness systems of the brain, including the locus ceruius and these areas that release norepinephrine to actually look up, to actually look up toward the ceiling. You don't want your chin all the way back, but to look up and to raise your eyes toward the ceiling and to look up and try and hold that for 10 to 15 seconds. It actually triggers some of the areas of the brain that are involved in wakefulness. So, if you're somebody who's falling asleep at your work, this can be very beneficial. When things are up, we tend to be alert. When everything's focused down, including our eyes, it tends to have a more suppressive or seditive type signaling to the deeper centers of the brain. How can you improve your vision? How can you get better at seeing things? Well, one way is to make sure that you spend at least 10 minutes a day total, at least viewing things off in the distance. So, that would be well over half a mile or more. Try and see a horizon. Try and get your vision out to a location that's beyond the four walls of your house or apartment uh or the doors of your car and the windshield of your car. I know that can be hard to do, but it's very valuable. So, try and see at a distance because it's good for your eyesight. It'll keep this lens nice and elastic and the muscles nice and strong that move the lens. And it has this relaxing component to it. Now, our visual system is exquisitly tuned to motion. Not just our self-generated motion, but the motion of things around us. And one of the things that it does is something called smooth pursuit. Smooth pursuit is our ability to track individual objects moving, as the name suggests, smoothly through space in various trajectories. You can actually train or improve your vision by looking at smooth pursuit stimulating. And that sounds really boring. Remember, the brain follows the eye. It follows the movements of the eye. It has to deal with that. And the neural circuits within the brain have to cope with changes in smooth pursuit. So, if you're doing a lot of reading up close, you're not viewing horizons, you're not getting a lot of smooth pursuit type stimulation from your life or you're just getting it within the confines of a little box on your phone, your vision will get worse. The idea is that you want to use the visual system regularly for what it was designed for and smooth pursuit is a great way to keep the visual and motion tracking systems of the brain and the eye and the extracular muscles working in a really nice coordinate fashion. So, what does this mean? The tool is spend two to three minutes doing smooth pursuit. There's some programs on YouTube. Um you can just look up smooth pursuit stimulus. Practice accommodation for a few minutes maybe every other day. Just bring something in close. You'll feel the strain of your eyes doing that. Move it out. You'll feel a relaxation point. Move it past that relaxation point where you will have to do what's called a virgin eye movement to maintain focus on that location as it moves out. Bring it back in. Practice that. Practice accommodation. And then be sure to give your eyes some rest. Get outside, look at a horizon, or do nothing. Just kind of let your eyes go soft. I guess what the yogis would call soft gaze. Practice a little bit of smooth pursuit. You don't have to be neurotic about this, but you if you do this often enough, meaning every other day, every third day or so, you can be the strange person on the plane or in the classroom doing this. You know that people might chuckle or look at you funny or or tease you, but that's okay because uh you'll be able to see when they are um losing their vision. Uh, so you'll get the last laugh. Let's talk about binocular vision and lazy eye. The young brain up until about age seven, but maybe even extending out until about age 12 is extremely vulnerable to differences in ocular input between the two eyes. My scientific great-grandparents won the Nobel Prize for discovering so-called critical periods, periods of time in which the brain is more plastic, more able to change. Those two guys, David Huvel and Torrson Weasel. Thank you, David and Torrrenston, forever changed the face of visual neuroscience and forever change the way we think about treatment of the young brain. It used to be thought that you wouldn't want to do a surgery on a young kid because of risk of anesthesia and young individuals, but we now know that you need to repair these imbalances. that even a few hours of oluding one eye early in life can lead to permanent, unless something's done, permanent changes in the way that the brain perceives the outside world such that when that eye is opened up again, the brain actually can't make sense of anything that's coming through it. It shuts down that visual pathway somehow. So, what does this all mean in terms of protocols? If you're a young person, do your best to get really good binocular vision, not just at level of your phone or your tablet, but also at distance. you will build strong binocular visual machinery in the brain and at the level of the eyes and the eye musculature. Now, if you're somebody who did have an occlusion, what's needed is to cover up the other eye to create an imbalance so that the weak eye, the so-called lazy eye, this sometimes referred to as amilopia, that eye has to work harder. Now, you might ask, what happens if you cover both eyes early in life? There are some like retreats and stuff where people go into caves with absolutely no vision. uh it creates hallucinations. We'll talk about why that is in just a moment, but here's my suggestion. Try and get balanced visual input through the two eyes. Almost everybody has a dominant eye. It usually doesn't relate to your dominant hand, although it can. And so for me, if I cover up my right eye, I see much less well, much more poorly. It's a little bit fuzzy and I have to work harder in order to see the camera, for instance, than if I cover up my left eye. And if you do have strong imbalances between the two eyes, which can be caused by cataract and lens issues, can be uh caused by neuromuscular issues, etc. to try and get those dealt with as early as possible by contacting a really good opthalmologist and ideally a neuroopthmologist. It's very common for young children, babies, to have an eye that um with strabismas that either deviates out or that deviates in. It is important to correct that if you would like to have balanced vision between the two eyes and for the brain to respond equally to the two eyes and to have I would say highfidelity quality vision. Hallucinations are a property of the visual system and it was always thought that hallucinations arise because of overactivation or activation of certain aspects of the visual system. I just briefly want to mention a paper that was published by my good friend and phenomenal uh scientist and physicist for that matter Chris Neil who's up at the University of Oregon in Eugene. They studied LSD like compounds and discovered that hallucinations actually occur because portions of your brain become underactive. The visual portions of your brain are under stimulated. This is probably why when people go into these cave retreats, something I've never done, um I don't think I ever will do where it's completely black, pretty soon they start hallucinating. They start seeing things even though there's nothing there. The visual system is desperate to make guesses about what's out in the world. It's like the eager beaver of your brain. It's like, what's out there? What's out there? What's out there? So it turns out that hallucinations are an underactivation of the visual system and then a compensatory a compensation by which the visual system creates activity and hallucinations. So if you're in the dark long enough you start to hallucinate and see things. So that's a little note about hallucinations. One of the things that you can do to improve your vision and it's also kind of fun is to put a Snellin chart in your home. A Snellan chart is that list of letters. If you go to the dreaded Department of Motor Vehicles have you cover up an eye, read the the letters on the chart. The letters of course get smaller and smaller. They're trying to figure out roughly what your vision is. Cover up the other eye. You'll do that. This is something that's not often mentioned, but your performance on the Snellen chart will vary depending on time of day because your level of fatigue and your ability to control that accommodation and other mechanisms of the eye muscles will vary. So you can take it as an average. It's also a good thing if you're going to get your vision tested for corrective lenses or or maybe you're going to do laser surgery or something of that sort. If you're thinking about any of that to really get it measured by a professional, get your vision tested by somebody who really understands vision like an opthalmologist or a really good optometrist. If you put a Snellin chart in your home, you know, you can do that as part of your visual training. Now, this might seem excessively nerdy, but what is more important than your eyesight, right? Eyesight is so vital. It's right up there with movement and our ability to move, to generate, to get up out of chairs and to walk and to run and to to take care of ourselves. Eyesight and movement are the main ways that we are able to take care of ourselves and take care of others. When you start having compromised eyesight or compromised movement, people need to take care of us and we become much more challenged in moving through our daily life. So, while it might seem nerdy to have a Snellan chart in your home or to do a smooth pursuit exercise a couple times a week or to get outside for a few hours a day and do your reading or your laptop work there, preserving your eyesight and preserving your vision is one of the most lifeenhancing or quality of lifeenhancing things that you can do. Now, of course, there are genetic factors and there are injury related factors that can compromise eyesight and our ability to see. And of course, this is the things I'm talking about today aren't going to solve all those issues, but they can have a tremendous positive impact if you're willing to do just a little bit of work. So, I want I do want to talk about a few other things that can uh perhaps improve vision. I want to dispel a few myths about stuff to take to improve vision. So, now you understand a lot about the biology of vision. You understand that light has to arrive at the retina and get converted into electrical signals. That process requires things like vitamin A, a fats, soluble vitamin. It requires things like the carotenoids. That metabolic cascade, the biochemical cascade is essential for vision. And this is why you've been told that carrots help you see better because they're high in vitamin A. There are a few simple things you can do to support your vision. First of all, it is true that eating vegetables, the dark leafy vegetables and things like carrots that have vitamin A in abundance and eating them in close to their raw form, so naturally occurring foods that contain a lot of vitamin A in their raw form can help support vision. Now, does that mean that if you ingest super physiological amounts of that stuff that it's going to make your vision that much better? No, but you do need a threshold level of vitamin A in order to see and in order to see well. Now, there's a lot of excitement nowadays about supplementation to help support the health of the visual system. But I want to talk about a molecule that's in a lot of supplements to support vision and there are some really good data on and that's luteine. What is this luteine stuff? Well, luteine is in the pathway that relates to vitamin A and the formation of the opsin, the photopigment that captures light in the back of your eye, literally absorbs light, pigment in your eye and converts that into electrical signals and allows you to see. And there is some evidence, I spoke to our chair of opthalmology, there is some evidence through quality peer-reviewed studies that supplementing with luteine can help offset some of the detrimental effects of age- related macular degeneration, but I want to emphasize but or emphasize however only for individuals with moderate to severe macular degeneration. For people that have normal vision or with a just a low degree of macular degeneration, these studies did not see a significant improvement of vision from supplementing with luteine. And the other one is as Tax A TI N. What is Azacin? It's a really interesting compound. It's the red pink pigment found in various seafoods. Uh I'm not a big seafood fan, but like certain fish like the you'll see at the fish market will have that red pink pigment and it's also in the feathers of flamingos. It's structurally similar to beta carotene. So it's very pro provitamin A but it has some chemical differences which may make it safer than vitamin A. Remember vitamin A is a lipid soluble vitamin. So it can be stored in our body for long periods of time. What is the deal with this as a you know what are its drawbacks? Well, it has a number of different effects, but the most notable for sake of this episode is the one on ocular blood flow. It does seem to increase the amount of ocular blood flow, so the blood supply to the eyes. So, that makes it an interesting compound. It's also been shown to have positive effects on things like skin elasticity, skin moisture, skin quality, etc. Probably due to its effects on blood flow. So, luteine, acidoxin, a sax, t i n. So everything I've talked about today relates to studies that were done and published in quality peer-reviewed journals. That doesn't necessarily mean you want to run out and start taking the stuff that I've described or even doing the protocols I've described. I've given you an array, a pallet, a buffet, if you will, of things that you could do to try and enhance or support your vision depending on how good your vision is, your uh family history of vision and vision loss. your occupational hazards. You know, people that work with uh metal filings that are flying out of machines are going to have a higher uh degree of of vision um you know, risk to their visual system than will people who just do office work. Although, if you're doing a lot of office work, chances are you're not getting a lot of long view vision, your accommodation mechanisms are going to start to suffer over time. I think we can reliably predict that. So, I've tried to give you an array of behavioral tools, and we did touch upon some supplementation tools. I'd be remiss if I didn't say that because blood flow is so critical for the neurons of the eye. Remember, these are the most metabolically active cells in your entire body, the cells within your retina, because blood flow is required to get them the energy and nutrients they need. Having a healthy cardiovascular system, right? Doing endurance work, doing strength training work regularly is going to support your eyes and your brain and your vision. It's indirect, but it's essential, right? It's necessary, but it's not going to be sufficient. You're going to have to do other things to support your eyesight as well. But having a healthy cardiovascular system because it's going to deliver blood and oxygen and nutrients to this incredible apparati on the front of your face, these two pieces of brain is going to support your overall brain health and vision over time. Last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention today. Your willingness to learn about vision and the visual system and the various things that you can do to help support the health and functioning of your visual system. And of course, I want to thank you for your interest in science. [Music]

========================================

--- Video 10 ---
Video ID: J7yn4tJEmJU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J7yn4tJEmJU
Title: Tools for Overcoming Substance & Behavioral Addictions | Ryan Soave
Published: 2025-04-21 12:00:28 UTC
Description:
My guest is Ryan Soave, LMHC, a leading expert in addiction recovery with extensive experience helping people heal from all types of substance and behavioral dependencies. We discuss actionable tools for breaking out of the addictive cycle and staying free of obsessions and compulsions. We also examine the relationship between trauma and addiction.

We explore the full recovery process—from detoxing and physical stabilization to building distress tolerance. We review evidence-supported tools to structure your life at each stage of recovery and highlight the power of learning “self-directed state shifting” through yoga nidra (NSDR), breathwork, meditation and prayer.

We explain how to recognize signs of addiction in yourself and others, and the treatment options available across all levels of resources, from residential programs to 12-step. If you or someone you know is struggling with any kind of addiction, this episode offers practical steps to break free and stay free.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/GoMGP2H

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
BetterHelp: https://betterhelp.com/huberman
Levels: https://levelshealth.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman
Function: https://functionhealth.com/huberman
Waking Up: https://wakingup.com/huberman

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Ryan Soave
00:01:32 Addiction, Addictive Behaviors, Relief
00:06:10 Rehab, Detox, Physical & Emotional Stability
00:13:33 Sponsors: BetterHelp & Levels
00:16:08 Recognizing Addition; Video Games, Parents & Responsibility
00:23:38 Experiencing Real Life vs Addictive Behavior; Dopamine Dynamics
00:29:38 Drugs & Feelings; Reordering Your Life; Roles, Kids vs Parents
00:40:03 Sponsors: AG1 & LMNT
00:43:13 Tool: 30 Days Abstinence & Addiction; Impact
00:46:10 Creating a Life Post-Addiction, Jellinek Curve
00:55:30 Tool: Emotional Weather Forecast, Gratitude, Plan, Strivings
01:02:48 Connection with Others, Mental Willpower Throughout Day, Defining Best Self
01:08:39 Emotional Weather Map, Navigating Life
01:10:16 Sponsor: Function
01:12:03 Tolerating Stress, Sailing Analogy, Discomfort
01:16:03 Building Distress Tolerance, Proactive Behaviors, Cold Plunge
01:23:55 Stilling Leads to Seeing, Tool: Recognizing Stress Response; Relationships
01:30:56 Yoga Nidra, Non-Sleep Deep Rest (NDSR)
01:38:54 Yoga Nidra & Authenticity, Breaking Patterns
01:45:45 Yoga Nidra Timing, Regulation of Autonomic Nervous System; Breathwork
01:52:53 Sponsor: Waking Up
01:54:28 Alcoholism, Social Acceptability, Community, AA, Powerlessness
02:02:23 Gambling, Kids & Susceptibility
02:08:58 Transmuting Energy, Running, Dopamine, Feelings
02:15:41 Cocaine, Amphetamine, Stimulant Addiction
02:18:21 Overcoming Porn Addiction, Shame
02:30:03 Struggle, “Discomfort Appetite”
02:36:09 Addiction Treatment, Detox, Rehab Centers, 12-Step Meetings, AA
02:46:54 Is Addiction the Problem?, Trauma, Stress & Addiction Cycle
02:49:05 GLP-1 Agonists & Addiction Treatment?, HALT; Addicted to Stress?
02:52:44 Sugar Addiction, Caffeine; Ibogaine, Psylocibin & Considerations
02:59:56 Helping Someone With Addiction
03:04:58 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Follow & Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Protocols Book, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Ryan Suave. Ryan Suave is a renowned expert in addiction treatment and trauma recovery. Ryan has spent decades on the front lines helping people overcome addictions to substances like alcohol, and various drugs, as well as behavioral addictions, including gambling, video games, and pornography. His approach combines evidence-based protocols tailored to each person's unique family history and needs. During today's episode, we explore all aspects of addiction, including the relationship between addiction and trauma. Ryan shares insights from his extensive clinical work and provides clear zerocost protocols for effective recovery that leverage neuroplasticity, which is your brain's ability to change with intention and experience. We discuss and compare residential treatment programs, 12step programs, self-guided addiction recovery, and more. If you or someone you know suffers from addiction, the information and tools offered in this episode ought to be of tremendous benefit to initiate and maintain sobriety from that behavior or substance. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, this episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Ryan Suave. Ryan Suave, welcome. I'm glad to be here. Thank you for having me. You're the guy that people call, reach out to, cry to when everything comes crashing down. That's kind of your thing. Yeah. And you have this incredible uh gift really to u orient people in time and space when that sort of thing is happening. And you do this for men, women, teens, kids, adults, families. You've pretty much seen it all, although I'm sure there's more to come. I would love for you to just explain to people listening what addiction is and how you see it show up in people's lives. I know that you tend to get things like a trauma surgeon would see the human body hemorrhaging and in need of great support, but how do you think about addiction? First, I I'd like to make a little bit of a distinction. You know, we're going to talk about addiction. Um, when we look at the the DSM, the diagnostic manual that we use for diagnosing psychological disorders, not really addiction as a diagnosis. That's not super important necessarily because we can talk about it in the the term of addiction, but you know, we can look at people and and and look at biological uh psychological and social factors and make a diagnosis to see that they've got a substance use disorder, an alcohol use disorder, uh whether it's moderate or severe or they're dependent on it. And not to give people an out, but not all people that show up with an alcohol use disorder for a point in time are necessarily an addict. They may not be forever. It might been a a life circumstance that kind of that brought them there. Um, that said, someone that at a point in time in their life could have an alcohol use disorder or a substance use disorder, you know, they're probably prone to that and they probably shouldn't uh continue down that path or or gamble with it. Um, so talking about addiction in general, I like to broaden that definition to really, you know, question I'll ask people is does it have you or do you have it? Is it driving you and your behaviors? Are you really leaning on it in a way that that's your uh your medicine? Because I I don't really see addiction as the problem. You know, addiction is the solution. Whatever they're addicted to is the solution to some underlying stressor. You know, I I think as as humans, we when we're dis when we're uncomfortable, when we're experiencing pain, our kind of immediate reaction is to get out of that. And when that stress becomes really big, we're going to look for the things that are going to impact us a lot quicker. You know, taking a drink, using a drug. Now, once people start doing that, depending on what it is, you know, if it's uh heroin or fentanyl, uh they could become physically addicted to it very quickly or alcohol over time. Um But I think the the definition can be expanded to a lot of other things. Maybe even things that seem mundane, you know, and we can have addictive behaviors at different points in our life. And maybe we're have the same behavior that sometimes is addictive and sometime isn't. You know, this is very mundane, but sometimes I'm binge watching Netflix because I'm on a plane and don't have anything to do or I'm sick and I can't get out of bed. And other times I might have a really stressful day or have something going on that I don't want to deal with and I end up watching TV too late and then I don't sleep. And now is that a addiction that I need to get treatment for or be pulled away from my family for? Probably not. But it's I I I think in talking about addiction we want to understand you know what is it that people are using whether it's a substance or a behavior and why are they using it? you know that while I say it's addiction is not the problem, it's the solution. It's a solution that becomes very problematic for people. Um and you know you will know this better than than I will be able to explain it better than I would but you know they get a benefit in their brain and body for feeling the sense of relief that they'll feel when they use the substance. You know one of the uh doctors who initially supported the people who founded Alcoholics Anonymous his name was Dr. Silkworth and he wrote this opinion and he said men and women drink essentially because they like the effect produced by alcohol. I believe that effect is relief. So people are looking for some sort of relief and the question has to be I think when we're talking about addiction what is it that they're looking for relief from? So when somebody comes to you or someone or in some cases is brought to you Yeah. who's in the throws of addiction what's your first line of attack so to speak? Are you focused on what the underlying stressor is or you're trying to stabilize them? I mean these are people who um sometimes and you know sadly I've seen this in my friends um fortunately who are now sober but um you know people wrap the truck around a tree at 7:00 in the morning having drank a bottle of wine and it taken a Xanax or jail or worse. Right. And so when when somebody comes in, what what what are the first questions that you're asking and and what's the goal? Let's talk about the most acute first. So I serve as a chief clinical officer for Guardian Recovery. We do treatment in different states. You know, we serve thousands of people a year and we have medical detoxes that we start with. So if somebody needs to be detoxed from alcohol or drugs, you know, they're going to come in. We're not going to start asking questions about what the underlying stressor is. you know, we're going to first do medical assessments, nursing assessments. Sometimes we have to send them to the ER if they're, you know, if they're uh in dire need or they're so acute that they can't even be in the the facility that we have. Um, we're going to just get them physically stabilized, you know, and as we're getting them physically stabilized, you know, the thing with addiction is a lot of people just say stop. But for people that just stop and assuming they're not in danger, like in alcohol, if you just stop, you could, you know, you can have seizures and die. You know, uh other drugs, if you just stop, it can be extremely uncomfortable. But even if they went to a detox and were able to stop, you know, their life doesn't generally get better right away. In fact, a lot of times it gets worse. Now, maybe it's better in the fact that they're not about to die. you know, they don't have these physical symptoms, but emotionally, you know, they've been using this substance or this or alcohol as a as a medicator. Now, all of a sudden, the medicine's gone, you know, and they've got to deal with life. And so, they can actually feel a lot worse right when they come in. So, first, what we're going to do is really understand what's going on with them biologically so that we can make sure they're safe. And then as we can support them over the days that they start, you know, becoming a little more comfortable, their their uh their physical conditions start to stabilize, then we can start to really understand what's going on with them in their environment, you know, what is their pattern of use, you know, when do they use, what are the what are the effects that it's having in their life, you know, um because we want to understand how it's playing out everywhere, like I said, biologically, psychologically, and and and socially, and and really get a clear picture of who this person is, you know, and sometimes people come in more motivated than others. You know, sometimes they get brought to us, like you said, and I've seen it work either way that someone who's comes in and says, "I need help, you know, I'm I'm willing to do anything." That they end up not following through with their treatment. And other people that come in fighting and screaming, end up, you know, doing very well over time. I actually like it when people come in in that kind of struggle. I think, you know, the more people kind of struggle with something up front, it's kind of like the you pull an arrow back, you know, the further you can pull the bow back and hold it, the more attention in it, the farther it's going to fly. And I I really like when we have people who say, "I'm not going to do this," or, "I'm going to leave." You know, they're actually telling us something about themselves and where they are, and we can be there with them in that struggle. You know, sometimes people come in and they're just like checking the boxes and they're going to be a good student and everything's fine because they're not drinking anymore. And then we're never able to really get to kind of the causes and conditions of it. You know, when they're in a treatment setting, we'll have them for anywhere from, you know, 7 days to 90 days. You know, we like to keep them, you know, and understand, you know, what's going on with them so we can meet them at their different stages and and the environment. We kind of try to create a microcosm of their social universe so that you know they can experience some stressors while we're not creating the stressors but we're having them communicate with their families. We're having them face some of the things they don't want to face. And we have a saying that says you know treatment can't really begin till the crisis occurs. And what that means is more of the internal or existential crisis. If someone's coming in going well I'm great. Everything's great. you know, why were they maybe things are feeling great right now, but why were they drinking or using in a way that was harming themselves, others, you know, ripping their lives apart, you know, sometimes people will say addiction is a a choice. I don't buy that all the time, right? Uh I but people will say that and I I I would what I would say to that is even if it is a choice even if people could wake up and say I'm going to do this or I'm not like why would they continue to choose a life that they're hurting themselves and others. So while they're in in treatment with us, you know, we want to um start to really understand who they are, start to understand, you know, what is happening in their environment. And then as they, you know, stabilize more physically and then they stabilize emotionally, as we can start to raise their capacity to experience difficult emotions. I mean, I I say this all the time to my clients. You know, what I really do with them is help them learn how to feel bad. you know, we don't put that on the website because no one's going to come to us to say, "How can I feel really bad?" But I think that's that's at the core of it. You know, how can we build a distress tolerance so that they can face discomfort? They can face pain and not choose the thing that gives immediate short-term relief that's going to end up hurting them and th those around them to to allow them to really lean in to whatever that discomfort is. And and when people are able to be available for the depths of discomfort, then they're really become more available for the heights of joy and and satisfaction and and in in life. Um, so we start to build that capacity so that then we can start looking at the beliefs that maybe the the limiting type beliefs that have been driving them that are often set from earlier on in the life in their life and the way that they were shaped, you know, and that's often what we talk about as as trauma. Not always a big event that that happened on a single day, although that does occur. But the shapings that people had in their life that were the ad you know we're adaptive people are very adaptive and you know kids and as they're in their formative years will develop strategies to live life that adapt them in a way that they can survive the environments that they're in. And you know if that adaptation which was appropriate in their family, their school, their environment, whatever it was, maybe all of those was something that um was more toward like a survival response, like a fight orflight type response. And now that's never resolved in some way and in a way. and then later in life they're still applying these adaptive strategies in situations that it's not appropriate for. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online now. I personally have been doing therapy weekly for well over 30 years. Initially, I didn't have a choice. It was a condition of being allowed to stay in school. But pretty soon I realized that therapy is an extremely important component to one's overall health. In fact, I consider doing regular therapy just as important as getting regular exercise, which of course I also do every week. There are essentially three things that great therapy provides. First of all, it provides a good rapport with somebody that you can trust and talk to about pretty much any issue with. Second of all, it can provide support in the form of emotional support and directed guidance. And third, expert therapy can provide useful insights. insights that allow you to better not just your emotional life and your relationship life, but of course also the relationship to yourself and your professional life and to all sorts of goals. BetterHelp makes it very easy to find an expert therapist with whom you resonate with and that can provide you those three benefits that come from effective therapy. Also, because BetterHel allows for therapy to be done entirely online, it's super timeefficient and easy to fit into a busy schedule. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Levels. Levels is a program that lets you see how different foods affect your health by giving you real-time feedback on your diet using a continuous glucose monitor. One of the most important factors in both short and long-term health is your body's ability to manage glucose. This is something I've discussed in depth on this podcast with experts such as Dr. Chris Palmer, Dr. Robert Lustig, and Dr. Casey Means. One thing that's abundantly clear is that to maintain energy and focus throughout the day, you want to keep your blood glucose relatively steady without any big spikes or crashes. I first started using Levels about 3 years ago as a way to try and understand how different foods impact my blood glucose levels. Levels has proven to be incredibly informative for helping me determine what food choices I should make and when best to eat relative to things like exercise, sleep, and work. Indeed, using Levels has helped me shape my entire schedule. I now have more energy than ever and I sleep better than ever. And I attribute that largely to understanding how different foods and behaviors impact my blood glucose. So, if you're interested in learning more about Levels and trying a CGM yourself, go to levels.link/huberman. Right now, Levels is offering an additional two free months of membership when signing up. Again, that's levels.link, spelled, of course, LIK/Huberman, to get the additional two free months of membership. The thing you said earlier that's ringing in my brain is does it have you or do you have it? And I think for people listening and watching um I think this is a really important distinction. And maybe you could just elaborate on how one starts to answer that question because these days we hear, you know, people are addicted to social media, people are addicted to sugar, people are addicted to, you know, all sorts of things and online shopping, you know, and and on and on. Let's just set aside alcoholism for the moment because that's a an a unique case where as you mentioned immediate withdrawal can cause death and um uh it has its own kind of unique features but but for everything else like if if somebody out there is listening and they're like well you know I have a hard time clicking off of uh social media um even though I know I need to sleep I need to study or have a hard time disengaging from video games I think is a common one in in a lot of young people, how do they know if they're addicted? Is there a litmus test? I mean, could we test ourselves as um as individuals? Like, can I go an afternoon without it? Can I go a week without it? Is that the test? I I think that's a great test. I mean, probably more than an afternoon or a a week, but you know, can I quit for a month? And you know, if you're if when you're when you've stopped, if all you're thinking about is either doing it or when you're doing it, all you're thinking about is how can I how can I stop doing this? That's a pretty good indication that it has you, you know, and you know, you also have to look at like what are the things that it's impacting in your in your life. And that's one of the things we can help people kind of orient to. They might think that if it's somebody that comes to us at their family saying this is a huge problem, they may not see it yet or they may be avoiding it. We call that denial. But a lot of times it's they there's something deep down where they know that, you know, I'm really disengaged from life. I'm lonely. I'm I'm I don't have the quality of relationships. I'm not able to be motivated to do the things that I want to do. What if it still feels good to them? However, like family isn't saying, look, you know, kid isn't getting their schoolwork done, but um it's kind of outrageous. You know, you four hours a day playing video games, 3 hours a day, that might not even seem like that much to a lot of people, but parents um can see the opportunity cost of that. This is time that kid isn't running around and getting exercise. This is time that um is eating and to sleep. This is time that could be spent studying. So maybe grades haven't cratered yet, right? Um, and we live in the quote unquote American dream model, uh, where kids say, "Well, so and so makes millions of dollars every year playing video games, right?" So, I'm actually on the path. I think you see that fairly often these days, right? Yeah. I'll relate it back to drugs for a second. You and I are the same age, and you probably remember the, you know, this is your brain. This is your brain on drugs when they cracked the, you know, showed the egg, this is your brain, and Yeah. disrespectful to eggs, which I I'm a big fan of. Uh, but and and then this is your brain on Well, it did call the egg a brain, so that was pretty true. You're right. Your logic is impeccable. Thank you. And this is your brain on drugs and it showed the fried egg. I think that was a a terrible example for kids because most of the time when people do drugs the first time, it doesn't feel like that. It feels good. It feels great. You know, it's over time when you keep doing that that it, you know, especially, you know, a kid that doesn't have all of the responsibility and the things in life that they might have or want to have later on, you know, uh they're not going to they're not going to see that that's a problem necessarily. And some of their heroes are um very public about the fact that they like smoke a ton of high THC weed, right? I mean that when I was growing up that was associated with um lack of agency and kind of being a quote unquote burnout was the idea. Nowadays there are just as many examples of people that smoke a lot of weed are vocal about that and by all external measures are doing very well perhaps better than most. It also wasn't as highly concentrated when we were kids. I mean, this is is is pretty intense these days and can have some really longlasting effects on people and and there's some people that it's not going to affect in the same way other, you know, it does others. Some people are going to be able to smoke that amount of THC or vape it or however they're doing it, right? I mean, the delivery methods are very it's it's crazy these days because, you know, used people used to have to roll a joint, go behind the store, you know, it was like an event to go do that. Now, and you had to break the law. You had to break the law. Now it's every it's in a candy. I mean it's it's candy, right? It's gummy gummy bears. Wild. It's really wild. Um and you know the thing with those people that are succeeding at it like when we really look at that like what how what percentage of the people is is that right? It's a very very small percentage. Of course kids are going to uh look at that and say well I can do that. you know, um I would I've had a conversation with my teenage son about that, you know, and even if he's playing if they're playing games four hours a day, I imagine those guys that win these video game or they're the the YouTubers that are making all kinds of money. I mean, they're they're approaching it like a like a pretty intense job. You know, they're really working at it. But you know we don't want to take away that imagin imagination and creativity from kids but you know it's our job as parents to look and see you know the kids aren't going to see what's happen you know they're kind of timing is like now or not now they're not really looking too far into the future and that's that's a beautiful thing about being a kid as well. It's it's our job to put those guard rails on and as parents really understand what are the things that um may impact them over the long term. But we also have to understand, you know, it's easy for me to look at, you know, I had video games when I was a kid, you know, but it was Nintendo and Sega Sega and, you know, it was not as it didn't pull you in as much. And we were outside all the time. It was a little bit, you know, it was a different we'd come in and play video games at night, you know. Um, you know, now these things really pull you in and you're interactive and they communicate with other people. You know, they a lot of kids have their social connection out of playing video games. I actually had a um a uh mentor once who was involved in a leadership program with all these other adults and they did their leadership program. They were all over the world and they would meet in I think it was World of Warcraft and and play together and they had different things that they would do to to to work through their whatever they were doing in the leadership program. So there is some benefits to it for people. You know they these kids can really connect with each other when they and and especially through the pan pandemic this this happened. I'm going to come back to what I was going to say about as a parent. It's easy for me to look at and say, "Well, there's too much social media. It's too much video games. It's too much this." You know, it it would be great if all that stuff was taken away. Well, guess what? It's not going anywhere, you know, and I can't really relate to it in the same way that my kids will relate to it. You know, I have younger kids that I have no idea what's going to be there when when they're of age to look at screens or be in the world or communicate with others. But, you know, it's our job as parents to look at and get to know our kids in a way that we can see what are the things that are going to benefit them and what are the things that aren't. You know, I I don't think every kid shouldn't play video games. No, neither do I. I think that the um the contrast with the video games that you played when you were younger and then you mentioned going outside. I think um I realize this is not a strict definition of addiction by any means, but if something in the electronic sphere makes quote unquote real life underwhelming, Yeah. Um I don't know if that means it's addictive, but it certainly means it has a gravitational pole, right? And and we can set this as a kind of a a pillar for context when we talk about pornography for instance, right? So when um I mean there's a saying, right? A picture is worth a thousand words. Um and I would say as a vision scientist that a a movie um or even a real or a clip on Tik Tok is worth a billion pictures. You know, never before have we been exposed to so many movies with so much richness in sound and um and eyes. you know, the more times we see eyes and and you've got all this elaborate context. So whether or not you're talking about pornography, whether or not you're talking about video games, you know, the sort of sensory richness of it, richness feels like the wrong word, right? But the the the kind of like the the amount of sensory information coming in through uh any one of those very brief experiences in a moment, it doesn't necessarily overwhelm the brain. Clearly, the brain can handle it. But then you walk out into a landscape like a park with a couple basketball hoops and a um and some paint drawn on the concrete and a ball and it looks boring. It's the difference between eating a, you know, as a kid, you know, a hot fudge Sunday banana split and then being offered a plate of broccoli. Like you have to know a lot about nutrition and care a lot about the long-term effects of nutrition on the body to um to not think that the hot fudge Sunday is the better option. I mean, it just makes sense from a like a neural perspective. So I I wonder whether or not this definition of addiction or habit forming behaviors or dependence um could be expanded to include um you know the the ratio of kind of gravitational pole versus you know how it makes other things seem. Yeah. Right. Um and obviously you know I don't believe that we should remove technology. I think technology is wonderful, but I could imagine that for a young brain and for an old older brain, right? I mean, can I just ask you, do you do you find any adults or do you encounter many adults who are addicted or have a have a habit of excessive online shopping? I mean, it's so easy to buy stuff online. I mean, just the the barriers to entry are so low. Yeah, absolutely. So, does that make sense? like this contrast between richness and dullness that exacerbates the dullness the more that you engage in some behavior. Yeah. And and I want to be clear, you know, while I said it's not necessarily a problem for everyone, I I believe it can absolutely the video games as an example can absolutely be addictive. I mean, there's been studies that have shown and I I uh that, you know, it's impacting the brain in the same way as a lot of drugs are. You know, I've worked with with kids who were video games were taken away and they were like and their Wi-Fi was shut down and they were somehow stealing some console and like in the bushes near another home somehow pirating their Wi-Fi to play the video games during the day. I mean, it sounds like an addict like a crack addict, you know, or you know, in the street a kid like this, you know, probably 15 or 16 year old kid. So they took away his his Wi-Fi. Yeah. And video games and he's hiding. I'm I'm chuckling, but it's terrible. I mean, you can only imagine what's going on inside that kid that they can't, as you mentioned be before, handle the discomfort of this thing that's like their medicine. It's the thing, it's the thing that makes them feel good. And and we have these adolescent treatment centers and these kids come in and they'll be very disregulated even if they're, you know, they've been off of drugs or usually it's it's it's a lot of marijuana these days. and you know they they start to clear up from that but they're extremely disregulated agitated reactive and you know after sometimes 3 4 weeks we start to see a completely different person and one of the things I'm convinced is that they haven't been with their phones they haven't been on social media they haven't been playing video games and I'm not saying the answer is to take that away but you can start to see the impact that that has on them you know they're so anxious about not being connected in that way or being I would imagine in that universe that you're talking about that's hot fudge Sunday all the time. Like who doesn't want to eat hot fudge Sunday all the time? Well, and then hot fudge Sunday doesn't seem to taste so good. Then you need more hot fudge Sunday. Yeah. I mean that's the dopamine dynamic stuff that um thank goodness uh Anna author of Dopamine Nation made so clear that those big fast inflections in dopamine very quickly lead to smaller and smaller peaks in dopamine from the same behavior or substance and then the trough of low that comes after is just immense. In fact, there's just what I the other day before I forget, there was a post on AXA of a guy. He sold his company for a billion plus dollars and he was expressing the extreme depression of not knowing what to do with himself now. And everyone will say, "Oh, poor guy, right? I don't illustrate that point to make it a point about billionaires or not, but it wasn't the pursuit of pleasure. It was the pleasure of pursuit that drives dopamine. He gets the goal. There's no more pleasure from pursuit because he's not pursuing anything anymore. And you think, how could that possibly be? He can buy anything he wants. But the whole point is that the dopamine isn't deployed for the reward. It's deployed for the pursuit of the reward. So that trough is a very real thing. Yeah. And in the trough, you're still not going to go back to a plate of broccoli. You're going to keep going after, you know, the hot fudge Sunday feeling even though the hot fudge Sunday isn't giving it to you anymore. Well, that's an extremely important point that people are chasing a feeling. I had a friend who um thankfully is a recovered addict. Obviously, won't disclose who this is. A former methamphetamine addict, very successful um in life, but had a serious meth issue. Um got sober and contacted me not long ago um requesting some support because they were thinking about abusing aderall. And we had a conversation. Fortunately, they didn't do this. um he's doing great, goes to meetings, has a sponsor, is taking care of that. But the description of why they were pursuing this uh idea of abusing aderall was this recollection of a feeling, you know, he kept talking about like there's I just remember that feeling. It was, you know, and everything felt and he was talking about something that I can't relate to because I've never done meth. have no intention of doing math, but his it's almost like it was a like a like a love affair that had been spectacular that he was missing this person, but it was a thing. Yeah. If it sounded like love, like I missed that feeling. I think that's a a very important point because I see people as having spiritual relationships with alcohol and drugs. You know, I mean, they use them as something that makes them feel connected. They feel whole. I mean, what do we what is alcohol called? Spirits. You know that it it it's something that can uh allow them even if for a period of time to feel the way that maybe they want to feel or not feel the way that they don't want to feel, you know. Can we dissect that a little bit? um to feel the way they want to feel versus not feel the way they don't want to feel. I remember reading Augustine Burough's book dry. He's a recovered alcoholic and there's this paragraph in there where he talks about his first drink of alcohol and I'm going to get the exact wording wrong but it went something like you know on that first drink he felt he's in the first person he's saying I felt it mesh with my blood and my physiology and my physiology felt correct for the first time and I thought oh my goodness like I I certainly don't have that relationship to alcohol but I have friends who are serious alcoholics fortunately now sober who describe alcohol that way from the first drink. It was like this is they they say this is me. It's like they're finding themselves. Yeah. And that's very different than avoiding the way they felt previously. Yeah. Most of them didn't pick up a drink the first time because they were trying to find that person or because they were trying to avoid something else. It was because there was booze at a party or booze at home. Even the people that like like him that are talking about alcohol like that. And I've heard this story thousands of times, you know, from people that never read that book, you know, that that's how they felt. They they couldn't have been using it most of the time to get away or or to move away from how they're feeling because they didn't even recognize that's how they're feeling. That was just the world they were in. You know, we're especially a lot of times this is kids and adolescence who that's the first time they're drinking and and they they don't realize that they could feel the way that they're feeling. You know, these are the the way that we grow up are just the waters we swim in. We don't often know that there's a difference between who we are and how we can be. And to be able to a lot of people the first time even the first time they'll do it and it's not always like that for everybody, right? Some people just are using it socially and then later on when there are stressors realize that you know I can use this to medicate as well. But the ones that are having the relationship that you just described is you know they didn't even know they had no idea that life or their emotional state or their physiological state could be different than it was. So, how do you persuade somebody that it's a good idea to take that away from themselves? Because I imagine some of the first thoughts that go through their mind um include I can't imagine life without that feeling. You know, St. Augustine said, and I'm not going to get it exactly right, but he said something like, you know, a well-living depends on reordering your loves. And he was talking about people living with a a a disordered a disordered life. And and the question it begged is what are you loving the most? And his argument I think was whatever you're loving the most becomes your god, your higher power. You know, if if I'm loving money the most, if that's the most important thing to me, then money is my higher power. The thing is money will fail me, right? like you just talked about like I could the guy could get a billion dollars and want to kill himself, right? Or if I put my relationship at the, you know, the if I if I said, you know, the most important thing to me is that my wife is happy, you know, and that's my most important thing. That sounds great, but she's not going to be happy all the time. And when she is, I'm going to feel great. When she's not, I'm going to feel like I'm doing something wrong. you know, are we making sex the most important thing? Are we making, you know, and and his argument was love God first and then do as you do as you will? Like find the highest power because these powers don't that we're putting up there like money, sex, food, all things that aren't problematic. We need them. They only become problematic when they're problematic, right? When they're when we're making them that thing that's going to solve our problems. What about kids? Um, I know a number of people who are excellent parents who are super devoted to their kids and they say like, "My kids are my life. My kids are my kids are everything." Um, that might just be language, right? They could also have a relationship to a higher power, but um do you see people um suffering by virtue of overemphasizing their kids or their you mentioned spouse, but as a priority in their life? Yeah. And and it's great that you made a distinction about just being language because you know people can say those things like I my kids are very important to me probably I would say you know one of the most important things in my life is to be a father right but if the energy in the house again and again is that my kids are my life what what are like what a burden that is for that child. That means that in know like that child might in those instances show up in a way that uh they need to be happy. They need to perform. They need to they can't show sadness. They in order for their becomes their job to make their parents okay. And can you imagine that kid later grown up looking for a partner and the expectation on that partner or the expectation on themselves just based on that role internalization of you know like that they're the center of the universe or that maintaining this beam of love from the other person is essential or else it feels life-threatening. Yeah. I mean, it's a it's a covert form of abuse to use our children to meet our needs. You know, we're there to meet their needs depending on their age, right? I mean, we're going to you have an infant, you're their highest power. You have to do it. They they they uh they can't survive without you. You know, they can't feed themselves. And you carry them all the time, right? And then, you know, eventually they start crawling and walking and you carry them more than than you don't. And then eventually they're walking all the time and you're carrying them just a little bit and you know, then you're not carrying them anymore. If you're still carrying them all the time when they're 16 or 17, that's a that that's a that's a problem. But when we're using them to meet our needs again and again, now it becomes their job to care for us. And most parents that do this, and I see this all the time, are not setting out and saying, "I'm going to uh use my child to make me happy." They really have the best intentions. And it it probably comes out of however they were shaped growing up and how their family was shaped growing up. But, you know, I I I see this, you know, with my kids. You know, sometimes I come home, I two that are six and three, and I come home from work and they're like, "Daddy, daddy, daddy," and they're running to me and they jump on me and and and it feels amazing. And other times I walk in and like they've got a show on or something and I'm like, "Hey, kids." And they're like, they don't even say anything. Now, that doesn't feel great. But what I know is that doesn't mean they don't love me, right? If every day I came home and they were like in the middle of this and I I forced them to get up and give me a hug, you do this once, it's not going to be, you know, a problem necessarily, but if I did that every day and now I need them to give me a hug in order for me to feel safe and comfortable coming in the home or just feel happy, they're going to start having the job of we got to hug daddy in order for him to have a nice evening. That's a big job for a little kid to have. And I see that play out a lot in the people that come to us in that they've unconsciously been assigned these roles in childhood like, you know, they're the hero of the family, you know, we can use those the the terms or or the scapegoat or they're the, you know, but really what was the job that they were given? You know, it's my job to take care of mom and dad. you know, maybe they were in the middle of the relationship or or or you know, if mom and dad are fighting all the time, but kids are often assigned these roles early on and then they don't know how to shed them later on and so then they just use that role later in life. I mean, my field is full of people who are assigned roles, you know, the therapists and nurses and things like that. You know, we want to care for people, but it's hard to parse some of that stuff apart, you know, because we don't want to blame parents for how their kids end up, but when we're doing work with our clients, we want to understand the patterns that were developed. not to blame them but to to start understanding what were the systemic challenges in the family system so that we can you know develop and deploy systemic solutions for them. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also contains adaptogens. I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before I even knew what a podcast was. I started taking it and I still take it every single day because it ensures that I meet my quota for daily vitamins and minerals and it helps make sure that I get enough prebiotics and probiotics to support my gut health. Over the past 10 years, gut health has emerged as something that we realize is important not only for the health of our digestion but also for our immune system and for the production of neurotransmitters and neurom modulators, things like dopamine and serotonin. In other words, gut health is critical for proper brain function. Now, of course, I strive to eat healthy whole foods from unprocessed sources for the majority of my nutritional intake. But there are a number of things in AG1, including specific micronutrients, that are hard or impossible to get from whole foods. So, by taking AG1 daily, I get the vitamins and minerals that I need, along with the probiotics and prebiotics for gut health, and in turn brain and immune system health, and the adaptogens and critical micronutrients that are essential for all organs and tissues of the body. So, anytime somebody asks me if they were to only take one supplement, what that supplement should be, I always say AG1 because AG1 supports so many different systems in the brain and body that relate to our mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drink AG1.com/huberman. For this month only, April 2025, AG1 is giving away a free 1-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As I've highlighted before in this podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 plus K2 have been shown to help with everything from mood and brain health to heart health and healthy hormone production and much more. Again, that's drink ag.com/huberman to get the free 1-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your subscription. Today's episode is also brought to us by Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need but nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for optimal brain and body function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved in water makes it extremely easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. to make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes. I dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up in the morning. And I drink that basically first thing in the morning. I also drink element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and therefore losing a lot of water and electrolytes. They have a bunch of different great tasting flavors of element. They have watermelon, citrus, etc. Frankly, I love them all. If you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with the purchase of any element drink mix. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. There's this thing that happens around any conversation about addiction where at some point any logical listener starts to say, "Okay, well," and it sounds like everyone's addicted to something and it's so hard to stay right in the, you know, between the lane lines of of healthy and healthy because yeah, I like I'm not speaking for myself because I'm not a drinker, but like I like a drink at the end of the day. It helps me relax, makes me a better parent, makes me a better spouse, and I like it. Is it my spiritual higher power? No, but I like it. Would I take 30 days off? Prefer not to, but I'm not addicted, you know. But then you think, okay, well, a kid that likes playing video games that lets him connect with his friends. Um, he's doing it a bit excessively, but is he addicted? You know, okay. Um, obviously if somebody if it's harming people's profession, it's harming their relationships in very overt ways, then we place into the category of addiction. There's this thing that happens in these conversations around addiction where people start to go, "Okay, it sounds like I can't really enjoy anything that much because then it takes over everything." Like, I'll I'll come clean. I've worked anywhere from 10 to 16 hours a day, 5 to six days a week on average, right? Um, since I was 19. Am I a work addict, workaholic? Maybe. But I love my work and it's done wonderful things for my life and I have a life that I wouldn't trade for anything. Did I miss out on a lot of things? Probably. Um, but I also love the life I've lived and that I continue to live. And a lot of that comes from the relationships and experiences I've had through work. Right. So, you know, at some point, this is where diagnostic criteria come become handy. But I do like the fact that um we have a lipmus test now. Could you take 30 days away from it and not um completely lose your mind? Or could you just take 30 days away from it? if I didn't work for 30 days that would be very difficult for me but I could do it. Um so how should we frame this this thing of addiction and so that people can ask themselves like do I have it or does it have me? Yeah. I mean I think how are you using it and what is it impacting if if anything but to be be able to be honest with yourself about it. I you know it's very hard to be it's it's easy to say be honest with yourself about it but it's very hard to be honest with ourselves. You know, that's where being in relationship with others, sharing what you're experiencing. If you're taking 30 days off, really communicating to somebody else, whether it's a therapist or a trusted friend, you know, how am I thinking about this? You know, am I waking up every day wishing I could be doing this other than some am I sitting in a business meeting completely dissociated from what's going on because I'm really focused on that I'm not gambling or that I'm not drinking? you know, you've got to be able to look at what it's impacting in the way that we're thinking and the way that we're feeling. Can I ask you a question about the what how it's impacting things? Because one thing I've observed um in myself and in others is that sometimes behaviors that if you if we were to just look at through a kind of tunnel vision, you'd say, "Wow, like this person just like works a lot or this person exercises a lot." Um but it provides energy that feeds a bigger ecosystem. You know, gives me a sense of purpose where I have great relationships through my work and relationships that are not through my work but you know it it sits uh not as my higher power but kind of at the center of my life and a bunch of other things wick out from it. And to remove that thing would be to disrupt the whole web. I think that's sometimes what scares people. Um, especially again, I don't I can't relate to alcohol specifically, but what my friends who have made the decision to try and quit or quit drinking alcohol, for them it's like the their ability to socialize, the lack of anxiety while they're intoxicated, the um knowing there's something to do um for them as you know, as opposed to like what they would fill that space with. So sometimes it I feel like these addictive behaviors fit into a larger ecosystem so that it masks the dis that any dysfunction but it's but it has this again gravitational pull so that you know it gets to bigger questions of like how how are we supposed to live our life and I like this quote from St. Augustine you know that a a life well-lived is a constant reordering reordering of our loves. Yeah. Yeah. Something like that. So it gets to these questions of like what what is a good life? This is a a great uh discussion point you know that you know people will come in and say I just want to be happy I just want to be at peace. First thing we have to ask them is what does that mean? We have to define it. A lot of times maybe they're saying that happiness is kind of the absence of all this bad stuff you know or that peace is you know everything outside of me is going okay everything is fine. you know, we've got to really explore with them what how would they know when they got there. You know, what a balanced life is going to be different for everybody. And especially like with behavioral addictions, you know, it's not about necessarily removing those forever. In fact, a lot of those we can't remove. Food addiction, you can't remove food. I mean, the things around sex addiction, you know, you're not going to I I suppose someone could not have sex, but really a lot of that is about connection and relationship and love and intimacy, you know, even gambling. You know, people don't have to gamble, but you're dealing with with money, you know, and you've got to touch it and spend it and be around it. Yeah. Buying a house is an investment. Yeah. or a gamble sometimes as we've we've seen, you know, and we've got to look at how we're using these things, you know, and and going back to drugs, you know, you look at like we've got pain pain medication, you know, aside from being abused, right? We've got opioid pain medication. Um, and then we've got heroin. And both of them either came from or derivatives of the poppy which is a beautiful flower right so we've taken this flower and we've been able to make this these drugs and one of them you know of of course prescription pain abuse and fentanyl that we see is is you know is it can be deadly but I think an argument could be made that it's probably saved more lives than it's killed when used appropriately. We're able to have surgeries that we probably never would have been able to have before because of the medications that people can use. And then we've got people who are either abusing that or taking heroin and dying. You know, having a, you know, we started calling it the opioid epidemic. I think 50,000 people died. It like surpassed the number of the people in the US that died by car accidents. Last year it was something like a 100,000. Right. 100,000 people died at least. You know, it's more than doubled. Um, you know, now it's in a lot of different things. There's a lot of kids that are taking something that they think is a a less harmful pill, like a Valium or Xanax, and it's got fentanyl in it, and they they die. You know, it's it's doubled since we started calling it an epidemic. And of course, that 100,000 doesn't include all of the other drugs and alcohol and um but you know, it goes back to how did we use it? You know, we manipulated this flower in a way that we can save lives and kill or die. That's a more extreme example. But how are we using the things in our life? You know, are we using exercise as a way to completely, you know, uh to dissociate from things? If I if I take away that exercise, am I going to fall apart? Am I not going to be okay? You know, and that doesn't mean don't ever exercise again, but understand like if I were to stop for a week, do I fall into a deep depression? Not everybody is going to do that, but if somebody's oriented in the way that it is a problem, that may happen for them. And then it begs the question like, what am I using this for? What I think is so important about treatment for addiction and then recovery from addiction is that, you know, at first it's about eliminating something. It's about moving away from something, but that's not sustainable. Just to cut something out isn't because it's being used for something to give them that sense of relief or that sense of peace or that sense of connection or spiritual or otherwise. They've got to eventually start building towards something. You know, what what's the life I'm going to create? If you look at the 12 steps, the last part of the the 12 steps says to practice these principles in all our affairs, which means go out and build a life. You know, don't don't find yourself really small. We we were talking beforehand there was a I think he was a biopysicist. I I I can't remember. Emelick, he was at at Stanford for a bit, the end of his career. and he had done a lot of research on alcoholism and I wrote a book in the ' 50s or 60s called the disease concept of alcoholism and out of that book there was a curve and you can look this up it's called the gel curve I don't think he actually created the curve it was credited towards him in fact I think he even uh kind of dissociated himself from it but it came out of his works and it it starts off with at the top and it's for alcoholism like where people start drinking and it's in the um crucial phase as they start drinking more. And at first when people are drinking more, you know, their tolerance increases, you know, but they start to experience some problems. They're hung over, they're late for work, they're having arguments with, but it's nothing that drastic. And as they keep drinking and descending down this curve, actually, they enter the I think it's called the critical phase. And that's where actually tolerance decreases, right? It's it's they're dependent on it. They need it just to get by. They need it to get to work, you know? they they're they can't keep the job, they can't keep their relationships, their uh physical body is starting to fall apart, they're getting sick because of it. There's a lot of other factors in it. And then they they come down to the bottom of this and and it's this cycle of drinking and stopping and drinking and stopping, you know, drinking until I can't anymore, physically sick, and then going back to it as soon as as they can. when those people are able to get treatment and find recovery now the curve starts to go back up the recovery side of the curve and in the beginning you know they're not feeling that great. they they've lost the thing that helps them get through life. But if they can stay in a contained environment, and that contained environment could be a treatment center or a contained environment like in a 12step program, you know, where they're engaged in something. I don't mean contained by uh uh the walls that you're in, but in some sort of in a community, and they can stay away from it. Eventually they start uh seeing that they see in others that they can build a life that they can go after the things that they wanted to go after and they start finding pleasure from life rather than from the the the substance. You know they start to be able to handle the stressors of life. their tolerance for stress instead of their tolerance for alcohol building their tolerance for for stress starts to build and then eventually they're kind of moving towards what we would call in Mazo's hierarchy of needs the self-actualization you know they're able to build a life that they never thought they could have before you'll hear people say a life beyond my wildest dreams you know and a lot for a lot of those people that's just that I'm able to meet anything with some sort of sense of peace and when I'm not I I think recovery is it's not about finding a let's just use the word peace it's not about finding a a a sense of peace that you stay in. You know, balance is not I'm on both feet standing still. Balance is like like this, right? And as we're taking risks in life as we should to really build awesome lives, sometimes we're going to feel way off kilter. But with the recovery process to be able to recognize when I'm out of balance sooner or out of peace sooner and return to it quicker, recover again and again, you know, and have the tools to know, you know, what are the emotional conditions that I might be facing on every day and what what am I made of and who am I that might bring to that? So for instance, something I give to a lot of my clients is we call it like the emotional weather uh forecast. You know, when the first part of this is they've got to really know themselves and that's something that we see in 12step a lot where they'll we hear if if you know people identify their character defects. Not everybody I know is familiar with 12step, but that's one of the but as part of identifying your defects, you're also identifying your virtues, right? Just like a balance sheet, you want to know your liabilities and your assets. And sometimes those things are sometimes they they they change. And if something that's a a liability in this situation might be an asset in this situation, right? Like if uh uncontrolled anger and violence in my home when my kids do something wrong, and I'm not doing this, but is is a liability. you know, if my family's attacked, it's an asset, right? So, understanding what these defects and virtue or assets and liabilities are so that I really know myself and and and that can be through a process of of of sharing with others. And in the 12step, that's how they do it. We do it in therapy all of the time to kind of know who I am. You know actually uh one of there's a line in one of the uh AA literature that Bill Wilson wrote and he he gives a definition of humility and it goes something like this that humility is an honest recognition of who and what we've become followed by a deep desire to become who we can be. And it it's not about like that I'm all bad. It's just to note it to to to recognize who I am. If I don't know where I'm starting, I can't know just like finding directions. If I asked, you know, to get directions to the studio and your team started giving me directions from uh uh over the canyon, but I was, you know, south of here. They're going to give me the directions to turn left on this road and right on this, and I'm going to I'm not going to know how to get there. I'm not I'm going to be disoriented. I'm going to feel lost. I got to It starts with really knowing where I am, who and who and what I am. And from there, then we can start to build a life. So one of the things I give people a lot is once they kind of understand these assets and and and liabilities of theirs, you know, to to look at each day ahead and say, you know, first we start off with gratitude, you know, it kind of gives a mindset and gratitude just isn't about being thankful for things. I I really believe gratitude is meeting what is as it is. you know that uh I always when I give people this and when I practice it myself, I try at least to be one of the things I'm grateful for to be something that I'm challenged by and not just to say I'm going to learn a lesson from this, but I I might not know what that is, but to really express gratitude for some challenge I'm I'm I'm having. So, that's kind of a mindset. And then the next thing is just laying out your plans for the day. and and not like a detailed calendar, but like, you know, I'm gonna wake, you know, take the kids to school, go to work, travel, you know, have a business dinner tonight, right? And then so I kind of know what's happening that day and then from there, uh, look at what are my what's my emotional state currently? What am I experiencing now? Especially if it's like fears, resentments, anger, guilt, shame. It could be something else. It could just be like I'm feeling I feel really solid today. But when I can take the what's going to happen today and what I'm already experiencing, I can look at what I'm doing today and think, you know, there are some character liabilities or defects that might come up. Like if I have to travel today and I've got to take three flights instead of one, I can know that if I know myself, I might say I could I have the the ability to become impatient, controlling, and and look at my day to say almost predict what are the emotional disturbances that can that can happen that day and then coupled with the state that I'm in. If I'm already upset about something else, I've got a higher likelihood of going into these reactive patterns that I don't necessarily want to go into. And so, you know, much like going on a trip where I would look and see what the weather's going to be. You know, if it's going to be looks like it's going to be rainy the whole time I'm there, I'm going to pack a rain coat. Now, that doesn't mean I'm not going to get wet, but once I start getting wet, I can go get my rain cat and and put it on. Same thing in this. You know, the last part of it is to look for what I'm going to watch for because of my plans and my emotional state. Now, I know that I have to watch for being like maybe short or controlling. I want to watch for these character defects or liabilities. And then what do I want to strive for? I'm going to strive for being patient, tolerant, kind. Now, just because I write this down, just like the rain jacket, doesn't mean I'm not going to experience these things. But when I can look at like a day as an example, I can break it down and in a in a chunk where, you know, I'm not going to be shocked by I'm being impatient. And as soon as I get impatient, I can remember, oh, this is what I'm looking this is what I want to watch out for today. What do I need to and I wanted to strive for being tolerant and patient. So then I can, you know, use one of the tools that I might have that I've laid out. You know, it might just be if I'm in the airport, walk away, take a breath, you know, and and recognize and and remind myself this is what I'm striving for today. And in this exercise, we're putting out in front of us what we might be be experiencing based on what we know about ourselves and what we've learned about ourselves. And when we can do that, we, you know, we can start living each day a little bit better. or at least I find this with my clients that they they can chunk it down and say, you know, they're not surprised by these emotional reactions and and and you know, like I said earlier, we we want to help people I I try to help people learn how to feel bad, you know, to to recognize that, okay, I'm feeling disturbed. I'm in a reaction. Let me lean into it rather than run away from it. And we run away from it in different ways. I might snapping at the lady at the counter or uh you know might be someone that that now I just totally withdraw and don't say anything. Yeah. Numbing out is very common nowadays. Yeah. I just want to repeat these different categories. Um a small list of gratitudes um including perhaps some things that um we're grateful that challenge us or things that we've received or whatever it happens to be. A quick list of gratitudes plan for the day. what the internal emotional weather is like how am I feeling irritated rested what it could be three or four things what to watch for and what to strive for I do think it's an extremely useful obviously zero cost minimal minimal time investment protocol for lack of a better word that um everyone not just people who struggle with addiction but everyone can benefit from because I think we we tend to be so conscious of like what to look for, what to strive for, coming out of a morning journaling or a great night's sleep. But then, you know, it's amazing how by 3 3 p.m. somebody cuts us off in traffic or, you know, or we're being bombarded with too many things and all of a sudden we're we're not necessarily unpeled, but we're not our our best self. Do you think there's value in sharing your list with somebody else? connection with others is so important, especially when I share something like this that's vulnerable with them because it's not just about holding me accountable, but now now I'm I'm I'm expressing it in a way that others see it and we can have communication with them about, you know, having them share it back with you, too. I have like 10 guys that I share this with every day, you know, and not that the way that I do things is the way that everybody should, but I ask other people that I give this to to share it because, you know, you're you're now expressing it. And expressing something kind of brings it more into existence than if I'm just doing it myself internally. And we've got to put these things in front of us cuz we will forget very quickly, you know, or you like you said, coming out of a morning journaling or meditation session feels great. I think most people decide to make a change and then, you know, on one day and then they don't think about it again in the way that they thought about it for months. Like it happens every year on New Year's. They're not putting it out in front of them every day to be a reminder of what I'm going after, what's important to me. And the brain is very different at different times of day and at night. You know, one thing that I subscribe to that is separate from this conversation, but perhaps relevant is I don't believe any thoughts that occur between 2 am and 5:00 a.m. But I just don't whatever whatever comes up if I happen to wake up in the middle of the night and have a I I just don't I've chosen to not believe those thoughts. I might write something down. I might have an insight that I'm interested in um or something that terrifies me or whatever, but I just don't believe those thoughts because I've had the experience thousands of times of then going back to sleep, waking up in the morning being like, "That's ridiculous. It doesn't it doesn't that doesn't hold any water anymore. I think we're so vulnerable in the middle of the night. Our forebrain shut down. We can't strategize. All our safety mechanisms are are are you know at their at their lowest and those thoughts just they don't hold meaning. Now I'm not to say that's not to say that some night owls might not have some brilliant insights in the middle of the night. So this is just relates to me and my schedule. But I do think that um we can make a decision to behave one way and do things at 8:00 a.m. and by 400 p.m. As a neuroscientist, I can honestly say that your brain is not the same brain at 4 p.m. that it was at 8 a.m. It's still you, but it's functioning so differently. What's important, how it orders priorities, how it interprets data. It's a it's like a it's not like a computer. It's it's a dynamic machine. And at different times of day, you're working with a different different set of hardware. Literally, certain circuits are more active than others. So, I don't believe that um we are capable of self-regulating nearly as well as we could, certainly not perfectly, if we don't have a reminder of our best self, our aspirational self that we carry forward. Whether or not it comes through other people or enforcement or ideally comes from from inside us. But the expectation that we are going to spontaneously and impulsively be our best self is one of the biggest uh failures I think of of education and psychology and medicine and evidenced by the fact that I have many colleagues who are scientists and physicians who have terrible addictions. Some are sober, some are not. These are brilliant people who have all the knowledge in the world about the inner workings of the mechanisms that make people addicted um etc. Anyway, I I I just I'm editorializing there a bit, but I feel very passionate about these zerocost uh tools, but I have to say these tools can make a huge difference. And um what do you call this list? What is it the plan for the day? What what is this list? uh just like an emotional weather forecast, you know? I mean, call it whatever you want, but I I I think it can be part of a daily inventory, too, where at night you could look at and see how you did, you know? I mean, I I I think you just talked about being your your best self. Like, it's a way to kind of des, you know, define what our best self is that day, you know, because what our best self is is going to change depending on the circumstances we're in. You know, I I I've run into problems before where, you know, in my own life where, you know, it's like the weekend and I'm really looking forward to I'm like the weekend's going to be and I don't let's say I don't do this exercise cuz it's a it's a Saturday and I it's going to be, you know, I'm home and it's going to be an amazing I live with four other people, you know, two of three of which are children. they might have other plans, you know, and or someone gets sick and we can't go to the the do the the thing that we were going to do. And and I can find myself, you know, really grumpy and right in those character defects or liabilities. I also think being your best self isn't never engaging in those. It's not never getting angry, right? I I remember a teacher I had was talking about and I can't remember the he was talking about some Indian yoga master you know that they the the student asked them like do the do the masters ever get angry and he said of course but when they get angry it's like writing on water it's there and then it's gone you know they're not holding on to it if you try to write on water those letters are going to disappear right after you write them you know that there's there are emotional disturbances that we're going to have and It's part of life. We can't ignore them. We should embrace them and lean into them. I mean, I think a the a real secret to having a really fulfilling life is being able to embrace all aspects of oursel, the the light and the shadow because we can't just try to run from the shadow and go to the light. It's just it's they they they're handinand. In fact, they don't exist without the other. Well, because they're both inside of us. And they're both inside of us and they both have their purpose. What is the purpose of the shadow in your in your mind? And for folks that don't know, I mean the shadow, we're using Yungian language here, but and and there probably will be some folks listening that say and are thinking themselves, well, I've never suffered from an addiction, etc. But what we're really talking about here with this, can we call it an an emotional weather map? Sure, that's great. Because I like the idea I like the idea of a map and the forecast component because it's not just how do I feel right now? It's how do I feel right now? What's coming? And how am I going to prepare? and and there's some goal setting in it, but you're not actually writing out your specific goals. Just, you know, what what am I striving for is I suppose a goal. Um, but what we're really saying is anyone that's ever gotten anxious, anyone that's ever gotten stressed, anyone that's ever gotten angry, whether or not you yell or not, right? I mean, what you're talking about is is a is a road map for the being able to navigate the experience of being human, right? Because the stri what we're striving for is not our like specific goals. I'm not striving for like success in this meeting. I'm not striving for making this money today. I'm striving for ways of being, you know, how I'm going to be that day in the face of the stressors, whether that meeting goes well or not, whether I make the money or I don't, whether I get the answer that I wanted or I don't, that I'm striving for this way of being. There's a a a line that I heard from a country singer once that I think he heard in a a 12step meeting that said, you know, peace is not uh finding calmer seas, it's building a better boat. You know, that you know, how are we going to navigate the storm? Not how are we going to avoid the storms. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Function. Last year, I became a Function member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. Function provides over 100 advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily health. This snapshot offers you with insights on your heart health, hormone health, immune functioning, nutrient levels, and much more. They've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful plastics, and tests for PASES or forever chemicals. function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors who are expert in the relevant areas. For example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption. I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and detoxification. And I should say by taking a second function test, that approach worked. Comprehensive blood testing is vitally important. There's so many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be detected in a blood test. The problem is blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated. In contrast, I've been super impressed by Function's simplicity and at the level of cost. It is very affordable. As a consequence, I decided to join their scientific advisory board, and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman. Function currently has a wait list of over 250,000 people, but they're offering early access to Hubberman podcast listeners. Again, that's functionhealth.com/huberman to get early access to Function. You alluded to this earlier when talking about balance as a dynamic process, not a static process. That part of peace is knowing that when distress comes, you'll be able to tolerate it. Yeah. As opposed to there's no distress. And I know people like this that are constantly trying to move through the channels of life, create their own little estuaries around things so that there's never any disruption. Yeah. We want to be able to tolerate that distress enough to make choice and respond rather than react to whatever it is. You know, it doesn't mean that we're not going to navigate out of the storm. I I think of it I I I I think of it like this in uh if we go back into the I don't know 17 or 1800s when the only way to get from England to America was to navigate or to sail in a a wooden sailboat, right? A sail ship, whatever it was called. And let's say we took the most experienced sailor with the best ship. But this time, rather than using his skills of navigation and sailing, he said, "The seas are calm and the weather's good, I must be going the right way. But if the seas are rough and the weather's bad, I must be going the wrong way." And every time the seas were calm, the weather's nice, he just kept going in the direction he was. But every time he came across waves and rain, he'd turn. Is he ever going to get there? Potentially, let's say it's calm the whole way. Or he might end up navigating all the way down around the South America and then coming back up. Neither one of those is the answer. The answer is that he when he meets the storm, he can use his skills of navigation as a sailor to and and understanding the weather and his experience to say, "Okay, this is something I navigate through. This is something I navigate around." But he doesn't just react based on the external conditions. And we react constantly to our external conditions based on what we're perceiving is going on. You know, I'll preface this by saying I think I believe one of our biggest, if not our biggest challenge as human beings and our psychology is that we confuse discomfort with threat and respond to discomfort as if it's threat. You know, and this goes back I can use the the uh uh diagnostic criteria for PTSD. Not that everybody that experiences this has PTSD, but when you look at the diagnostic criteria criteria in the DSM5, which is the fifth version of the it's the most recent version of the diagnostic manual, it says that the person was exposed to um it's like exposed to death uh threaten actual or threatened death or or actual or threatened violence or actual or threatened sexual violence. In the DSM4, it said real or perceived. And what that means is, you know, we can have a similar or exact reaction to something that is actually happening like you're attacking me. Hopefully, you're not going to attack me, but like you were as if you threatened to attack me. You know, if I believe that I'm in danger, then I can have the same I'm going to have the same fight orflight response or the same reaction in my body as if I am actually in danger. It's interesting that our I think our legal system recognizes this in that uh you can be arrested for assault or battery. Battery is you hit me. Assault is you threatened to hit me or threatened to kill me. We we actually in a way recognize this idea of perception in our legal system. It's actually it's also I I believe what the forgive me for saying it in this way, but the quote unquote success of terrorism is it's not that this event happens. It's that we leave that event thinking it's not that those buildings came down. It's that we think we believe that all of the buildings are going to come down, right? It's it's it's it's terror. I think that because we were talking about addiction and now we're talking about perception of threat and distress. I want to make sure that we tie those things back to one another uh one another. No, I think this is a very important conversation because what we're, you know, at the heart of addiction, but also at the heart of a challenged life, challenged in the ways that life shouldn't be challenging, is this lack of distress tolerance. Yeah. And I have a question about distress tolerance specifically. What can we do to increase our distress tolerance? Like what practices Maybe we just have to experience distress to know how to navigate distress. we we're going to experience the stress. We experience it all the time. And I think it's it's and and you may be able to articulate this even better than I can. But, you know, I think we need to look at stress, right? Not all stress is bad. We we need stress. I need stress to move around in this chair. I need I need to I need to be able to um uh to walk around. My my muscles need to tense and I need that stress. I think was it Han Sier's work around ustress and and distress? We're going to experience distress and it's not about avoiding distress. It's, you know, how are we going to walk through that distress? And so I I like to break practices down into a couple different ways. So proactive and reactive. Proactive are going to be things that we schedule. You know, I'm going to do you talked about yoga nidra. We can talk about that a little bit more. You call the non-sleep, deep rest, other forms of mindfulness and meditation that actually allow us to raise capacity in our our nervous system. um uh going to therapy, coaching, being involved in a community, doing physical exercise. These are things that we're going to schedule going into the cold plunge which does allow us to experience something and stay a little bit longer and it gives us you know it's so it's we have one at home and when friends come over to use it it's so funny because like the first time they're going to do it and I know you've had a lot of people we actually I was at your home a couple years ago and there was a guy who was doing it for the first time and he he's like a big I don't remember this but he's like a big athletic guy and he he was freaking out getting into terrified right and it's just cold water. There's it can't I mean it could hurt you if you're in there for however long to get hypothermia, but it's not going to hurt you. So having practices like that that allow us to move through that level of fear can translate to fear or distress can translate when it it comes in real time for something that we that I know I can walk through this. Yeah. Because adrenaline is ubiquitous in stressful circumstances, which is just a bunch of science nerd speak for the stress response is always an increase in autonomic arousal or alertness, a shrinking of the visual field, an increase in heart rate, a tendency to move. People will say, "But I freeze." Actually, the freezing response, this is kind of interesting. My lab studied this. Lindsay Cle published a paper in Nature about this um in 2018. She was a graduate student in my lab. The freezing response is an active behavior. Oh yeah. Trying to hide from from an intruder in your home in the closet, you're trying not to move. So people think, oh, you know, people freeze under stress. No, the freezing response is an active response. You know, the adrenaline dump, as it's sometimes called, is is what essentially creates the freeze response. It's why people can't remember things when they get up on stage if they have a fear of public speaking. Um, and I was going to I forgot to mention in the cold plunge, cold water is a highly reliable way to elicit an adrenaline response. It's just a great training for this feels uncomfortable. I want to get out, but I'm going to learn to control my thinking in this uncomfortable circumstance. Yeah. So, that would fit into the proactive, right? So that's something that you you can proactively start to be able to manage that adrenaline as you're as you're telling me in in the body, right? You're we're able to manage those feelings cuz what does it come down to is a it's a these sensations in our body that we're experiencing that feel really uncomfortable and we might be able to sense them a little earlier, right, if we have some training. I just want to throw in one little science tidbit as long as we're talking about using cold as a way to manage um distress tolerance is that the first 15 to 20 seconds after the adrenaline response hits and it hits very fast your forebrain which is involved in all your contextual decision- making and clean clear strategies of what best to do is essentially shut down for about 20 seconds. If you can make it 20 seconds, you have a far better chance of not doing something really stupid and doing something that's very adaptive. Right now, there may be circumstances where you don't have 20 seconds. But if under stress and riding out that 20 seconds is uh generally going to be a very adaptive approach because then your forebrain comes back quote unquote online and you can really start to make strategic decisions based on those particular circumstances. And so that's what's happening when we get uh experienced some people say get triggered by something that's uh uncomfortable for us, right? uh you really uh you you get a a text message from your boss or your partner that says we need to talk later, right? A lot of people, I don't know about you, but when I get we need to talk later, it's not my favorite text in the world to get, right? So, someone might get that text and then they immediately go into like their perception or their beliefs or their kind of narrative about what that means. I'm going to be rejected. This is going to be disappointing. It's going to be really hard. And those perceptions or beliefs are coming out of their past. So now sitting there looking at a text message which is really just a a neutral it's it's all events are neutral. We bring the meaning to them and we want to bring meaning to them but it's just words on a a screen and we don't even know what it means yet. You're looking at those and you're not even in the present that more. You're in the past and we're never really out of the present. People say get present. That's the only place we live. It's what where are we oriented? past, present, or future. Right in this moment, now that I'm going into this narrative from all the other times that I was, let's say I'm making up that I'm being rejected or I'm not going to get what I want. Now, I'm oriented to the past. So, I'm we we could say I'm disoriented in that moment or to the future. You're anticipating what might be said, what's going to happen. You're out of the moment, but I would say that the anticipation is still something that's coming out of what we've experienced before, right? And then from there, we go into an automatic reaction. And it's like a fight orflight response. It might not seem like that because we don't we might not be thinking I'm going to die from this. But if you know we might be thinking I'm not going to be okay. And what is I'm not going to be okay? That gets carried out and it's triggered in the body. I would say in the same way as I'm at threat. I'm at I'm in danger. And this is where we're confusing discomfort because even if I am going to be not going to get the answer I want or I'm going to be abandoned, it's not life-threatening. It's not actually threatening. It's the it's perceived threat, but I respond to that perceived threat as if it's actual threat. And I might respond by kind of going after the person like I need to know right now, being obsessive about it. I might respond by withdrawing completely and and and hiding from it. But it it it it creates this cycle of kind of uh an automatic reaction to things that doesn't allow me to build tolerance for that that stressor. Right? The the solution to that is first be aware that that's that's happening. And once you're aware that that happens, and it happens to us all all the time. Once I recognize that I'm in this cycle below to to to find a way to stop to intervene on that to take a break from it. It might be just those 20 seconds. It might be uh something that uh it might be taking a few breaths. It might be walking away from it. Can I interject something there? Because one thing that um stemmed out of a prior conversation we had is I think you know these aspirational um responses of okay like the the stressor hits I'm going to take a I'm going to create the gap between stimulus and response that you know was it Victor Frankle or something like that referred to sounds wonderful but in real time everything's very hard everything's different and so uh you know what can we do to prepare what are the things I like this notion of proactive tools that that we can schedule. Um coal plunge being one of them. We'll talk about yoga nidra and some other things. But um but one of the things that I've learned is that there are sensations in the body that come about and it will be different for different people. But there are sensations in my body that come about very fast because the adrenaline response is fast. And the more that I pay attention to those, the more I'm able to pick up on them at at earlier stages of the the stress response. Kind of like seeing a big wave coming from further out. And the the yogis talked about this. I learned about this also from you that like to in meditation, we can start to see the quote, it's mystical language, but that like the subtle ripples of our perception. Whereas when we're going through life and we're just kind of around, it's like being on a train and we're just seeing stuff go by all the time. The concept is is stilling leads to seeing. I love that. The more that we can still the mind, the easier we can see what's actually happening versus what we perceive is happening. So what you say is so true that it is hard if the first step is to to after we recognize that this is something happening is to stop when we're in the middle of response. How do we stop? um something that I work with the people and I actually heard you talk about in a in a different way that I really appreciated in uh one of your essentials podcast where you know in that moment when we're in that reaction you know the the the the sympathetic nervous system has been activated the solution though is not to deactivate the sympathetic it's to activate the parasympathetic. So, our practices and tools that I I think are the most beneficial is how do we activate the parasympathetic? A a great question to ask ourselves once we recognize that we're in some sort of stress response. I like to tell people to ask, is am I or is anybody around me in immediate physical danger? And if the answer is no, first off, if I can ask that question, it's probably the answer is no. But most of the things that we experience every day are not life-threatening. Actually, probably the thing that we experience every day that's most life-threatening that doesn't bother most of us is driving in a car, right? I mean, we're h hurtling down the road and just trusting that someone's not going to cross over that other line. But that won't scare us. But, you know, uh uh getting someone that you're in a a committed relationship with or that you're emotionally attached to that says something you don't like might throw you into a a spiral. I mean, it speaks to the unbelievably powerful aspect of of human connection. Yeah. I mean, likewise with the earlier example of the kid in video games, we think about this kid and the video game as like the the only players in the interaction. But to take a video game away from a kid is to also remove him from his social context. We know that social isolation is one of the most um potent stressors for for any mammal, especially humans. I mean, from what I've read, and you know, tribes would basically shame someone out of it if they did something really terrible. You know, they would send them out of the tribe and that was like death. You know, they only survived together. Now we can live alone because of you know technology and human advancement but like ser like live physically alone but you know we're not at the top of the food chain really you know if we were out in the in the jungle or back when we were uh nomadic and we still have that within us that we need that connection. We need that. So we're talking about distress tolerance. we have a a an emotional weather map tool that can prepare us. There are things that are proactive like cold plunge or meditation um in the moment we can hopefully create more of a gap and and of course we were talking about this in the context of addiction but as you were saying with the behavior or the substance is the medicine against discomfort. Can you go back to that theme just a little bit to really hammer that home that when somebody comes to you initially you're saying okay like what are you using how often are you using how's this impacting your life trying to get them to see all that but once they move past that are you trying to get them to see like what they're really afraid of um let me frame this a little differently many years ago you said it's kind of incredible we're having an academic discussion and you said it's kind of incredible if we can tolerate discomfort for one second then we can tolerate ate it for 2 seconds. If we can take discomfort for 2 seconds, we can do it for 5 seconds. Once you start to realize that all you have to do is experience discomfort as a series of moments, suddenly you realize that you have an immense capacity to manage discomfort. And I was like, I sat with that for a long time. Why do you think it's so hard for us to do that? Even though in theory that's exactly how it works, I think this is where we get hijacked by the part of our nervous system that is kind of binary and looking at it's life or death. You know, if we perceive this as danger, it's going to respond as as danger. We don't want that part of the nervous system and we don't want it having discernment. We want to really when we're actually faced with, you know, I say if you and I were walking across the road here and a and a car is about to hit us and you see it, I don't want you to stop, breathe, meditate, you know, have compassion for the driver. I want you to, you know, react immediately, push me out of the way, even if we get hurt and break a leg. I want to we need to live. You know, the problem happens when I, you know, go home and I say something to my wife and she disagrees with me and I react to her like she's a car about to hit me. You know, it becomes an appropriate response at an inappropriate time. We don't want to lose that. And so it becomes so hard because we're in this kind of I believe this fight in our in our nervous system to say one part of it saying you need to act or you're not going to be okay and the other part saying I don't want to keep doing this. In your mind, you know, I know that I'm in this room or in your lab with virtual reality goggles on, but that one part of my body thinks I'm falling when really I'm watching a a video game. So maybe the best we can do is prepare. These proactive tools seem increasingly important to me. Um can we talk about yoga nidra? Um I talked about non-sleep deep rest a lot on this podcast. Yes. I decided to take yoga nidra which is a thousands of years old practice and rename it non-sleep deep rest. Um because I wanted more people to you for doing that. I mean, I I've taken some heat, but I wanted more people to do it. And I, you know, it's a zerocost tool that I think is very valuable. I learned it from you. I came I you know, I went out to uh where you work and observed that this is the first thing that people do every morning when trying to get sober. This is the first thing that people do every that you have them do every morning when they're trying to identify and overcome their traumas, including full-blown PTSD. And I don't want to share some of the stories that people shared out there, but a couple of them were very intense. I mean, when I'm talking about PTSD, I'm not talking about like had a bad semester in school. I'm talking about people who were co-sleeping with their kid and the kid died. Yeah. And it was like it was a very intense thing to to hear those stories. And it was also a beautiful thing to see people's transition through their traumas in some cases their addictions or both. And every day started with an hour of Nidra. What is it about Nidra? How did you discover Nidra? And how did this come about? Because I think it's an an extremely extremely important tool for a number of reasons, but how did you start incorporating this into trauma and addiction treatment? I was working at a place in um central Florida and near there it was a treatment center and not far from there there happened to be a a an ashram um started by a old Indian guy who had come over from India in the ' 50s or 60s he's in his 90s now and is kind of credited as one of the people to bring uh yoga to the the west one of many um uh it was the Om yoga institute and uh they um uh they were running some workshops and I ended up doing a training there that opened a door for me to start doing some other things. I I'd been practicing breath work and this was all part of my own journey and then I got introduced to to yoga nidra and um it was just a very powerful tool and in these workshops that I was in I saw some pretty amazing things happen for the people that were taking trainings. We were there um you know for I remember we were we were there for uh it was a 10-day training and you could take it as 10 days or you could take 5 days and then come back for 5 days and there was a woman who had been there for a 5day and was was coming back and when she was there at the first part she had she was a a single mom she had two boys I they were probably under 12 and she was completely stressed by them like completely stressed. She was uh could not almost handle being a mom and she practiced this. She decided to come to this training and then she went home and it was several months in between and when she came back I remember in the opening like group she shared that she'd gone home and had not changed anything. The only thing she did was practice yoga nidra uh I think twice a day in the morning and the evening and she's like my boys changed and I actually don't think the boys probably changed at all but she was someone who was filled with anxiety and and stress and the kids were picking up on that and she wasn't able to tolerate the the discomfort or distress of her children or boys just being boys. I don't even think they were really probably behaving more than you know an 8 and 10year-old does differently but she couldn't handle it and now she was able to kind of build this uh distress tolerance by practicing this meditation you know and nidra means sleep. So it's a sleep-based meditation. Yeah. Do you want to just briefly describe what it looks like? Generally what it looks like is first a person lays down and ideally they'd be laying on their back unless they they can't lay on their back but you you lay on your back and get in a very comfortable position. the it's a guided practice and one of the reasons it's guided is uh it it it's kind of becomes a technique that disappears the technique and what I mean by that is if you're sitting doing meditation and you're doing something where you have to focus on a mantra or which is not this is not an uh exclusion of that I mean people so but when you're doing that you kind of have to focus on that mantra so sometimes having to focus on something can can bring you out of it and in those practices, bringing you out of it is beneficial, too, because you want to be brought out of it and then you can find ways to get back into it. It being the the the meditative experience. So, you're you're you're laying down and there's generally um a a series of kind of I'll say physical movements. It's not like yoga doing stretching. It might be something like tensing and relaxing your muscles. It might be something like massaging your face as you're being guided through this to kind of just relax the body. And after a certain point and in a lot of the the teachings that when I do it or I've been taught there's a certain point at which all movement stops and you just want to follow the you just you're just instructed to follow the the the person's voice. In yoga nidra we or nidra we set an intention like an intention might be like I'm at peace with myself as I am and the world as it is. something like that something that you want to bring in or a state that you want to experience. I know that you distinguish I believe you distinguish non-sleep deep breaths as like yoga nidra without intention generally without intentions or mystical language. Right. It involves the um the I think the most critical part of non-sleep deep rest and yoga nidra that to me the the overlap in the ven diagram is includes um self-directed relaxation the ability to do that which of course the incorporation of long exhale breathing will facilitate that because it pushes down on that uh side of the seessaw that is the parasympathetic nervous system and really gets it engaged regardless of how stressed you are as you pointed out getting that parasympathetic nervous system that um the idea that people's mind can be active but their body is still I think is a very powerful state. You're not trying to fall asleep. So the end goal is in reach for everyone. Yep. It isn't like you're going to fall asleep. It's like actually you're going to not fall asleep. If you fall asleep it's okay. And actually sometimes people think they're asleep but when I'm guiding them and I'll I'll give a direction like you know to roll over on their right on their side at the end and they do it but they thought they were asleep. So they were where they what we believe is happening in that is they're in the the the brain states of sleep while still being awake once they're in that relaxed space after doing some movement in the beginning or the space to be relaxed and still I should say still versus relaxed still physically um is through breath different breath exercises specifically ones that have long exhales right that's like you said it activates the parasympathetic nervous system and and guiding them through their body in some way. So it might be there's one called 61 points where you identify all these different points in the body starting with the the forehead down to the pit of the throat and then at all different parts from your shoulder down to your fingers and then all the way down to your toes. And people being able to kind of move their awareness in their body kind of gets them away from that thinking and doing into the more feeling and being. They're putting their awareness on their body rather than everything external. One of the great strengths of doing nidra or NSDR as it were is that we take ourselves out of the prediction mode and we can experience life unfold in in real time moments. It sounds so mystical but actually it was Josh Weightskin who was on this podcast the the former chess prodigy um martial arts champion etc. on the Joe Rogan podcast he said something that I wanted to share with you which felt appropriate now which was he said there are two ways to go through life. One is metaphorically speaking as a passenger in the dining car on a train that's going 80 miles hour and you're experiencing what's in that train and you're seeing things go by. That's the non-concious lower way to experience life. Lesser way to experience life. Where you want to be is strapped to the front of that train safely experiencing space and time as they're happening, flowing by you and through you as a series of moments. And I really think I credit Nidra and NSDR with an ability to see life unfold as an observer and still have the ability to participate. So you're not like dissociated. You're not stepped back. You're not ahead of yourself. You're like right where you need to be, right? Does that capture it? I believe so. I might take that the train example a little bit different direction where I always will say it's like you know you're either on the back of the bus and you're being driven around or you're driving the bus. You know, it's not that you're just on, and he may not have been saying this, but just not on these rails experiencing it like this, that you have uh control, autonomy, and have the ability to be authentic. And authentic in a way, not authenticity gets kind of thrown around and people like, I just I just am who I am. Well, most times when people are doing that, they're just acting however they're feeling in the moment. They're not who they are. They're who they were or they're, you know, they're they're acting out their past experiences. Authenticity in the way that I'm talking is more like uh like off is the same in author, right? It's like authorship that you become the author of your life. You know that you're able to write the story going forward because a lot of what we're doing before that is just plagiarizing from our past, stuck in the cycles of our uh kind of programmed reactive patterns that came out of the ways that we were shaped. and things like nidra where we can start to activate the parasympathetic nervous system again distinct from deactivating the sympathetic and be able to pause and be able to look at kind of choice you know in that cycle I was talking about earlier where we're being reactive the first thing is to stop well how do we stop it's by building these these abilities to have this distress tolerance even if it's for a few seconds and take a moment to be able to get present And look, and what I mean by that is get look look at what's actually happening. This isn't every time someone sent me a text message and uh or every time someone's ever abandoned me or disappointed me or every time I've been afraid. It's just this one moment where I get a text that says we need to talk later. And from that now that can break the cycle enough that I instead of automatic reaction, I'm in choice and I'm making a choice out of kind of all options of how I'm going to handle this. Now, it might still mean that I go, "Could we talk about it now?" in a text response, but that would be very distinct from kind of sending 20 text messages in rapid ree succession saying, "What do you need? Why are you doing this? Am I in trouble?" You know, whatever it is we're saying, but you've been able to to to move to the front of the bus and now you're driving it, right? you're moving kind of out of um uh you're being at instead of being at the effect of life, you're being at at cause. I feel like most people learn how to control their body, but most people don't know how to control their mind. Meaning they don't know how to control their thinking. Yeah. And there's a a great line in a Indian text. It's called the uh atmaagita I think it is where it says something like the the the end of the is is it's like man thinks his enemy is out there but really his unc the man's uncontrolled mind is his only true foe. I don't know if we need to garner complete control over the mind. I think the way to do that is to be able to kind of find ways to relax back from what the mind is doing and saying and the you know like you said ignoring the thoughts between two and five. You know I I think there's a lot of thoughts that we have that we can ignore. you know, our thoughts are not fact. It's this input or that I'm getting. And we tend to grab on to the thoughts that I think that we've had before that have helped us survive situations even if the way that we've survived those situations is to cause destruction. You know, we know how to live. You know, example would be someone who's in an abusive relationship again and again, right? That person, I've never met that person uh that said, "I can't wait to get in the next relationship." ship. So, it's abusive. You know, it could be a man or a woman. In this case, let's say it's a woman. You know, maybe the only men that she was around growing up were controlling or abusive. And she had some experiences with men who were very similar. And then that's the environment or the waters that she started to swim in. She knows how to survive that kind of man or if you're a man, that kind of woman. And when they they would find even if they want that relationship that's loving, caring, kind, and patient, no conflict or not that type of conflict. Even though they want that, when they get into it, it doesn't make sense because they've never done it before. They're still going to be potentially relating to that person with these past reactive patterns. You know, I always say this when my wife and I have, you know, if you're in a relation, I we have a great marriage and great marriage also includes disagreement and argument, right? It also includes love and connection and all of that stuff. And when we're in an argument, it's almost like I'm not talking to her and she's not talking to me. It's like my past is talking to her past and her past is talking to my past. When we can stop and get out of that cycle for just a moment, then we can make a choice that will move us toward the direction that we want to move. And that choice can seem risky because if we haven't done it before, it it goes against every or let's say that that choice might go against everything that we've developed in order to survive the situations that we've come out of. So now instead of arguing I'm going to be vulnerable, that's going to feel very scary. Yeah, Lori Gotautlib, a psychologist, was on this podcast and saying, and I totally subscribe to this, that people are more willing to stay in a bad situation often. Um, something that's not adaptive for them because it's familiar versus stepping into something that could be better for them. Yeah. Clearly better for them. And they can understand that cognitively, but they somehow cling to what's familiar. They I think that's just the way our nervous system is wired. Like you said, you know, staying in the battles, repeating the battles that are familiar to us that we know how to win. We just instead of authoring something new, we're plagiarizing from our past just again and again. Yeah, I love that phrase plagiarizing from the past even though it's something to avoid. How often should people do nidra at or where NSDR and at when what time of day? Um I think I think I've told you this before, right? The first probably the best time is to do something in the morning and in the late afternoon. Uh second best time would be in the evening and third best time would be anytime you you can. So it it's not easy, you know, it could be anywhere from 20 to 35 minutes, right? So it's not easy for people to find that based on uh find that time based on the schedules they have, but you know, set a set a time that you're going to do it. You know, when we schedule and have proactive tools, we don't know if we're going to need them in that moment. What it means is regardless of whether I need it or not, I'm going to do it. You know, it's kind of like I tell people with therapy all in about therapy and coaching all the time. Uh if the second best time to get therapy is when you're in crisis. The best time is when you're not. That's when you can we can grow. So scheduling proactively will allow us to either um maybe solve a crisis that we're in or help us have the tolerance in that moment. like I wake up stressed and I'm able to then do this this practice and then I'm not stressed or I wake up not stressed and I'm able to do this and it helps to build the ability for me to kind of drop back into that state because that's what I I I think as we practice things like yoga nidra um we're able to more quickly move from a disregulated state to a regulated state. I I don't know if you've had that experience. Definitely. I think of um stress and alertness and calm, all of it as the autonomic nervous system, right? Parasympathetic being calm, calmer states, sympathetic being more activated states. Um and I think of it like a seessaw. And I think, you know, when we're asleep, we're mostly parasympathetic. When we're very stressed, we're mostly mostly symp. So, it's the balance. And but the way I think about things like nidra is as a person on that seessaw you're you are that person and you're learning to press on one side and when you're stressed the hinge of that seessaw is very tight. So it's hard to activate the person that much more than when like you come out of sleep you're still a little bit relaxed perhaps um and then it's easier to push on that. So you might find that learning nidra is easier then. Um there's always value to to uh learning how to work both sides of the seessaw. And actually sometimes we need to know how to ramp up the level of stress as in the case with the coal plunge. We're deliberately activating the sympathetic nervous system and we're saying aha but I'm doing it as this kind of person surfing on the seessaw and so I know how to balance here so that when I'm there again I recognize this place you know. Uh so that's kind of how I think about it. Yeah. And and and also I have found in practicing you're going to draw your non-sleep deep breaths that it makes other practices easier that like when I want to do a five minute meditation you know and one of the things that I I I think is super valuable for people is to to set aside you know proactively schedule these times that you're going to do longer periods of of rest or of practice but also recognize that you don't you know there might be things that you can do for a minute or two minutes. So, this is what Pavl Satsulin, who is a, you know, world-class strength coach, who was on this podcast, talks about greasing the groove. You know, you want to get good at pull-ups, do two pull-ups every time you walk through the doorway from a pull-up bar. I I think metaphorically speaking, the, you know, like the workout in the gym, people think of that as the end point, but actually, you know, we used to do physical labor as a species, right? So, I look at the workout in the gym as the ability to lift boxes on moving day, to move furniture without getting hurt. I love going to the gym, but it's not an end in of itself. Same thing like a long run is the ability to go hiking with friends without having to train for it and not worrying about, you know, gassing out half, you know, halfway through. So, I think that these practices are preparation for real life stress. They're the gym for your mind. They're the gym for your mind. And we don't talk enough about emotional fitness and the world is clearly metabolically ill with obesity, diabetes, etc. But we are also dealing with a massive mental health crisis that I do believe stems primarily from an inability to regulate this autonomic nervous system thing because we can say well sleep's the foundation of mental health which it is and physical health a lot of people have trouble sleeping how to get better at sleeping get better at relaxing how to get better at relaxing yoga nidra and SDR and then you know so I feel like the tools exist and I'm so grateful that you pointed me in the directions of these tools and it can be very simple you know one of The teachers used to say that the the the breath is the mind made visible and if you want to change your mind change your breath I mean of course do a yoga nidra it might take 30 minutes right but if you're in in a moment where you're feeling really activated change your breath specifically like a long deep a long exhale I love that breath is the mind made visible it's beautiful uh and and so true that was desai I should give him credit okay wonderful it's the quickest way to to move us to to to create an activation of the of the parasympic nervous system quickest way you know and it this is where uh you know people will think meditation is so hard breath work which there's many different forms of breath work are are hard which they can be I I suppose you know hard in in the way that we've got to find the time and it can be uncomfortable but it you know I'll tell people take a minute and breathe and if you if even a minute sounds long take seven breaths. Like, who can't take seven breaths at any point in the day? You're going to do it anyway, right? We never aren't breathing. But if we can bring our attention to that and you can schedule that like, you know, I'm going to do that before I get out of the car to go to the office. I'm going to do it before I go to lunch, after a meeting, before a meeting. Or you can just say anytime that I'm feeling like this, I can I can take seven breaths. It might be end up being two minutes like a TV commercial. And those things add up and they they build on each other. And the more that we practice those, the more that we do raise that capacity to experience distress. First, it helps us activate that part of the system and teaches us like a like a like your analogy in the gym, but we also start building a habit around doing something like this so that we can weather whatever storm's coming and we start to orient toward it. I'd like to take a brief break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Waking Up. Waking Up is a meditation app that offers hundreds of guided meditation programs, mindfulness trainings, yoga nidra sessions, and more. I started practicing meditation when I was about 15 years old. And it made a profound impact on my life. And by now, there are thousands of quality peer-reviewed studies that emphasize how useful mindfulness meditation can be for improving our focus, managing stress and anxiety, improving our mood, and much more. In recent years, I started using the Waking Up app for my meditations because I find it to be a terrific resource for allowing me to really be consistent with my meditation practice. Many people start a meditation practice and experience some benefits, but many people also have challenges keeping up with that practice. What I and so many other people love about the Waking Up app is that it has a lot of different meditations to choose from. And those meditations are of different durations. So, it makes it very easy to keep up with your meditation practice, both from the perspective of novelty. You never get tired of those meditations. There's always something new to explore and to learn about yourself and about the effectiveness of meditation. And you can always fit meditation into your schedule even if you only have two or three minutes per day in which to meditate. I also really like doing yoga nidra or what is sometimes called non-sleep deep rest for about 10 or 20 minutes because it is a great way to restore mental and physical vigor without the tiredness that some people experience when they wake up from a conventional nap. If you'd like to try the Waking Up app, please go to wakingup.com/huberman where you can access a free 30-day trial. Again, that's wakingup.com/huberman to access a free 30-day trial. People are probably starting to realize that overcoming addiction is about more than just white knuckling it. It's about more than just going to meetings, although that can be very useful. It's about having a road map of the day, having a plan, knowing what weather patterns to look out for internally and externally. It's about having a way to deal with distress, having a way to calm down. Let's talk a little bit more about specific addictions. Maybe I'll mention a couple different categories of addiction and maybe you could reflect on some of the unique features of that in your experience. not necessarily neurobiologically but in terms of strategies for confronting in oneself that those things right like strategies for trying to overcome the because I hear from thousands of people really about different uh addictions in themselves and and people close to them so um let's start with alcohol um what what is unique about alcohol addiction that uh people should know and this doesn't these don't these could be extensive answers they don't have to be, but that that could be helpful to them. You know, alcohol is a is an interesting one. A lot I think alcohol and and most drugs have a lot of similarities. Um although alcohol tends to be the one that is the most like socially acceptable. I mean, drinking is part of our culture, you know, and if you don't do it, you you catch some flak sometimes. Oh, yeah. I mean, I think some of that's been changing and some of it thanks to you. I mean, I can't tell you how many people that have ended up I've ended up talking to because they listen to your podcast on alcohol, you know, um, just from a health standpoint. So, people are starting to look at that. It's it's become, you know, it's less like the Mad Men 50s people drinking at at lunch, but it's still very much part of the culture and everything. H happy hour, happy day, you know? I mean, look at the You ever been to one of these retirement communities like in where people are retired and just drinking all the time or Oh, yeah. There's a a real stigma to not being able to drink for people. You know, I I I you know, I don't mind sharing. I've I've been sober for quite some time. And that was a that was a challenging thing. Like the first wedding I went to or the first uh you know, work event that I went to, I didn't know how to talk about it with people. Now I it it's no big deal. I don't it doesn't bother me at all. Um and if it does, you know, sometimes I don't like to be around people who are just getting wasted, but I you know, so I'll leave the wedding at 10:00 instead of two. You know, most of the people thought I was there till 2, but I I left it I left at 10:00 cuz they're they're doing whatever they're doing. But um it it's it's very challenging cuz you know having a glass of wine at dinner or uh you know a beer after work or you know thinking about you know people there's like a it was always a thing like the first time a dad and a son share the share a beer like there's a lot of romanticizing around it and I alcohol I don't I don't I don't think alcohol is evil. I mean, I think listening to what you've talked about it, it is poison, but I I don't like anything else in moderation, I don't think it's going to it's it's a terrible problem. I'm not anti-alcohol, but you know, what is it what is it doing to you and what are you using it for? Um I so I I think what the good side of that being part of the culture is when people can find a community like a 12step community or some other sort of peer community where people aren't drinking it can you know that is really what helps them a lot. You know they're not alone in this. And you know I think the movies and TV do a a a terrible job representing what 12step meetings are like. You know, it's usually like they show a circle in a church basement and everybody's talking about how they can't drink that day. Um, I'm sure you've seen that in television, right? And in in reality, of course, that happens sometimes, but most people are there really trying to use their that program as a design for living and to build really amazing lives. When you look at the 12 steps, when it comes to alcohol, alcohol is only mentioned in the first one. Everything else is about how you live your life. You know that first step is about admitting we were powerless and that our lives have become unmanageable. And powerlessness is actually an an awesome concept. I mean people will look at powerlessness and think that means I'm weak. That means I I I can't control my life. But really defining where you're powerless is is is the first step in finding great power. Because if I'm if I just keep going out every day and I start fighting a battle that I'm going to lose every single day, and even if it was an addiction, like every day I just go out and I am am, you know, taking on the the five biggest guys on the block when I'm a kid, right? I'm going to lose that every day. I'm not going to start winning until I realize I can't beat them in the way that I'm doing it. So, go do something else. You know, powerless. When we identify where we're powerless, then we can go find great power. And that's where the the concept of higher power comes in. And higher power to a lot of people is God and whatever their concept of it. Sometimes higher power is just the group of people and the community. You know, I I will see that anywhere from the relationship with God to like me and you talking is a is a higher power. Two heads are better than one. You know, I'm going to be able to reflect to you and you're going to be able to reflect back. I'm going to share with you and you can reflect back to me and help me see things differently and shift a perspective because a lot of our healing is just a perception change. Like I'm just going to see things a little bit differently than I did before. So that community and the ability for them to be in service to each other and help each other is is a I think that's the antithesis of I'm part of this drinking culture and and I that's not only unique to alcohol, but because there's such that you know there's not usually like a socially acceptable like you don't see crack advertised on television, right? You see alcohol and it's in it's in everything. Now, we do see gambling in on television quite a bit, which is incredible. Let's talk about gambling. I I like the way, by the way, that you frame um uh alcohol. It's being offered to us all the time after a certain age. And uh so it, you know, it's it's a challenging one for people that uh are challenged with alcohol addiction or alcohol use disorder. Um and 12step, I think, is right. It's free. It's in every city. It's um powerful um program certainly that there are data I should just mention this you know I think people will hear oh it's a cult etc uh there was a study actually that run at Stanford um some years ago we'll provide a link to the coverage of that study and the study which took a very objective look at 12step for the treatment of alcoholism and other uh substance uh addictions um and actually the investigators the people that ran the study were very skeptical going into And um the the results were pretty remarkable and they they they changed their uh initial perception coming out of it that it can be very very effective for people especially given that it's you know you can do it when you travel you go to meetings in other cities and as you mentioned it's it's not uh it's not the depressing picture that people think of a bunch of people whose lives are destitute in a basement. Sometimes people are coming in with some hard stuff but um there's often a lot of humor. There's a lot of common challenge that it's it's very it's very um there's a there's a lightness there that might a lot of people might not anticipate. People taking on life, not hiding from it. Yeah. Love that. Um gambling, not everybody that gamblings has a gambling problem just like everything else. Um but when it does become problematic, it's a it's a very challenging disorder to treat. I mean, it's uh I I don't know where the study came out of, but at one point I had seen some research that said uh that the highest rates of suicide were among gambling addicts. And what I've seen with that is it's like the their whole world starts to get really small. Um you know, it's weird because in the way that I look at it, it's it's really the only addiction if it's an addiction for that person, right? Not everybody that gambles is gamb. But the ones that are addicted, it seems to me to be the only addiction that the next hit can solve all your problems. So you're down $300,000, you could bet that and win it. I don't think anybody thinks like really thinks I mean in the moment they're probably out of their mind, but they don't think, you know, if I shoot this next if I take if I if I shoot heroin, my life is going to get better in the long run. They might be thinking it's going to get better right now because I'm not going to get sick. I'm going to feel good or whatever it is for them. But they don't they're not thinking that this is going to solve their problems. They know it's not. And so it it it it fortifies what you were talking we were talking about before is continuing to go after the hot fudge Sunday except they can they can get it, you know. And it's interesting because I've talked to different people and sometimes that the hit isn't in the winning, sometimes the hit is in the losing for them really. I've had people tell me that. I don't I don't really understand that, but I I think then they have to go back after it again. I mean, I I believe them, you know, they're the ones suffering from it, but wow. And, you know, it's becoming a real problem with kids. You know, there's a lot of sites to gamble on now. Um, you know, a lot of they can bet on a lot of crypto sites. You can bet on anything. There's and kids are playing in these online casinos that are probably operated overseas that are not regulated at all. And you know, casinos that are regulated become very wealthy, winning on a very small margin. I'm sure these casinos don't ever lose, right? They're making it up. Um, it's in our face all the time. It was uh I was reading Willie Mays died recently as a baseball player um San Francisco Giant uh before we were around. But he uh was banned from baseball for life. I think they ended up letting him back in because he took a contract from I think it was BS. He wasn't betting on sports. So this is in the 80s. He took a contract because he would go there and meet with their uh high rollers once a year for like a week just play golf with them, hang out with them. It wasn't he wasn't betting on baseball and he got banned from baseball. Now you watch a baseball game or go to a baseball stadium and different betting sites are uh different betting sites are mentioned all over the place. You watch any sporting event and it's it's out there and and that's not the only thing people are gambling on, but I don't know if you watch sports right now with the basketball on or you know the Super Bowl was on. I mean it it showing people with a phone showing that they're winning, you know, hundred there's a celebrity on there winning $186,000 I think the number was, you know, and then couple that with kids that are pretty susceptible already looking at those unicorn type people that are making millions on YouTube playing video games or poker players. Yeah, professional poker players or even ones that aren't gambling that, you know, they're out there and they became a a creator and they're making millions of dollars a year by having people follow them like that this this there's a way to make a you know that their significance is going to come from making a lot of money really fast, you know, and then they see this way to do it without having to work or anything like that and it's it's rigged to lose. I mean, they're they're going to lose. Dopamine without effort. Yeah, that's the danger. I was, you know, I've said it many times on this podcast elsewhere, too. It's like any high rapid inflection in dopamine that doesn't require effort. Aside from being a kid and your parents get you an ice cream or it's your birthday, all you were all you did is you were born. It's and to get those presents and you deserve that. It's your birthday. Great. But in life, like dopamine that doesn't require effort to obtain is um is the slipperiest slope. Yeah. And the gambling is not for the kids. Isn't just and and adults, but it's not just on betting on like what we think we might traditionally think of betting on a sporting event or something like that. It's, you know, we see it in cryptocurrencies. Not that cryp this is nothing against cryptocurrencies, but people going into it without any knowledge or any sort of sophistication and just putting all their money in it and you know up and down. We see it, we see more sophisticated people doing it as as as adults on uh in real estate investments or stock market stock market or owners of company taking big bets on things and and it doesn't mean that there's aren't people that are taking calculated risks. I'm talking about people who are like day trading when they you know and there are people that day trade and do great but then there's a lot of people that see this person day traded in great and then they they do it and don't do so great right it it their their lives collapse. So, are you seeing more people coming to you with gambling addiction? Yes. Um, it's not always then the primary thing though. There's a lot of people that are uh coming in with substance abuse or substance use or alcohol, you know, alcoholism and we find out that they're also doing that. The thing is people addicted to gambling aren't always seeking treatment. You know, by the time that they are ready to, they might not have the money for it. you know, they might not have the job with the insurance and and you know, if we are talking about insurance and treatment centers, there's not really a a benefit for long-term gambling treatment. You know, you have to kind of look at the anxiety and depression around it. And sometimes they get put in with people who are just who are suffering from anxiety and depression and we're not really focusing on the specific gambling issue. We also see people that, you know, they stop drinking and they're able to stay sober that way and they haven't really organized and ordered their life in a way that they're building towards something and that energy from the addiction of alcohol or drugs goes to gambling. Yeah, I was going to ask you about that. Uh we'll talk about a few other um patterns of addiction and types types of addiction, excuse me. Um, but this idea that when you remove the quote unquote medicine, there's a lot of distress and discomfort that comes up for people. And some people are able to white knuckle it as it's called. Um, some people can develop tools to try and work with that distress, become more distress tolerant. Um, some people will transmute distress sometimes. Yeah, it goes into running ultramarathons, which doesn't necessarily mean that it's an addiction, but um I've seen and we know some people who uh got sober and stayed sober basically by running a lot. Yeah. A lot. A lot. You know, do you think that that increased like V2 max allows for ability to handle distress better? Sure. I think that running can calm the mind over time. runners who run a lot, most of them are pretty tired or a little bit tired, right? Um, and maybe that's part of the solution. You know, if you have a dog that needs a lot of physical movement, you put into a small space and it doesn't get that a chance to run around. I mean, you see this in zoos and animals develop these what called stereotopies like you see the lion that's cutting a literally a trench in the dirt. It's really sad to see. you know, that animal is designed to roam. And you give an animal the opportunity to expend this energy that's stored up in its mitochondria and and it and it does and it can relax and it can sleep. I mean, they still have to do the work of getting sober. Um, these people, but you know, moving your body through space is a way of of of transmuting energy out of the body. So, you come home, you're like relax, you eat a meal, it's like there's a calming effect to endurance activities. For me, nothing changes my mind, my mood and nervous system better than even a 20-minute run. I I mean, I think they're also getting the benefits if you're walking or running, you're getting the benefits or similar benefits to what people get from EMDR. I mean, just the natural movements of the eye. In fact, EMDR, which is eye movement desensitization and reprocessing was the woman who discovered it discovered it by going for a walk and realizing when she put uh something that she was distressed by in her mind at the end of the walk, she felt better. Yeah. Francine Shapiro. She was in Palo Alto walking behind Stanford when she made that discovery. There's a um as long as we're talking about this, it's funny that this is coming up because I online behavior, gambling, um looking for somebody to get drugs from, you know, those are the foraging is where the dopamine is released. We were talking about this earlier and foraging mentally is the same from the perspective of the dopamine system as foraging physically through space. Think about what the dopamine system evolved for. It's like any animal, including us, searching for water, searching for food, searching for mates. We rest at night, but it's the it's the movement forward through space that satisfies that dopamineergic system. And in fact, the the major I don't want to go off on too much of a tangent here, but the the major system for movement in the body, not just reward and motivation, is dopamine. That's why people with Parkinson's lose dopamineergic neurons and they they can't generate smooth behavior anymore. And it's interesting that NIDRA and NSDR, the most impressive study in my mind, is the one that shows these big increases in dopamine from resting. So I feel like physical movement 65% increase in indogenous dopamine or something like that. It's incredible. There's something about still still body active mind that ramps up our dopamine stores and then prepares us for Does a dopamine store get ramped up when we're sleeping? Yes. So I mean I think that's the I mean the yog anecdotally they'll say that you know a 30 minute yoga nidra is equal to about 3 hours of REM sleep. I don't know that that's true or not but it's hard to equate. Yeah, of course. But I'm just saying anecdotally, you know, but it makes sense. And I think, yeah, there's some there's some truth to that basic statement or basic truth to that statement. I think that transmuting just the energy that would otherwise become distress or that starts as distress. Like when we're stressed, we need to get that out of our body. And I think that um drugs like cocaine and amphetamine, big increases in dopamine, then crashes, you're essentially dispelling the energy. I'm not so sure that it's always about pursuit. That that that's kind of like you said, it's like the the gambling addict that actually wants to lose. They want to lose, but they they recognize that they felt that that was the that was the hit or they felt one there. They I'm sure they felt it when they won as well. But well, when you're really low, the only place you can go up go from there is up. You know, when you're really high, the only place you can go from there is down. Yeah. This is so important because I I think you know what is discomfort? What is the distress we're experiencing? It's not our thoughts. We don't feel our thoughts. We feel our feelings. They call them feelings, right? Because we feel them. What are we feeling? We're feeling some sort of sensation in our body. Yeah. It's energy. It's energy, which is energy. And and when we're feeling that energy in an appropriate situation, like I'm feeling uh intense adrenaline and excitement when I'm going on a roller coaster that I like, you know, and I'll pay and money and stand in line to do that. If you wake up on a Tuesday morning in your bed and you start feeling that it's anxiety, fear, desperation, you know, it's still just energy in our body. And everybody will experience things differently. I could probably ask you because you've got insight, you know, if you're experiencing anger, where it is. If somebody asks me, you know, I can experience that in a hot belly, like heat between my eyes. My my shoulders feel really tense. You know, if I'm if I'm scared, where do I feel that? You know, I I feel like an emptiness in my stomach and a kind of tension in my body. You know, people can name it. And sometimes just naming it, you know, what it is versus kind of running through like I'm anxious, I'm afraid. Instead of saying I'm anxious or afraid, being able to go, well, my heart's racing, I'm feeling uh tension in my shoulders. Talking about the experience. And the goal isn't always just to dissipate it, but we can be with it. Because the the idea that I'm anxious and I can't get out of it then causes more anxiety. That's right. And so these practices that we can anything that we can build where we just kind of lean into the discomfort a little bit and then lean out, we start to build capacity. We pendulate through kind of activation and resource until we we have we have a larger range of motion. What about, and I'll bundle these, things that really hit the dopamine system hard, like in your observation, cocaine, empetamine being the the most salient ones, aderall, and other stimulants. Is there something unique to those addictions that you see in people that come in that give them kind of special requirements for how to overcome those addictions? Yeah, I mean, it's interesting. I think in the um up until sometime in the 80s, and I'm not going to have this right, they didn't even I think they didn't really see cocaine as addictive because it it you didn't become dependent on it like you would heroin or alcohol. Yeah. Somebody wrote a book called I think it was it Dr. Gold 1800 cocaine where they were starting to see that we could classify addiction as a psychological addiction. I might have that a little bit off, but I I I think it's somewhere in that in that neighborhood. There there's not a a physical detox from stimulants like amphetamines or uh uh cocaine like there is from heroin, opioids or alcohol and bzzoazipines. Coming off stimulants is really hard. It's really hard. It's really hard, right? But it's there's a obsession of the mind that gets triggered and it's this it's this psychological uh addiction that they can't seem to get out of. I would imagine that you could probably describe it what's happening with the huge surge in dopamine and then dropping off of it. I'm I'm not sure exactly where it falls in that, but you know there's uh they used to think that people couldn't you know recover from crack cocaine. That's what we were told. You do it once and you're addicted. I don't want to say that's not true, but there was no real evidence for that. It's just smoking crack aside from shooting cocaine like in introvenously leads to the fastest increase in dopamine. It's the rate of increase is just as important as the peak, right? In working with those. I mean, there's a lot of uh energy that goes into just having them kind of still. I mean, I think a lot of, you know, uh, stimulants kind of ma I I see it as they they help the physical body kind of match with the internal state of the of the nervous system. I mean, I think that's one of the reasons we see stimulants work for ADHD. I mean, you you probably understand the biological reasons, but it seems to me that it kind of levels out their experience. I mean, I I've seen people that that when they take stimulants, they get really calm. Yeah. Having a mismatch between your brain level of activity and your bodily level of activity is really rough. So, let's talk about some process addictions. Uh, these days I hear a ton of really um desperate stories, mostly from young guys. I've heard from maybe four or five women on this, but literally thousands of young men about porn addiction. Every time I hear about it, I feel so fortunate that I grew up in a time where or maybe I just don't have the the wiring for it. And if I did, I I would be I'm pretty open on this podcast. I I it's never been an issue for me. Um and they're telling me that they can't stop watching porn. I get the sense that they're not enjoying this experience anymore because they're reaching out to me saying, "How in the world can I quit?" And what do I tell them? I remember, and again, I don't know this study, but I remember uh somebody referencing many years ago when I was first getting in the field that porn addiction at the time, specifically related to um video pornography, which is what it all is now, right? Um it was having the same impact on the brain and young men as crack cocaine. I mean, it's extremely powerful. has a lot of other effects in that it sets up a very unrealistic idea and perspective of what sex and intimacy is. You know, it also uh can help uh or can lead to kind of setting their sexual template. You know, they can quickly escalate just like you would escalate. you kind of back to the the um uh hot fudge Sunday where it doesn't work anymore from you know something that might seem like normal sex to violent sex to really out there things that um can bring a lot of shame that they're even watching and it can escalate quickly and then have an impact on their own lives and relationships because they're playing out those relationships or that amount of intimacy intimacy depending on what are doing also if there's masturbation along with it in in a fantasy. Well, what I'm also hearing is that anytime they are in a real life intimate scenario, which seems to be fewer and fewer times nowadays in the younger generation, that they're having sexual uh anxiety, sexual performance issues, which makes sense if they're if their brain and nervous system is getting wired by porn to observe sexual behavior as opposed to being in the experience of of of intimate sex behavior, right? two different things to be in the experience versus watching someone else's experience of it which is what pornography is. Yeah. This was probably 10, 15 years ago where we were treating some but we treating a lot of soldiers that had come back from Afghanistan or Iraq and you know they had access this was like the first wars where they had access to the internet and there's a lot of other things. So there was a lot of uh kind of uh combining of sex and violence, right? they're around a lot of violence and then they're watching sex and then that kind of sexual template would set around like in order for them to get pleasure out of sex it would need to be aggressive or even even violent um or risk very risky you know so there's all these things that kind of collapse together there were other things going on was like the first time that they had also really had access to video uh uh video chats to be able to like be on a battlefield and then come back and be talking to their spouse house about something that's going on with the kids. It was very confusing in environment for uh those guys and men and women. Um you know the the porn addiction is a is a tough one you know because it it's everywhere. I mean now you can find it on any social media almost not maybe not anyone but it's not really limited you know and and even if it's not you know I know certain states have just put in where you have to put in your ID to get it but there's tons of ways around that and other sites that that people can go to and I've run into that with a lot of it does seem to be young men you know and it's a way for them to play out some sort of fantasy around connection and relationship and it's it makes their world really small. I don't think it's the same as gambling, but it can make it it can make their world very very small in that they're instead of finding relationships out in the world. And it's not necessarily a relationship, but they're what they believe they're getting out of a relationship, they're then getting out of watching porn. It seems like basically stopping completely is the answer. And people say, and I'm not trying to moralize here, right? I'm not telling people what's moral about this. I just know that any behavior or substance that leads to quick repeated inflections in dopamine is going to create a groove in the nervous system where you're going to crave that thing and it's going to give you a lower and lower sense of satisfaction over time. And the only way to reset that circuit is to stop and do something else in its place. Ideally, that's adaptive. These are people that are asking you how they can stop. You know, they're telling you, I can't stop. how do I do it? So, it can be similar to other addictions, you know, I mean, first the admission part that it's a problem or awareness it is and then being able to start to to talk to somebody and start to take some accountability around it. Not accountability like you're doing something wrong, but to be able to have some sort of identify the behaviors that start leading to that. You know, I mean, there uh that can be done in therapy. There's other 12step groups that can help people with that to identify what their sobriety would look like, if you want to call it sobriety, what it looks like. And if it does involve not watching any porn, then that's the rule set that they have. And then they figure out either with their therapist or in their treatment center or with their sponsor or community in 12step like how am I going to be held accountable to that? And that might be doing the things like we talked about laying out looking at your your day ahead. at at the beginning they might need to look at things like you know uh there's ways and software out there to not be able to look at that on your phone or have an accountability partner that can you know you have to they have to approve websites you go to and and that that that's not to say that they have to do that forever but it's something that's available right you know 50 years ago or 30 years ago someone had to like find their dad's porno mag somewhere and then look at it you know now it's on their phones or computers well we know that accessibil increasing accessibility increases addiction. Right? This has been studied over and over again and people say what about red light districts and things and there's some caveats that have to do with when you uh create areas within cities where certain things are allowed but you know this has been tested many many times. Um it's also true and it's kind of a duh but to quote on ampki it's impossible to get addicted to a substance or a behavior that you've never taken or engaged in. Right. So some things are best avoided entirely. Um, are there specific 12step programs for porn addiction that are separate from say sex addiction? If you people look it up, I'm sure there's meetings out there that that are specific to that. There are um some treatment centers that have tracks that deal specifically with that. There's therapists that work very closely with that. And I I believe that there are some 12step I mean there's pretty much 12step programs for any sort of you know within things like SA or SLA there'll be subsets of meetings for people that are with a very specific condition. And one of the reasons I wanted to discuss this today is because I hear about it so much is unlike alcohol or drugs, there's a a kind of extra layer of shame associated with with pornography addiction for people. Um, you know, so many times we've heard, oh, like this celebrity was a alcoholic or drug addict, you know, wrapped their car around a pole, was arrested, this and that, then they get sober and everyone still loves them loves them more, right? If we knew that a given celebrity was like a porn porn addict or something, we look at that person differently. Yeah. Especially if they're male, we just look at them differently. And so reducing some of the shame around it, I think, is key to to helping them recover because I can tell you there's the the questions initially came in kind of like as is often the case with with men when they're trying to talk about issues that they were kind of cloaked in like what are your thoughts about nofap, which is this thing where guys um withhold ejaculation, okay? Does it increase testosterone? Turns out in the short run it does, in the long term it's probably not good for the prostate, etc. But then what it turned out they were really asking about masturbation. they were really asking about pornography and then all of a sudden I don't know what changed out there but there's been this deluge of of questions from young guys of how they can stop engaging in online porn. A key to that is what you said about we look at them differently. You know, they're going to keep it secret, you know, and there's a saying secrets keep us sick, but I believe there's like a real almost a biology to that. And that, you know, if you're holding it in, not sharing it, you know, there's no really place for it to go but shame. And shame separates us. And separate, we're not connected. And not connected, we're alone. And alone, we're, you know, we keep carrying that forward. Alone, we're dead. You know, maybe not in that sense anymore, like we talked about earlier, but like we're not really living. And so they're, you know, these guys are hearing you on a podcast and then DMing you, right? They're probably not in a personal close relationship with you, right? it's it's easier to send it there than maybe go ask for help with somebody in their area or go to a meeting or something like that because of the the stigma. So, it's good that you've opened up the ability for people to do that, but to continue to direct them back to, you know, let's try to treat this like we would any other addiction at least from the standpoint of you've got to talk about it. You've got to have some sort of admission. You've got to be able to find a community around it. You want to be able to do work, you know, most likely with a therapist or a team of therapists that can help you understand what's driving that behavior, you know, and I I, you know, you and I have had long discussions about trauma before. That's something I've I've I've worked with for many years or most of my career as I came into being a therapist. Um, you know, and in trauma therapy, we're often going back to seeing like find we do a history and really kind of understand where the patterns started, you know, and I it's really helpful, you know, for me as a therapist when I can see where it is because I can start making sense of how people are behaving this way as adults when I can see all of the experiences they had and especially the the the more negative impactful ones which tend to impact the brain. Like you always say, fastest way to plasticity is through a traumatic event. Um I believe that's how you say one trial learning. It just takes once unfortunately. But luckily there's plasticity in the other direction. It just takes a little bit longer, right? I think that's where addiction comes in too because you know you can kind of feel a sense of plasticity, you know, if I'm if I'm drinking or if I'm doing drugs, right? I don't know if that's the actual term for it, but I'm not feeling like my brain is so stuck in that direction. You know, I can I can act a little bit differently. What comes to mind for to kind of encapsulate all of it because it gets to the underlying mechanisms, I think, is, you know, beware the things that come easily and quickly like really beware those things. If it's pornography and you can get to experience, it's not the experience of sex, but the um the illusion of pseudo sex, right? Right. If it's if it's easily available, beware of that thing. If it's a feeling of relaxation from a drink, beware of alcohol. Yeah. If it's um fast money. Yeah. If it's you you are very proficient at um you know you find you you know lift a weight you build muscle you get attention for it beware that thing because there all these positive reward signals that are masking what soon will happen which is that that thing is going to make you lopsided internally and make you crave it more. And so I think that there there's something about this uh things that come easy it's a problem. And I think I kind of like that in the sense that um because many people are struggling and we don't often uh glorify the struggle. We're all we're all trying to you know struggle our way out of struggle. But struggle is distress and as long as we're struggling, we're in the distress tolerance. I'm not saying people shouldn't aim to succeed, but um and and forgive me for going a little long on this reflection, but I remember in graduate school, I had a paper that got accepted by the journal Science, which is like one of the three apex journals, Nature, Science, and Cell. And I was like over the moon. Yeah. I was like, "Oh my god, like this is amazing." Like first author paper in science. Like some people never do that in their career. I was doing as a graduate student. And um my dad who's a scientist said, "Prepare for the week afterward when you wonder if you'll ever do it again." I was like, "Okay." Kind of a postpartum crash. And then my graduate adviser, I said, "Do we get to celebrate?" Like, "Do we get to like throw a meal or a party?" And she goes, "No." Like I suppose I could buy you a pizza, but that would be stupid. This is perfect chap. And uh very blunt. Um, and she said, "No, the pleasure was the work of doing the paper." And I I was like, "I got it." And that's what taught me to repeat that process. I didn't always publish in science, but um certainly in other great journals again and again. It's like that that the reward is in the process. Like the effort is the reward. And if there's no process or no effort, I mean, and we don't struggle, in one way, we're struggling with so much and in other ways we don't struggle, you know, with the stuff that we probably need to struggle with to move the energy out of our body. You know, I mean, Michael Easter's book Comfort Crisis is great. You know, it's it's like, you know, we used to walk like 10 miles a day and, you know, we're not burning that energy. So, we're just sitting there with this energy that used to just get disseminated or we'd like wake up in the morning, have move through the stressors of the day, good, bad, and different. You know, even good things are stressful. If you have to go to three birthday parties on a weekend, even if they're fun, you're you're tired at the end. Sounds like a dad. Yeah, it is a dad. I go to a lot of birthday parties and try not to get sick because of, you know, at them, especially when they're at these little indoor ballping kids. But what's interesting, Michael Easter, you know, with the comfort crisis, I mean, doing these hard masogi challenges, he calls them, you know, I mean, think about like self-imposing discomfort so that you don't get pulled into the illusion of of comfort by these other things. I mean, the I think it's coming clear to me now that the things that come easy are the traps. Yeah, they're the traps. So folks, if you're really good at something, doesn't mean don't lean into it. But if something comes really easily for you, you have to be very mindful of that thing and other things around it. Sounds like you create a discomfort for yourself. Maybe there's like a discomfort um appetite that if we don't satisfy through healthy things, we will satisfy through unhealthy things. That's a very interesting concept. I mean, I don't know where that would exist in the nervous system, but because you hear, oh, we're trying to avoid pain and go toward pleasure, but those models are that's true, but those models are too simple. So, I like the idea of a ration of discomfort to experience every day, isn't it, that we're kind of built to expend energy and then sleep and then wake up the next day and expend energy and sleep. And if we're not expending the energy, how can we sleep and then we wake up with more and we just carry the stressors from the day before rather than just breaking it down. I mean, that's that's one of the beauties of, you know, recovery where they talk about one day at a time. Well, one of the um you know, this last couple weeks, there's always something each year that really pops that gets kind of viral overnight. Last year it was the Hakua girl. This year it's the morning routine guy, the guy that he shows his morning routine and it got millions and millions of hits. And um this guy does cold water on the face. He's working. He's praying. He's doing all these things. He's he's wearing no shirt. He's super jacked. Like he was getting attention for different reasons. Anyway, huge following and uh the best comment ever was, "Oh man, this guy's going to come after me. Uh he seems like a like a like he's got his life organized." Someone put a comment, "This guy spends all day preparing for the next day, which is, you know, the worst thing about optimization, right? The whole purpose of tools like sleep or and all these things that you can, and you taught me this, really good protocols let you lean into life more, not less. It's not about withdrawing and getting into a wellness loop where you're just preparing for the next day, right? It's about being able to lean into the third birthday party where you're like, and the kids are sick and you know, you're being exposed to all this stuff, but you're there because your daughter needs to be there and she's elated to be there. Yeah. Can we put on the shelf that perhaps we have an appetite for discomfort that we can either satisfy through healthy things or unhealthy? I think that's a a good way to put it. Can we call it the suave hubman? We can call it that. We'll go suave. It's fine. Addiction means that somebody's already in the pit. Like they haven't done the the okay, I have an appetite for discomfort. I need to satisfy with with adaptive things. um they're in the pit. So, if you would um if people out there listening are in a place where they're like they know they're something's got them as opposed to them having it where they're wondering or someone they know and it and especially if it's somebody that they know, what what do you suggest? I mean, this isn't kind of like call the suicide hotline. I mean, unless they're suicidal, obviously. I mean, a lot of people don't have means to like start therapy with a world-class addiction therapist, trauma specialist. Some do, some don't. What do people do? Um, well, there are a lot of, you know, options for people out there. You know, sometimes they don't think that they have them because they don't have means, but, you know, in in our centers, we, you know, strive to create access and I know a lot of others do, too. So, it's not just people that pay with out of pocket. There's insurance and you know, we build some quality treatment centers for people with Medicaid in different states. You know, that's um we don't know what's happening with that at the moment, but you know, it's uh currently they can get treatment for that. So, if they're in a state where they needed like detox or, you know, they're in a place where if they try to stop drinking or using it gets uh pretty significant, um there's services out there for them. Another great thing though is to just go straight into a a 12step meeting. They're everywhere. How do people find those meetings? They go online, Google 12step in your area. If it's, you know, there's narcotics anonymous, there's alcoholics anonymous, there's cocaine anonymous, there's overeaters anonymous, there's gambling anonymous. I mean, if you every one of them has a central office. The organizational structure, especially of like Alcoholics Anonymous, is really incredible. We could do a whole episode on it. There's no there's no leaders. It's a very flat organization, politically unaffiliated. Politically unaffiliated. They have a vow of poverty. If somebody died and donated a million dollars, they can't take more than 10,000. Really? Yeah. There's only trusted servants. There's no leaders. The the there um there are people who are employed that do administrative work, but everything else and it's been like this for 80ome years. It's it's really quite incredible. And there are online meetings. There's online meetings. Um they're all over the world, you know. Um you can find them at any time. That's one of the beauties of of of 12step meetings is that, you know, I obviously I'm a therapist. We have treatment centers. I I um it's nice to get people to come to those and it's it's great for people to be able to step out, but there's things that we can do that they can't. I mean, they're not going to medically detox them. They can't keep them out of like, you know, in a safe environment for a period of time. But a kid with a porn addiction, somebody who's abusing alcohol or addicted to food, shopping, gambling, they can find a meeting. They can find a meeting. Yep. They can find a meeting. And you know, I always tell people to try six different ones. They're free. you know, you're going to find your group. I mean, listen, they're they're they're run by peers. So, this is like something that was developed as it would be like if somebody developed a therapeutic modality 80 years ago and then passed it on to everybody that they gave they every client they had and then they they ran it. I mean, it's not it's not run by professional counselors, although there are professional counselors in them. There's every walk of life from I've you know, been around people who are anything from priests to rabbis to to doctors. there's no prejudiced in the in the in the disease. Um, but you know, you can build a community where people are willing to help and be in service to each other. And you know, you can't call a therapist any time during the night. You can't just look up and find a meeting and and go. And at this point with things online, you could find a meeting 24 hours a day anywhere. And the meeting is not going to solve it necessarily, but the fact that you're uh moving in that direction. You know, you're spending an hour if you're spending an hour thinking and reflecting and talking about it. Even if you're not like in silent meditation, it's almost like a meditation. If you're spending an hour hearing people talk about how they recovered and helping you, it's an hour that you're not doing the other thing. And in the beginning, that might be the white knuckling of it, right? But the idea is to get out of white knuckling, you know. And so the beauty of the 12step programs, which was founded by the guys that started Alcoholics Anonymous and then it was Dr. Bob Smith and Bill Wilson. And the way they discovered it was by helping each other. Bill Wilson had been uh trying to get sober for a long time. He'd been introduced to something called the Oxford group, which was more of a religious group based in Christianity. and they had like a four I think it was a fourstep process um which the 12 steps are just kind of really expanded on. Um, but there's a there's in in the literature there's this beautiful moment where uh Bill Wilson had been trying to stay sober for a while and he was, but he was really white knuckling it. And he'd been at his home in New York, he'd been going into the hospital and and helping others. And he found by trying to help others, he stayed sober. And he's a guy that had struggled for a very long time. And none of those guys were staying sober, but he was, which was kind of he first kind of conceptualized this. And then he was on a business trip in Akran, Ohio, which is where this Dr. Bob Smith lived. And he he was staying at this hotel. I think it was called the Mayflower Hotel in the in the history. And he had come out of a business meeting. I think it didn't go the way he wanted. And he he walked in and in in the story, he's describing hearing the bar and the kind of clinking of the glasses over here and and the kind of the call of the bar. and he had some change in his pocket and it was in the 1930s, early 1930s. Um, maybe 34, 35. And then there was a bank of phones over here. And so he was kind of pulled between the the bar and the phones and for whatever reason he went to the phones. He paused and he went there and he called I forget who he called, maybe the hospital, and he he he asked if there was I think he basically asked if there was any drunks in the town he could help. And they directed him to in some way to this this doctor who was like the local town doctor, Bob Smith. And he was uh also an alcoholic who struggled for a long time. And they met and he I think he went to his house or he might have been in the hospital at the time. I could have the history a little bit wrong. But they met and started talking and I think Bob relapsed one more time. But they started talking and helping each other and then they went and helped another guy and then they went and helped another guy and there's a whole history to like how it it developed and then how they wrote a book together. The book was really meant to send it was written like four years later send the information about alcoholism and alcoholics anonymous to everywhere in the country where they didn't have meetings. they started having the these meetings and helping each other through this step process that they they they developed. And um it's really interesting because this was one man's decision, you know, instead of going to the bar or going to the phone, instead of going to the bar, he made one phone call and that transformed millions of lives. I mean, there's millions of members around the around the world. you know, he was like I think he was called either Time magazine or Life magazine's hundred most influential people of the of the 20th century and there's still people who find recovery through and then they gifted those steps to all of the other things like Cocaine Anonymous and Alcoholics Anonymous and you know it's not for everybody and they'll even say that in the literature. That's why I don't I wouldn't consider it a cult because I'll say we don't have a monopoly, you know, and of course you're going to meet personalities in there, but the the organization itself is agnostic to religion, to ideas, to politics and it's a place that people can come with a common problem and find a common solution. And these meetings can be the place that hold people as a container. You know, I always see our treatment centers as like a container of space and time where people can come in and really kind of let themselves fall apart and we can start helping them build their life back. But these 12step meetings are like a container and they have a you know people will people are you know excited in there to reach out and connect with with you. And it's in those moments of connection that we can really find healing. I mean, look at what happened to him. Instead of going into the bar and connecting with the people in there and drinking and, you know, he had enough evidence to show that drinking would, you know, it it didn't take him in the right direction. Um, he was able to make a phone call, connect with somebody else, and it created all these connections later on, you know, and it's not a place that people go just to white knuckle it. I mean, that's how they might get in there. Nobody usually comes there because they, you know, had one bad night of drinking. It's usually, as some people say, no one comes in here a winner. you've been on a losing streak and uh and that's okay. But to be able to admit that and really discover who you are and share that with others and find frivolity and joy in in in in like in the depths of people's pain and they can really understand that there's there's hope, there's promise and there's a way out. And these people who are struggling aren't going to necessarily find that in their their first meeting, but they might get the hope and the connection with others. And so they're available out there. And if you don't like the 12step and the the the spirituality, there's other recovery programs out there or other peer support groups out there like Smart Recovery or Refuge Recovery and and they'll talk about things in a different way. So, it's not about like finding a specific dogma. Go out and try different things. You know, even the act of trying different things is going to help them move out of being stuck in that if it's like the porn addiction, right? Um, and then people do reach a certain point in acuity, especially with drugs and alcohol, that they need to be in a facility, you know, and that might be a hospital, it might be a treatment center. Um, and you know, you can there are resources for that. I think it's a good place for people to start if they don't have the resources to be able to attend a treatment center or work in therapy. Thanks for sharing that that avenue for people um with all sorts of uh addictions not just alcohol and for the families. Alanon for the people is is for the families. There's codependence anonymous. There's families anonymous. There's uh adult children of alcoholics anonymous or adult children of alcoholics is really about uh um dysfunctional family systems that people might have grown up even if their parents weren't alcoholics. So there's there's stuff out there for for everyone. Prior to this conversation, I solicited for questions from the internet about addiction, broadly speaking, and got some great questions. The first question is, is addiction the problem? They put the in quotes. Or is addiction an attempted solution to a different but less obvious problem? The short answer to that is both. the addiction is really the solution to some sort of discomfort or stress that they're experiencing, but then the addiction itself becomes problematic. I would say that addiction is the solution in the sense that it's the person's attempt to solve or to find relief from whatever stressor they're experiencing. Um, but it's a solution that becomes problematic. So, it takes on a life of its own. It becomes its own trauma itself. you know that drinking alcoholically and blacking out is a trauma to your body, to your brain. The things that people do in addiction become more traumatic. I think there's this cycle that I always use in the background called it's trauma, stress, and addiction. And expanding the definition of trauma to wound, it starts with a wound and then stress is the relationship to that wound much like a limp after a broken leg. And when stress gets big enough, people look for relief. And so they look to behaviors or substances which then can if the stress is big enough and repeated can become alcoholic. So um that stress is not really the wound, it's the relationship to it. Like I said, the the limp after the broken leg, but that limp, while it's not the broken leg, informs how we walk or don't walk, how we run or don't run, how we view ourselves, how we view the other people in the world view us. And all of those things together can lead to a level of stress where people find relief. And since it's chronic, then they they keep they keep using, but then the behaviors and things that they do while they're using or drinking create a trauma itself, which then leads to more stress, which then leads to more addiction. So it becomes kind of this perpetual motion machine if you will. So the medicine becomes the source of stress. Yeah. Are GLP-1 agonists things like ompic, wiggoi, etc. being used for addiction outside the context of weight loss? Interesting question. And will this happen in an official capacity or remain off label use? They're asking your opinion. Um, are GLP1s being used to treat addiction to food? And do you think it can be useful for uh treating addiction to other things? I believe that there's some initial research going on that it uh it can help with uh cravings um and addiction in general. Um it makes sense to me. I mean, I've I've heard that anecdotally over the years that people that were diabetic and also alcoholic, but the diabetics that maintained their blood sugar properly had less chance of relapse. I mean, there's this very simple uh kind of an acronym called HALT. You may have heard of hungry, angry, lonely, tired, which seems so simple. It used to drive me crazy, but it's so true that, you know, people tend to be at higher risk for relapse or using when they're either hungry, they're angry, they're lonely, or they're tired. And sometimes those things are all together. And those are times in which I would imagine uh their system is looking for something to uh I mean, if you're hungry, you're looking to elevate your blood sugar. And if you can maintain that, uh, I would imagine that it would have some interesting effects. I was just at a, um, a meeting with some of the executives of the major insurance companies, our our company, uh, and has a private meeting with them and they were talking about that's some some of the things that they're looking for. I don't know that I'm sure it's been used off label, but I don't know of anybody that's using it yet on label for for any of that. Can somebody be addicted to stress? meaning are habits addictions? Those are sort of two questions. Clever. This person snuck in two questions. First question, can somebody be addicted to stress? I think that people can be set have their nervous system set in a way that they need that level of stress or activation in order just to kind of get to baseline, in order to kind of feel alive. You know, I I've seen that a lot when I worked with when I've worked with um especially special forces combat veterans, you know, coming home, like a lot of the mundane stuff almost didn't feel like they felt alive, you know, and of course, this isn't everybody. This is the ones that were coming to me, but that they needed to be involved in like really risky behaviors or really uh high adrenaline behaviors kind and it felt like they were just getting to kind of baseline of being normal. It wasn't even like taking them to another edge. Um, and you know, that makes sense to me because a lot of like what basic training or the training that they do later on for more special forces is while it's skills training, it it's really nervous system training, right? It's it's the ability you you could it's it's the ability to do those skills under an extreme amount of stress or lack of sleep and and everything like that. So if they're kind of oriented in that way, then when they come home or they're in environments where it it doesn't it takes a lot to bring them up just to that level of like what might feel normal for them. Their their kind of system is set up much higher than here and they've got to get up to that to just feel alive. So I I don't know if addicted it maybe it is addicted. I feel like they have a need, you know, it's a drive. It's a drive. Intensity addiction. Um, that's a you and I know some people with that. Yes. Yeah. I'd like to know about social behavior addictions, social media, coffee, sugar, even work addiction. And as always, thank you for tackling hard topics. I guess that was directed toward me, but you're the one who's about to try and tackle this topic. So, um, are all are those things really addict addictions? Are people addicted to sugar, addicted to coffee? Do they meet the classic definition of of addiction? Well, they're not going to meet a a a diagnostic criteria for progressive, etc. What is the diagnostic? It's always this progressive. I don't know if it was was it on your podcast or did I read about this somewhere else where when they took you know there's the classic study about taking rats with cocaine and they'll they'll they had water and and uh uh cocaine and they would like press that lever thousands of times to get the cocaine. Somebody else repeated that but added one that had sugar in it and their cocaine uh use went significantly down when sugar was also present. Well, meth addicts will consume sugar and meth more readily than either one alone. I mean, I we see this different drug. We see this when people get sober, you know, that, you know, there's people that will get very heavy. You know, they'll engage in what looks like a food addiction. And when we peel that back, I can't tell you how many times I've heard of, you know, people recognizing their first addictive behavior is going to the sugar bowl and, you know, taking spoonfuls of it. that I've I've actually heard people say that uh food addiction and probably specifically around sugar is often the primary addiction for people. It's kind of like how they get in get in get in there. I don't I'm sure that's not true for everybody, but I I think if we broaden the term of addiction beyond what um a use disorder is in the DSM and move towards do you have it or does it have you? Absolutely. I mean, I don't think we can become sugar dependent in a way that if we stop it, we're going to go into some sort of major withdrawal, but I would imagine there would be some sort of withdrawal. Same with caffeine. I've seen people go into psychosis with caffeine. I never want to find out what happens if I quick. You might just always be in psychosis. Caffeine psychosis. Thanks for that. No, not you. I meant all Yeah. I mean, I love caffeine, but I keep that out. I can sleep on No, no, that's fine. I actually can sleep on it, too. Like, well, I don't I don't I don't drink caffeine past 2 p.m. Occasionally. I don't either, but once in a while I do, and it doesn't You're definitely getting less REM sleep in there, but but you look rested. So, not last night. Um lot of questions about Ibeane probably because um the incredible work of my colleague Nolan Williams at Stanford with these single Iagain trials for people getting over alcoholism meaning one taking Iagain once or twice and uh mostly in veterans was covered on the uh Rogan podcast and Nolan's been on here. What are your thoughts on the use of Ibagane and other psychedelics? Let's leave MDMA out of it because that's more for the treatment of trauma and it's not actually a classic psychedelic. But things like psilocybin, ibagane for people seeking relief from alcohol and drugs specifically, but maybe other addictions. You know, I've seen some pretty incredible things happen with people. Um it's uh I and I'm glad that the studies have been going on specifically around psilocybin in the US. I'm not really aware of any around ibagane. So anybody that is doing I gain treatments are either you know I don't know if they're finding it in the US or they're going to Mexico or wherever which has to be done in Mexico they're doing the brain scans at Stanford before and after okay it's not currently in the new admin so they are doing some studies around it the rates of remission from alcohol use disorder and other uh substance use uh disorders is somewhere there's a range but 40 to in some cases 80% um with one or to Ivagane trials but this is with therapeutic support there are a bunch of other things happening there and then there's evidence of brain plasticity in a number of brain areas yeah so I don't know enough about the studies happening before like they were doing this where Stanford was doing a study and taking people down to Mexico or people going down there to do it was kind of a lot of uh I don't know how else to say it but renegade folks doing it outside wasn't always you know run by medical teams and people making sure that everybody is safe uh at least from my experience although then I've seen some amazing things around it. My general take on psychedelics. If I look at PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder, I really see that as you could almost substitute state disorder in there for stress because people get stuck in a certain state and call it the survival state. And you know that's as I've said one of our biggest challenges is that we go into survival mode when we don't need to go into survival mode, an appropriate response at an inappropriate time. And so things like psychedelics or we actually can see this with breath work and can help people have an experience where they uh recognize another state, you know, that they can be in another state, not not another state of the US, but like uh they have access to something other than survival and those touchstone experiences can really give them something to build on. Um, I think like any other approach to medicine that seems miraculous at times, there's a lot out there of this worked for me, so everybody should try it. I there's what I'm most concerned I'm not concerned about the effectiveness of overall of psychedelics because I think there's definitely a place for them, but I'm really most concerned about the ethics that we develop around them. Who's delivering it? What are the rules? You know, I know we weren't we were going to leave MDMA out, but I know some of the MAP studies it was like three sessions. I think it was over and I I I I don't think that the the world that kind of sees those is then taking that, especially in the personal development world, and going we're going to do three sessions. It can kind of come be something that we do all the time, you know, or micro doing all the time. I don't know enough about it to see if that's going to have an impact. And you know it there are people with psychological and psychiatric disorders that it can really impact in in another way you know schizophrenic bipolar and you know you know I look at it like you know antibiotics like penicellin saved a lot of people but then there's people that it kills right I can eat peanuts and uh get protein out of them and I know people that eat peanuts and they can they can die so we lousy source of protein by the lousy source of protein eggs let's say uh but there there's a real we need to really understand the ethics around it and the and the time frame and then make sure that people are following that up with something because I think you've used this example before of like kind of being on a trampoline and you can jump up and see the top of the building, you know, and you can see where you want to be, but you haven't built the staircase or the elevator yet. We got to go out and build the staircase and the elevator. So, I think they're a great window into how we can be and an experience of this person that I can be, but I don't think that there's going to be like some immediate structural change that's going to last. And the danger in that is then people start using that over and over again and can lean on that as a as a as a crutch. Last question. If we know somebody or are close to somebody that's clearly suffering from addiction or struggling with addiction, what can and should we do? This sounds like somebody who is aware of the all too common scenario of this kid, this parent, this co-orker, this significant other is clearly an alcoholic, clearly a drug addict, clearly addicted to fill in the blank. What can people reasonably do assuming that person is not in a uh medical crisis yet? I think one of the biggest things we can do is is is is talk to them, but also without shaming them, you know. Um, and if you don't know how to talk to them, reach out for some help yourself. You know, there's, like I said, there's there's family support meetings like Alanon that you can go to. Um, if you reach out to a treatment center like ours, you can um we're happy to talk to the families and and help point them in the in the right direction. Uh but having an open conversation without shaming them and understanding that this is a you know approaching it with the idea that this is a disease and a and a like a like like we're talking to a sick friend not that we're talking to a bad a bad person. Can I ask slash offer one which is if uh if a 12step meeting is an open meeting as they call it like an open AA meeting you could offer to go with them uh when they do the round the circle thing you if you go and you don't want to say anything you just say pass no one no one and a lot of places they don't even do around the circle so you can you could go with them to you could take them to a meeting. Yeah. As long as it's an what's called an open meeting. You don't have to be an alcoholic or an addict to go to that meeting. And so you could take them, you could even go and just observe. Believe it or not, some non-alcoholics have come to 12step meetings that uh were open meetings to learn more about it to then be able to go help somebody that they know and and reach out and find a a a therapist that can um do an assessment in our mission to create access. Um we have been really doing some kind of innovative stuff around virtual care and inhome care. So when there are people that are resistant and maybe if they even it is true that they need to go to a residential treatment center that we can offer this different service that's much lower cost and covered by insurance that we can come in and kind of build a relationship with them and you know in some way sometimes it it it works for them and they're able to to move through it and other times we're able to help them witness their failures and then have h having done complete assessments with them get them to the correct level of care and make sure that the family has everything they need. So those options are out there as well. I've seen the work you do help so many people um so so many people and so I'm just very feel very lucky uh you come on here and share with a lot a lot more people. Yeah. And I'm sure you'll get some outreach. Well, we'll put links to uh where people can find you and some of the resources and things that you're up to and um and the papers and other things mentioned. But yeah, on behalf of myself um and everyone listening and watching, I just want to say thank you. you're doing incredible work. I was uh reflecting on this a lot before coming out here, but you know, I I really appreciate what you do in the world and especially knowing you and knowing how and why you started it. And there wasn't this grand vision at the end. It was like, I'm just going to help people today. I mean, you literally was like, I'm going to help people today. I'm going to write do these little diagrams and these little things and I'm going to help them today. and helping people today and the next day and the next day, you know, has led to you having such an impact in the world. You know, I you I was telling someone on your team earlier, your work makes my work easier, right? I've had men specifically, mostly men that come to me more open because of what they've heard you talk about. And conversely, I've had men that we're working with that are very closed off and then I'll have them listen to something that you've done and it opens them up. My wife wanted me to tell, you know, she's a therapist, too, and she was running a group this morning with a group of kind of more uh mentally ill folks and they were doing a group on stress management and she used a video of the physiological sigh. So, she wanted to say thank you for that. But I know lots of therapists that are using that and it it's it's just you make our you make our jobs easier by bringing awareness to the the challenges and problems that are out there. So I really really appreciate that. Plus I just appreciate you as a human being and and very much value our friendship. Thank you for that. That's extremely gratifying to hear. And I'd be remiss if I didn't say that were not for you and your support and the many things you've taught me and our friendship, I definitely wouldn't be doing this and uh maybe wouldn't even be here today at all uh in the biggest sense. So, thanks for everything. I appreciate you. Thank you. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Ryan Suave. To learn more about Ryan's work and to find links to the various resources discussed during today's episode, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerorost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Ryan Suave. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]

========================================

--- Video 11 ---
Video ID: 7MEhDlw1e9k
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7MEhDlw1e9k
Title: How to Build Endurance | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-04-17 12:00:21 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I explain how to build endurance and describe targeted protocols to enhance different types of endurance.

I discuss how endurance—the ability to sustain effort—requires the coordination of physical and mental systems driven by energy availability, brain willpower, and specific training adaptations in the muscles, heart, lungs and neurons. I explain conditioning protocols designed to enhance four types of endurance, from long-duration steady state to muscular endurance and high-intensity intervals, and how each training style triggers unique adaptations in the body and brain, such as improved mitochondrial function and oxygen utilization. Additionally, I highlight the crucial role of hydration and electrolytes, which are essential for neural function and influence the brain’s willpower to sustain effort.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/PH5df16

Join the Huberman Lab Neural Network newsletter: https://go.hubermanlab.com/Y05kduw

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
X: https://x.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Build Endurance
00:00:50 Energy Sources, ATP, Oxygen 
00:04:14 Neurons & Willpower, Glucose & Electrolytes
00:09:19 Heart, Lungs; Physiology & Performance Limiting Factors
00:10:35 Muscular Endurance, Protocol, Concentric Movements, Mitochondria
00:17:14 Long-Duration Endurance, Efficiency, Mitochondria, Capillaries
00:21:07 High-Intensity Interval Training (HIIT), Anaerobic Endurance, Protocol
00:27:47 High-Intensity Aerobic Endurance, Adaptations
00:30:06 Brain & Body Adaptations, Heart
00:33:57 Hydration, Tool: Galpin Equation
00:35:38 Supplements, Stimulants, Magnesium Malate
00:36:27 Recap & Key Takeaways

#HubermanLab #Science #Health #Endurance 

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
Andrew Huberman: Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. Today, I'd like to talk about endurance and how to build endurance, and how to use endurance for the health of your entire body. Endurance, as the name suggests, is our ability to engage in continuous bouts of exercise, or continuous movement, or continuous effort of any kind. It is clear that cardiovascular exercise, exercise where you're getting your heart rate up continuously for a period of time is vital for tapping into and enhancing various aspects of our biology in the body and in the brain, such that our brain can perform work for longer periods of time, focused work, learning, et cetera. The key thing to understand about energy production in the body is this thing that we call ATP. ATP is required for anything that requires energy, for anything that you do that requires effort. Our muscles and our neurons use different fuel sources to generate ATP. The ones that are used first for short bouts of intense activity are things like phosphocreatine. If you've only heard about creatine as a supplement, well, phosphocreatine actually exists on our muscles. That's why people take creatine, you can load your muscles with more creatine. Phosphocreatine is great for short, intense bouts of effort. Then you start to tap into things like glucose, which is literally just carbohydrates as just sugar that's in your blood. Then if you keep pushing, you start to tap into other fuel sources like glycogen, and you have fats stored in adipose tissue. Even if you have very, very low body fat percentage, you can extract lipids, fatty acids from that body fat. It's like a storage pack, it is a storage pack for energy that can be converted to ATP. Without going into any more detail, when I say today energy or I say ATP, just remember that regardless of your diet, regardless of your nutritional plan, your body has the capacity to use creatine, glucose, glycogen, lipids, and if your ketogenic, ketones in order to generate fuel energy. Now, the other crucial point is that in order to complete that process of taking these fuels and converting them into energy, most of the time, you need oxygen. You need air, basically, in your system. Now, it's not actual air. You need oxygen molecules in your system. Comes in through your mouth and your nose, goes to your lungs and distributes via the bloodstream. Oxygen is not a fuel, but like a fire that has no oxygen, you can't actually burn the logs, but when you blow a lot of oxygen onto a fire, basically onto logs with a flame there, then basically it will take fire, it will burn. Oxygen allows you to burn fuel. Today we are going to ask the critical questions. What allows us to perform? What allows us to continue effort for long periods of time? We think of things like willpower. What's willpower? Willpower is neurons. It's neurons in our brain. We have this thing called the central governor which decides whether or not we should or could continue, or whether or not we should stop, whether or not we should quit. We have to ask the question, what is the limiting factor on performance? What prevents us from enduring? What prevents us from moving forward? What are the factors that say, you know what, no more, I'm not going to continue this run? There are five main categories of things that allow us to engage in effort. I don't want to completely write off things like the immune system and other systems of the body, but nerve, muscle, blood, heart, and lungs are the five that I want to focus on today because that's where most of the data are. Let's talk about neurons and how they work. I want to tell you about an experiment that's going to make it very clear why quitting is a mental thing, not a physical thing. Why do we quit? An experiment was done a couple years ago and was published in the journal, Cell, Cell Press Journal, excellent journal, showing that there is a class of neurons in our brainstem in the back of our brain that if they shut off, we quit. These neurons release epinephrine. Epinephrine is adrenaline. Anytime we are engaged in effort of any kind, we are releasing epinephrine. Anytime we're awake really, we are releasing epinephrine into our brain. In fact, this little group of neurons in the back of our brain it's called the locus coeruleus, if you like, is churning out epinephrine all the time. If something stresses us out, it churns out more, and then it acts as an alertness signal for the whole brain. We also, of course, have adrenaline epinephrine released in our body, which makes our body ready for things. Think about epinephrine as a readiness signal. When we are engaged in effort, this readiness signal is being churned into our brain. When we're relaxed and we're falling asleep, epinephrine levels are low. Our desire to continue, or put differently, our willingness to continue and our desire to quit is mediated by events between our two ears. That doesn't mean that the body is not involved, but it means that neurons are critically important. We have two categories of neurons that are important: the ones in our head that tell us get up and go out and take that run, and the ones that allow us, encourage us to continue that run, and we have neurons that shut things off and say no more. We of course have the neurons that connect to our muscles and control our muscles. The reason we quit is rarely because our body quits. Our mind quits. When people say, "I hear that sports or effort, or fighting, it's 90% mental, 10% physical," that whole discussion about how much is mental, how much is physical, is absolutely silly. It's 100% nervous system. It's neurons. When people say mental or physical, understand, it's 100% neural. What do nerves need in order to continue to fire? What do you need in order to get neurons to say, I will persist? They need glucose. Unless you're a keto and ketogenic adapted, you need carbohydrate, is glucose. That's what neurons run on, and you need electrolytes. Neurons have what's called a sodium-potassium pump blah, blah, blah. They generate electricity. In order to get nerve cells to fire, to contract muscle, to say, I'm going to continue, you need sufficient sodium salt because the action potential, the actual firing of neurons is driven by sodium entering the cell, rushing into the cell. Then there's a removal of potassium, and then there's a resetting of those levels by something called the sodium-potassium pump. The sodium-potassium pump and sodium and action potentials, even if you don't know anything about that is ATP dependent. It requires energy. You need energy in order to get neurons to fire and it is pH dependent. It depends on the conditions or the environment within the brain being of a certain pH or acidity. pH is about how acid or how basic the environment is. Nerves need salt. They need potassium, and it turns out they need magnesium. You need glucose and carbohydrates in order to power those neurons unless you are running on ketones. Muscle. Muscle is going to engage and generate energy first by using this phosphocreatine system. High bouts of effort, really intense effort, short-lived, seconds to minutes, but probably more like seconds, it's going to be this phosphocreatine, literally a fuel source in the muscle that you're going to burn just like you would logs on a fire. Glycogen which is stored carbohydrate in the muscle, they're converting that into ATP in order to generate that energy. Then there's stuff in our blood that's available as an energy source. In blood we got glucose, so literally blood sugar that's floating around. Let's say you have fasted for three days. Your blood glucose is going to be very low, so that's not going to be a great fuel source, but you will start to liberate fats from your adipose tissue, from your fat. Fatty acids will start to mobilize into the bloodstream and you can burn those for energy. There are some other factors that are important. Those are the heart, which is going to move blood. The more that the heart can move blood and oxygen, the more fuel that's going to be available for you to engage in muscular effort and thinking effort. As I've mentioned oxygen a few times, it should be obvious then that the lungs are very important. You need to bring oxygen in and distribute it to all these tissues because oxygen is critical for the conversion of carbohydrates and the conversion of fats. When we ask the question, what's limiting for performance? What is going to allow us to endure, to engage in effort and endure long bouts of effort or even moderately long bouts of effort? We need to ask which of those things, nerve, muscle, blood, heart, and lungs, is limiting? Put differently, we ask, what should we be doing with our neurons, what should we be doing with our muscles, what should we be doing with our blood, what should we be doing with our heart, and what should we be doing with our lungs that's going to allow us to build endurance for mental and physical work, and to be able to go longer, further with more intensity? Let's talk about the four kinds of endurance and how to achieve those. First of all, we have muscular endurance. Muscular endurance is the ability for our muscles to perform work over time. Our failure to continue to be able to perform that work is going to be due to muscular fatigue, not to cardiovascular fatigue. Not because we're breathing too hard or we can't get enough blood to the muscles, or because we quit mentally, but because the muscles themselves give out. One good example of this would be if you had to pick up a stone in the yard and that stone is not extremely heavy for you, and you needed to do that anywhere from 50 to 100 times. You were picking it up and putting it down, and picking it up and putting it down, and picking up and putting it down. At some point, your muscles will fatigue. Muscular endurance is going to be something that you can perform for anywhere from 12 to 25, or even up to 100 repetitions. A good example is pushups. It's actually no coincidence that a lot of military boot-camp style training is not done with weights. It's done with things like pushups, pull-ups, sit-ups, and running, because what they're really building is muscular endurance, the ability to perform work repeatedly over time for a given set of muscles and neurons. A really good muscular endurance training protocol, according to the scientific literature, would be three to five sets of anywhere from 12 to 100 repetitions. That's a huge range. Now, 12 to 25 repetitions is going to be more reasonable for most people. The rest periods are going to be anywhere from 30 to 180 seconds of rest. Anywhere from half a minute to three minutes of rest. The one critical feature of building muscular endurance is that it has no major eccentric loading component. I haven't talked much about eccentric and concentric loading, but concentric loading is when you are shortening the muscle typically, or lifting a weight, and eccentric movements are when you are lengthening a muscle, typically, or lowering a weight. If you do a pull-up and you get your chin over the bar, or a chin-up, that's the concentric portion of the effort, and then as you lower yourself, that's the eccentric portion. Eccentric portion of resistance training of any kind, whether or not it's for endurance or for strength, is one of the major causes of soreness. Some people will be more susceptible to this than others, but it does create more damage in muscle fibers. Muscular endurance and building muscular endurance should not include any movements that include major eccentric loads. If you're going to do pushups, it doesn't mean that you want to drop, smash your chest into the floor. By the way, your chest should touch the ground on every pushup. That's a real pushup. It's about pushing down till your chest touch the floor and straightening out. That's a proper pushup. A pull-up is where you pull your chin above the bar. Neither of those should include a slow eccentric or lowering component if you are using those to train muscular endurance, the 3 to 5 sets of 12 to 25, and maybe even up to 100 repetitions, with 30 to 180 seconds of rest in-between. If you want to build muscular endurance, you want to make your muscles able to do more work for longer, it's going to be this 3 to 5 sets of 12 to 100 reps, 30 to 180 seconds of mainly concentric movement. Not a slow lowering phase or a heavy lowering phase. That might be kettlebell swings and things of that sort. Isometrics, as I mentioned, things like plank and wall sits, will work. What's interesting about this is that it doesn't seem at all like what people normally think of as endurance, and yet it's been shown in nice quality peer reviewed studies that muscular endurance can improve our ability to engage in long bouts of what we call long-duration low-intensity endurance work. This can support long runs, it can support long swims, and it can build also, it can build postural strength and endurance simultaneously. Let's talk about the science briefly of why this works. That takes us back to this issue of fuel utilization and what fails. If we were to say, let's say you do a plank and you're planking for, maybe you're able to plank for a minute or two minutes, or three minutes, at some point you will fail. You're not going to fail because the heart gives out. You're not going to fail because you can't get enough oxygen, because you can breathe while you're doing that, you're going to fail because of local muscular failure. Which means that as you do, if you choose to do this protocol of three to five sets, et cetera, to build muscular endurance, mainly what you are going to be building is you're going to be building the ability of your mitochondria to use oxygen to generate energy locally. That, it's something called mitochondrial respiration. Respiration because of the involvement of oxygen. It's also going to be increasing the extent to which the neurons control the muscles and provide a stimulus for the muscles to contract. This is independent of power and strength. Even though the low sets like three to five sets, and the fact that you're doing repetitions and you're going to failure, even though it seems to resemble power and strength, and hypertrophy-type training, it is distinctly different. It's not going to generate strength, hypertrophy and power. It's going to mainly create this ability to endure, to continually contract muscles or repeatedly contract muscles. Continually, if you're using isometric holds, repeatedly if you're using repetition-type exercise where there's a contraction and an extension of the muscle, essentially concentric and an eccentric portion. Remember that you want the eccentric portion to be light and relatively fast, not so fast that you injure yourself, but certainly not deliberately slowed down. Now let's talk about the other extreme of endurance, which is long-duration endurance. This is the type that people typically think about when they think about endurance. You're talking about a long run, a long swim, a long bike ride. How long? Anywhere from 12 minutes to several hours, or maybe even an entire day, maybe 8 or 9 hours of hiking or running, or biking. Some people are actually doing those kinds of really long events, marathons, for instance. You're getting into regular repeated effort, and your ability to continue that effort is going to be dependent mainly on the efficiency of the movement, on your ability to strike a balance between the movement itself, the generation of the muscular movements that are required, and fuel utilization across the different sources of nerve, muscle, blood, heart, and lungs. Let's ask the question, why would you fail on a long run? Why would you quit? Well, your mind is going to use more or less energy, depending on how much willpower, how much of a fight you have to get into with yourself in order to generate the effort. I really want to underscore this. Willpower, in part, is the ability to devote resources to things, and part of that is making decisions to just either do it or not do it. I'm not of the "just do it" mindset. I think there's a right time and a place to train, but I also think that it is not good, in other words, it utilizes excessive resources to churn over decisions excessively, and you probably burn as much cognitive energy deciding about whether or not to do a given training or not, as you do in the actual training. When you go out for a run that's 30 minutes, you are building the capacity to repeat that performance the next time, while being more efficient, actually burning less fuel. That might seem a little bit counterintuitive, but every time you do that run, what you're doing is you're building up mitochondrial density. It's not so much about mitochondrial oxidation and respiration, you're building up mitochondrial density. You're actually increasing the amount of ATP that you can create for a given bout of effort. You're becoming more efficient. You're burning less fuel overall, doing the same thing. That's really what these long, slow distance, or long bouts of effort are really all about. Why do this long-duration effort? Why would you want to do it? Why is it good for you? It does something very important, which is that it builds the capillary beds within muscles. These are tiny little avenues, like little tiny streams and estuaries between the bigger arteries and veins. You can literally build new capillaries. You can create new little streams within your muscles. The type of long-duration effort that I was talking about before, 12 minutes or more of steady effort, is very useful for doing that, and is very useful for increasing the mitochondria, the energy-producing elements of the cells, the actual muscle cells. The reason is when blood arrives to muscles, it has oxygen, the muscles are going to use some of that oxygen, and then some of the deoxygenated blood is going to be sent back to the heart and to the lungs. Now, the more capillaries that you build into those muscles, the more oxygen available to those muscles. This long-duration work, unlike muscular endurance like planks and everything that we were talking about before, is really about building the capillary systems and the mitochondria, the energy utilization systems within the muscles themselves. There are two kinds in-between that in recent years have gotten a lot of attention and excitement, sometimes called high-intensity interval training. One is anaerobic, so-called an-aerobic endurance, so no oxygen, and the other is aerobic endurance, both of which qualify as HIIT, high-intensity interval training. Let's talk about anaerobic endurance first. Anaerobic endurance, from a protocol perspective is going to be 3 to 12 sets. These are going to be performed at whatever speed allows you to complete the work in good, safe form. It could be fast, it could be slow. As the work continues, your repetitions may slow down or it may speed up. Chances are it's going to slow down. What does this work? What do these sets look like? Remember, long, slow distance is one set. Muscular endurance is three to five sets. High-intensity anaerobic endurance is going to be somewhere between 3 and 12 sets, and it's going to have a ratio of work to rest of anywhere from three-to-one to one-to-five. What would a three-to-one ratio set look like? It's going to be 30 seconds of hard pedaling on the bike, for instance, or running, or on the rower. These are just examples. It could be in the pool swimming, it could be any number of things, or air squats, or weighted squats if you will, provided you can manage that. 30 seconds on, 10 seconds off. That's a very brief rest. three-to-one is just a good example would be 30 seconds on, 10 seconds off. The opposite extreme on that ratio would be one-to-five, so 20 seconds on, 100 seconds off. You do the work for 20 seconds, then you rest 100 seconds. Let's just take a look at the three-to-one ratio. In the three-to-one ratio, if you're going to do 30 seconds of hard pedaling on a bike, followed by 10 seconds, so maybe one of these, what they call assault bikes, and then you stop for 10 seconds and then repeat, chances are you will be able to do 1, 2, 3, 4, maybe even as many as 12 sets if you're really in good condition, that you'll be able to do all those because pedaling on the bike doesn't require a ton of skill. If you do it incorrectly, if your elbow flares out a little bit or something, it's very unlikely that you'll get injured unless it's really extreme. The same movement done, for instance, with kettlebells, so 30 seconds on, 10 seconds off, the first set will probably be in good form. The second one will be in pretty good form. Let's say you're getting to the fifth and sixth set and you're going 30 seconds on, 10 seconds off, chances are the quality of your repetitions will degrade significantly, and you increase the probability that you're going to get injured. If quality of form is important, so maybe this is using weights, maybe you're doing squats, so you're going to do 20 seconds on and 100 seconds of rest, what you'll find is that the longer rest, even though it's 20 seconds of intense effort, followed by a longer rest of about 100 seconds, will allow you to perform more quality repetitions safely over time. It might be three sets of 20 seconds of hard effort followed by 100 seconds rest. Then you repeat, 20 seconds of hard effort, 100 seconds rest, 20 seconds hard effort, 100 seconds rest. You might do that twice a week. In doing that, you will build up what we call anaerobic endurance. Anaerobic endurance is going to be taking your system into greater than 100% of your VO2 max. It's going to be taking your heart rate up very high, and it's going to maximize your oxygen utilization systems. That is going to have effects that are going to lead to fatigue at some point in the workout, and that fatigue will trigger an adaptation. Let's ask what adaptation it's triggering. It's triggering both mitochondrial respiration, the ability of your mitochondria to generate more energy by using more oxygen because you're maxing out. Literally, you're getting above your VO2 max. You're hitting that threshold of how much oxygen you can use in your system. One of the adaptations will be that your mitochondria will shift such that they can use more oxygen. You're going to also increase the capillary beds, but not as much as you're going to be able to increase the amount of neuron engagement of muscle. Normally, when we start to hit fatigue, when we're exhausted, when we're breathing really hard, because the systems of the body are linked and there's a mental component to this as well, a kind of motivational component, after that third or fourth, or sixth set of 20 seconds on, 100 seconds off, or if you're at the other extreme, 30 seconds on and 10 seconds off, there's going to be a component of you want to stop. By pushing through and repeating another set, safely, of course, what you're doing is you are training the neurons to be able to access more energy, literally, convert that into ATP and for the muscles, therefore, to access more energy and ATP. The adaptation is in the mitochondria's ability to use oxygen, and this has tremendous carryover effects for other types of exercise. This can be beneficial in competitive sports or team sports where there's a sprinting component, where the field opens up and you need to dribble the ball down the field, for instance, and shoot on goal. Or where you're playing tennis, and it's a long rally, and then all of a sudden somebody really starts putting you back on your heels and you have to really make the maximum amount of effort to run to the net and to get the ball across the net. Things of that sort. There are a variety of places where there's carryover from this type of training, but it does support endurance. It's about muscle endurance, it's about these muscles' ability to generate a lot of force in the short term but repeatedly. That's the way to conceptualize this. It is different than maximum power. Even though it feels like maximum effort, it is not the same as building power and speed into muscles. Those are distinctly different protocols. The key elements, again, are that you're bringing your breathing and your oxygen utilization way up above your max. It's not quite hitting failure, but you're really pushing the system to the point where you are not ready to do another set, and yet you begin another set. You're not necessarily psychologically ready. I want to make sure I touch on the fourth protocol, which is high-intensity aerobic conditioning. HIIT has these two forms, anaerobic and aerobic. You just heard about anaerobic. High-intensity aerobic conditioning also involves about 3 to 12 sets. A one-to-one ratio is powerful for building, on average, most of the energy systems involving-- remember, we had these nerve, muscle, blood, heart, and lungs. A one-to-one ratio might be, you run a mile, and however long that takes, you might run first mile is, let's say seven minutes, then you rest for seven minutes, then you run a mile again and it might take eight minutes and you rest for eight minutes. You continue that for a total of four miles of running work, I should say. You can build this up. Many people find that using this type of training allows them to do things like go run half marathons and marathons even though prior to the race date, they've never actually run a half marathon or marathon. That might seem incredible. It's like, how could it be that running a mile and then resting for an equivalent amount of time, running a mile, resting for equivalent amount of time, for 7 miles, allows you to run continuously for 13 miles or for 26 miles? It improves ATP and mitochondrial function in muscle. It allows the blood to deliver more oxygen to the muscle and to your brain, and it allows your heart to deliver more oxygen overall, and it builds a tremendous lung capacity. What would this look like, and when should you do this? It's really a question for these workouts of asking how much work can one do in 8 to 12 minutes, and then rest, and then repeat? How much work can you do for 8 to 12 minutes, then rest, and then repeat? How many times should you do this? This is the thing, it's pretty intense, and so you would probably only want to do this two, maybe three times a week if you're not doing many other things. We have four kinds of endurance, muscular endurance, we have long-duration endurance, we have high-intensity interval training of two kinds, anaerobic and aerobic, and this last type, the aerobic one, works best, it seems, if you do this one-to-one ratio. How would you use these and what are they actually doing? Let's talk about the heart and the lungs and oxygen, because that's something that we can all benefit from understanding. The brain and the heart are probably the two most important systems that you need to take care of in your life. Maintaining or enhancing a brain function and cardiovascular function, it's absolutely clear, are key for health and longevity in the short and long term. The sorts of training I talked about today has been shown again and again and again to be very useful for enhancing the strength of the mind yes, I'll talk about that - as well as the health of the brain and the body. Let's talk about the sorts of adaptations that are happening in your brain and body that are so beneficial in these different forms of training. If you are breathing hard and your heart is beating hard, so this would be certainly in the high-intensity anaerobic and aerobic conditioning because you're getting up near your VO2 max in high-intensity aerobic conditioning and you're exceeding your VO2 max in high-intensity anaerobic conditioning, what's going to happen is as, of course, your heart beats faster, your blood is going to be circulating faster in principle. Oxygen utilization in muscles is going to go up, and over time, not long, very quickly what will happen when those capillary beds start to expand, in addition, because of the amount of blood that's being returned to the heart when you engage in these really intense bouts of effort repeatedly, the amount of blood being returned to the heart actually causes an eccentric loading of one of the muscular walls of the heart. Your heart is muscle, it's cardiac muscle. We have skeletal muscle attached to our bones, then we have cardiac muscle which is our heart. When more blood is being returned to the heart because of the additional work that your muscles and nerves are doing, it actually has the effect of creating an eccentric loading, a kind of pushing of the wall. I realize I'm not using the strict anatomy here, but I don't want to get into all the structural features of the heart. The left ventricle essentially getting slammed back and then having to push back, and a kind of eccentric loading of the cardiac muscle, and the muscle thickens. As more blood is returned to the heart, there's an adaptation where the heart muscle actually gets stronger and therefore can pump more blood per stroke, per beat. As it does that, it delivers, because blood contains glucose and oxygen, and other things, it delivers more fuel to your muscles, which allows you to do yet more work per unit time. If you do this high-intensity-type training where your heart is beating very hard, so maybe the one-to-one ratio mile-run repeats that I described a minute ago, pretty soon, the stroke volume of your heart will really increase. As a consequence, you can deliver more fuel to your muscles and to your brain, your cognitive functioning will improve. This has been shown again and again because there's an increase in vasculature, literally capillary beds within the brain, the hippocampus areas that support memory, but also areas of the brain that support respiration, that support focus, that support effort. Weight training does have some positive effects on brain function also. However, it's very clear, and you should now understand intuitively, why the kind of standard strength and hypertrophy-type workouts are not going to activate the blood oxygenation and the stroke volume increases for the heart that the sorts of training I'm talking about today will. It just doesn't have the same positive effects. The other thing that's really important to think about in terms of endurance-type work is hydration. I think hydration is important for all forms of physical work and exercise, not just endurance. Typically, we're going to lose anywhere from 1 to 5 pounds of water per hour of exercise. That's going to vary tremendously. It's going to vary on weather, it's going to vary on intensity, probably more like 5 pounds if it's hot day and you're exercising very intensely. If you think about your weight in pounds, once you lose about 1% to 4% of your body weight in water, you are going to experience about a 20% to 30% reduction in work capacity, in your ability to generate effort of any kind, strength, endurance, et cetera. You are also going to experience a significant drop in your ability to think and perform mental operations, so hydration is key. Potassium, sodium and magnesium are really key. Yes, it's true, you can die from drinking too much water in particular because it forces you, if you drink too much water, you'll excrete too many electrolytes, and your brain will shut off. Actually, your heart will stop functioning properly. You don't want to overconsume water to the extreme either. A simple formula, what I call the Galpin Equation, which is your body weight in pounds divided by the number 30. That is how many ounces you should drink for every 15 minutes of exercise. If you are sweating a lot, you may need more. If you're already very well hydrated, you may need less. That's a good rule of thumb to begin and to start to understand the relationship between hydration and performance. We didn't talk about supplements much today. In the previous episodes I talked about the phosphocreatine system and supplementing with creatine, talked about beta-alanine for moderate-duration work. Really, the only things that have been shown to really improve endurance work across the four varieties of endurance work I described today, they have essentially two forms. One are stimulants, so things like caffeine will definitely improve endurance work and power output. Certain forms of magnesium, in particular, magnesium malate, M-A-L-A-T-E, have been shown to be useful for removing or reducing the amount of delayed onset muscle soreness. That form of magnesium is distinctly different than the sorts of magnesium that are good for getting us into sleep, things like magnesium threonate and bisglycinate. In general, we focused mainly today on behavioral tools. I hope I was able to illustrate for you that endurance isn't just one thing. It's not just the ability to go for long bouts of exercise of different kinds. There's also this mental component because of the way that neurons work, and also that there are these different forms of endurance, of muscular endurance, where you're going to fail because of the muscles and muscle energy utilization, and the nerves that innervate those muscles locally, not because of a failure to bring in oxygen or blood. Whereas long-duration effort, it's going to be more about being below your VO2 max and your ability to be efficient for long bouts of more than 12 minutes of exercise. One set, as they say, of 12 minutes to maybe several hours. High-intensity training will tap into yet other fuel sources and mechanisms, as we learned today. Last but not least, thank you for your interest in science. [music]

========================================

--- Video 12 ---
Video ID: UyneMnERmnI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UyneMnERmnI
Title: How to Improve Your Vitality & Heal From Disease | Dr. Mark Hyman
Published: 2025-04-14 12:00:52 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. Mark Hyman, M.D., a physician and world leader in the field of functional medicine. We discuss a systems-based framework for diagnosing and treating the root causes of disease, rather than simply managing symptoms. We also cover cutting-edge health and longevity tools such as peptides, NAD/NMN, exosomes, proactive blood testing and cancer screening, as well as nutrition, supplementation, detoxification, and strategies for addressing specific diseases and health challenges. This discussion will benefit anyone seeking to improve their vitality or combat specific health concerns.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/iKSCqnh

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Joovv: https://joovv.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
Function: https://functionhealth.com/huberman
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman

*Dr. Mark Hyman*
Website: https://drhyman.com 
UltraWellness Center: https://www.ultrawellnesscenter.com 
Books: https://drhyman.com/pages/about-dr-hyman 
Newsletter: https://drhyman.com/pages/longevity 
Podcast: https://drhyman.com/blogs/content/tagged/podcast 
Function Health: https://www.functionhealth.com 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/drmarkhyman
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/drmarkhyman
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/user/ultrawellness 
X: https://x.com/drmarkhyman 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@drmarkhyman
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@drmarkhyman 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/drhyman 

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Dr. Mark Hyman
00:01:48 Functional Medicine, Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, Mercury; Systems Medicine
00:08:51 Metabolic Psychiatry; Medicine, Creating Health vs Treating Disease
00:12:19 Sponsors: Joovv & Eight Sleep
00:15:06 Wholistic View of Body, Root Causes
00:19:48 Medicine & Research; “Exposome”, Impediments & Ingredients for Health, Whole Foods
00:26:30 Seed Oils, Starch & Sugar, Ultra-Processed Foods; Obesity Rise
00:36:27 Sponsors: Function & ROKA
00:40:05 Tool: Ingredients for Health, Personalization; Multimodal Approach
00:46:25 Essential Supplements, Omega-3s, Vitamin D3, Multivitamin, Iodine, Methylated B12
00:56:54 Supplements & Traditional Medicine; Limited Budget & Nutrition
01:02:54 Air, Tool: Air Filters; Tap Water Filter; Tool: Health, Expense & Whole Foods
01:09:03 Food Industrialization, Processed Foods
01:14:23 Sponsor: AG1
01:16:18 Declining American Health & Nutrition, Politics, MAHA
01:26:03 Toxins, Food Additives, Generally Recognized As Safe (GRAS) 
01:29:25 SNAP Program & Soda, Food Industry & Lobbying
01:36:58 Big Food, Company Consolidation, Nutrition Labels
01:44:21 GLP-1 Agonists, Doses, Risks; Food as Medicine, Ketogenic Diet
01:51:29 Cancer, Diets & Alcohol
01:54:03 Blood Markers, ApoB, Cholesterol, Tool: Test Don’t Guess, Individualization
02:02:54 Mercury; Tool: Detoxification, Sulforaphane, N-Acetylcysteine (NAC)
02:04:56 Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals, Fertility, Tool: Hormone Panels; Heavy Metals 
02:11:36 Upregulate Detox Pathways, Gut Cleanse, Tools: Cilantro Juice, Fiber
02:17:08 Peptides, PT-141 (Vyleesi), BPC-157, Thymosin Alpha-1; Risks, Cycling
02:22:03 Cancer Screening, Data & Personalized Health; Alzheimer’s Disease
02:30:45 Longevity Switches, NAD, NMN; Exosomes, Stem Cells
02:39:50 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Follow & Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Protocols Book, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science #Health 

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. Mark Heyman. Dr. Mark Heyman is a medical doctor and an internationally recognized leader in the field of functional medicine. He is a practicing physician and the head of strategy and innovation at the Cleveland Clinic Center for Functional Medicine. Today we discuss what is functional medicine, how the different systems of the body interact to improve or degrade our health, the science of mitochondria and metabolic health, nutrition, inflammation, and how you can leverage these factors to improve your physical and mental health and cognitive performance at any age. We also talk about how to confront any health challenges you might face by taking a systems level approach. Dr. Heyman's work is unique in that it integrates conventional medicine because after all he is an MD with what he calls good medicine which is an amalgamation of the best practices from both traditional and alternative approaches. During today's discussion you'll see that Dr. Heyman's expertise on a diverse range of topics really comes through. For instance, we talk about food both sourcing micronutrients macronutrients timing. We talk about exercise and we talk a lot about supplementation and which supplements can provide tremendous benefit for certain people in particular. Dr. Heyman grounds all that knowledge in the latest discoveries in human biology to provide you with actionable tools that you can apply in any case and at any age. By the end of today's episode, I'm certain that everybody will glean at least one and very likely several important protocol updates that they can incorporate to improve their general health. And now for my discussion with Dr. Mark Heyman. Dr. Mark Heyman, welcome. Thanks, Andrew. So good to be here. Great to see you. We go back a few years. Yeah. Like almost 10. Yeah. It's been awesome to see your arc and you were at it long before I met you. I think to kick things off probably best if you explain to people what functional medicine is and what your orientation towards health and medicine is because I think there are a few misconceptions out there both about functional health and you but I think also you provide a very unique perspective you've been at this vista that no one else has had where you know people who are deans of medical schools you know people who are biohackers you know the general public you've treated and treat patients And you also are an experimentalist with yourself and can make suggestions about things that can help people. So yeah, tell us how you parachuted into this whole thing and how you look at this whole thing that we call health and medicine. Yeah, thank you Andrew. And it, you know, I I would say that, you know, I didn't choose what I'm doing. It chose me. Uh I was super healthy, fit, you know, riding my bike 100 miles a day. I was 36 years old and then wham I got really sick and I went from being able to memorize 30 patients in a day and dictate their notes and ride my bike a 100 miles to not knowing where I was at the end of a sentence and not being able to barely walk up the stairs and I got hit with chronic fatigue syndrome and I tried to figure out what it was. I went to, you know, doctors at Harvard and Colombia here, they're everywhere and oh, you're depressed, take some Prozac, this and that. And I realized that I I, you know, traditional medicine wasn't having the answers. And even though I sort of came from the perspective of like a yoga teacher before I was a doctor, you know, I studied Buddhism. Yeah. Yoga teacher. I was It was back in the 80s. You're a tall guy, long mat. It was They didn't have yoga mats when I was doing yoga. You put a towel on the ground. There was no Lululemon. It was it was like on top of like the East West bookstore in New York City, there was like one yoga class in the early 80s. Okay, that was it. Uh and I studied Buddhism in college, but I also studied systems thinking and systems theory and Gregory Bateson and you know the nature of the network effect of life and biology and everything else. And so I kind of went through medical school, but when I came out I was pretty straight traditional medicine doctor. But then I got sick and it turned out I had gone to China to live there for a year and work as a doctor to help start expatriate medical clinics because there were no western medical clinics in China and people were terrified who were 60,000 expatriots to go to the Chinese hospital. So I spoke Chinese because I studied Asian studies. I went there. But what I inadvertently had happened was I got exposed to huge amounts of mercury from the air because they burned coal and coal expels lead and mercury and lots of other toxins and they there's 10 million people in Beijing in the city at the time and they all heated their homes with raw coal and I had an air filter that I would clean out every day and the breathe the black soot in. I got like a whopping dose of mercury and it took a couple years for it to kind of cause this problem. But from one day the next I went from being great to not being great and my gut broke down. I had diarrhea for years. My cognitive function completely went south. It was like I had dementia, ADD and depression all at once. I ended up having autoimmune stuff going on and just rashes and sores and I couldn't think. I literally almost had to go in disability. And I met a person who introduced me to this guy Jeff Bland who studied with Lionus Pauling and had a very different view of health that really was more around the framework of the body as a network as a system as an ecosystem where everything is connected and that it wasn't reductionist. It was inclusive. And when when we go to medical school, we we're taught to ask for the symptoms, look for the signs, do the lab testing, and come up with a singular diagnosis to explain everything. And you know it if there's extraneous symptoms that don't fit the thing we're looking for then we dismiss it. You know if you go to the the the the doctors for migraines and you say well I got irritable bowel. Oh go see the GI doctor or I have this rash. You go oh see the dermatologist. But the truth is the body's connected and everything is connected. And so functional medicine is really about understanding the body as a network as a system and it's a it's a meta framework for understanding biology like a it's I think of it as an operating system. Uh it's not based on just diagnostic testing or supplements which a lot of people think it is. It's really based on understanding the network of bi. So we were doing microbiome testing. We didn't call it that. It was just poop testing back then. You know, we were we were looking at hormones, at mitochondria, at inflammation, at insulin resistance, at all the things that are toxic environmental toxins and their role in health. And we're trying to understand how the body started to sort of work. And through that process, I literally had to reverse engineer my way back to health by understanding all the systems. So, my adrenals shut down, my thyroid wasn't working, my mitochondria were terrible, my muscle enzymes were super high, like CPK were super high because I had a mitochondrial injury, which is the little, you know, factories in your cells that make energy. I had severe cognitive issues and neurotransmitter issues and sleep issues. I mean uh immune issues, rashes. So my whole system broke down. So I literally had to learn every system of the body and how it worked and how it connected to every other system and then create uh a healing plan for myself and that allowed me to recover. So that really taught me to there's this new way of thinking. And I remember when I I was working at Kenya Ranch as a as a medical director and I would see all these patients coming in and I I started think well you know I'm going to try to do this on my patients and see what happens and just apply these principles and I call them the laws of biology right we don't have laws laws of biology that we can easily describe or laws of medicine we have laws of physics but that doesn't mean there aren't laws of biology and what functional medicine I believe is is the first clinical application of this understanding of the laws of biology and there's like scientists like Lero Hood who created the institute for system biology and folks like at Harvard Lazium Barbasi was studying this and wrote a book called network medicine about the body as a network but for me I had to start to you know apply this in clinic and so I would people would come in with autoimmune diseases or with intractable depression or with terrible gut issues or dementia or autism or you name it diabetes and I would apply these principles and they get better and like literally I would say eat this way, don't eat that. You know, simple stuff like it was not, you know, that complicated. And six weeks later, I'd say they follow visit. I'd say, "Oh, so how you doing?" "Oh, all my symptoms are better." I'm like, "What? Really? Your migraines are gone?" Like I couldn't believe it. Like it was such a shock to me as a traditionally trained physician that people were actually getting better. And so then I knew I knew this was something real. Even though it was sort of 30 years ago was just sort of not even on the radar, still is pretty pretty much not on the radar. Although like New York Times is doing articles about it now, things are changing, things are changing slowly, but they're but they're changing, I think, which sort of um dovetales with the question I was going to ask, which is um how did the medical establishment view this stuff, you know, these days it's so complicated without, you know, um taking off on a tangent here, you know, the word expert is gated politically. Like one side feels like they you can only be called expert if you're with their camp. the other side is now associated with kind of more of a um like a like a wellness aspect and you know and I don't even have to say which side I'm referring to here and it's it's become a real clash of you know we only believe in randomized control trials or um you know there's clearly evidence that you know nutrition matters and it's like of course both things are important and so what you're describing here is that you this intersection this intersection and there really isn't a political home for the intersection unfortunately Maybe in these um new uh in this new I didn't know cells had a political ideology. That's right. That's right. Um no, that's that's right. I got the red cell and the blue cell. Exactly. And and that's what I love about you is that you you are you you have friends in both camps and and you're willing to trudge forward. What what did the medical establishment think? Yeah. And um and how many of you are there now? Yeah, it's a great question. I mean, I remember talking about leaky gut almost 30 years ago and talking to allergists and immunologists. People thought you were crazy and people thought I was a looney tune. Same thing with chronic fatigue. By the way, I remember when chronic fatigue syndrome was considered a psychosmatic. It's just it's, you know, people are crazy if they think they have this. And um we now know uh like fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue, and leaky gut. This all used to be for those that are listening that a little bit younger uh than Mark and I that um that was considered pseudocience. Just the whole notion there are now departments at major university medical centers devoted to each one of these. That's right. Maybe not whole departments but but sectors within departments. Yeah. I think it's it's crazy how things have changed. And so now you know we have people who are talking about mitochondria in medicine like people like Christopher Palmer who's a Harvard professor psychiatrist who's studying psychiatric disease and the application of diet nutrition to treat bipolar disorder and schizophrenia or I will say Stanford sorry to cut you off now has a division within our department of psychiatry on metabolic psychiatry in large part thanks to Chris's work. Yeah. Yeah. And yeah so so metabolic psychiatry about you know role of sort of insulin resistance and inflammation in the brain as causing depression and causing anxiety and more severe things like bipolar disease since born and schizophrenia and these are the things that I saw like in my patients so I wasn't an academic but I I would just look at their story and listen to it and I would look at the underlying biology because you know you you talk about the sort of intersection of the sort of the biohacking kind of wellness and medical community. Lee Hood has a term for this. He calls it scientific wellness. And when people ask me what functional medicine is, I say it's the science of creating health as opposed to the science of treating disease. When you create health, disease goes away as a side effect. So if you optimize your basic body systems, your gut, your immune system, your mitochondria, your detox system, your hormonal regulatory system, when you optimize those things, symptoms go away. And you don't have to treat all the different branches of the trees and the leaves on the trees. You treat the root and the trunk, which is what functional medicine does. I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor, JWVE. JWV makes medical grade red light therapy devices. Now, if there's one thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast, it is the incredible impact that light can have on our biology. Now, in addition to sunlight, red light and near infrared light sources have been shown to have positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cellar and organ health, including faster muscle recovery, improved skin health and wound healing, improvements in acne, reduced pain and inflammation, even mitochondrial function, and improving vision itself. What sets tube lights apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy device is that they use clinically proven wavelengths, meaning specific wavelengths of red light and near infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal cellar adaptations. Personally, I use the JWV whole body panel about three to four times a week and I use the JWV handheld light both at home and when I travel. If you'd like to try JWV, you can go to JV spelled jovv.com/huberman. JWV is offering an exclusive discount to all Huberman Lab listeners with up to $400 off JW products. Again, that's JW spelled J Ov.com/huberman to get up to $400 off. Today's episode is also brought to us by EightLe. Eight makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. Now, I've spoken before on this podcast about the critical need for us to get adequate amounts of quality sleep each and every night. Now, one of the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop about 1 to 3°. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3°. Eight automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs. Now, I find that extremely useful because I like to make the bed really cool at the beginning of the night, even colder in the middle of the night, and warm as I wake up. That's what gives me the most slowwave sleep and rapid eye movement sleep. And I know that because EightLe has a great sleep tracker that tells me how well I've slept and the types of sleep that I'm getting throughout the night. I've been sleeping on an EightLe mattress cover for four years now, and it has completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep. Their latest model, the Pod 4 Ultra, also has snoring detection that will automatically lift your head a few degrees in order to improve your air flow and stop you from snoring. If you decide to try eight, you have 30 days to try it at home, and you can return it if you don't like it, no questions asked. But I'm sure that you'll love it. Go to eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 off your Pod 4 Ultra. 8LE ships to many countries worldwide, including Mexico and the UAE. Again, that's eight.com/huberman to save up to $350 off your Pod4 Ultra. For example, can I tell you a quick story, please? I want to tell a story about a patient I had at Cleveland Clinic, which actually, by the way, was amazing, that Toby Cosgrove, who's one of the most renowned figures in medicine as CEO of was a CO Cleveland Clinic for years, invited me to come start a center for functional medicine there. And we we've done, you know, been 10 years now. We've done a ton of research. This one patient came to see me and she had a whole list of problems. And that's why I jokingly call myself a holistic doctor because I take care care people with a whole list of problems. I want to know everything. And functional medicine is inclusive rather than exclusive. It's like rather than discarding things that don't fit your diagnosis, we want to know everything about you of how you were born, whether you were breastfed, whether you took antibiotics, any traumas, any toxins you're exposed to, whether you eat fish, like we want to know everything. And so this woman came to see me. She had seriatic arthritis, which is a terrible disease where your joints break down. You got, you know, those heartbreak of psoriasis, the rashes and itchy plaques on your skin. But she had a whole bunch of other stuff, too. She had migraines. She had pre-diabetes. She had depression. She was a 50-year-old health coach who, I mean, life coach who and business coach who was very successful, but was struggling. She had terrible reflux, irritable bowel syndrome. So, she had all these clusters of diseases. And I said, "Gee, what do these things have in common? What's the root?" Inflammation. And I know you've talked a lot about this on your podcast, but inflammation is a sort of the root of many chronic illnesses, whether it's obesity, diabetes, heart disease, cancer, dementia, autism, depression. I mean, the list goes on and on. Autoimmune, allergy, obviously. And I said, why don't you you why don't we look at your gut because you're having a ton of gut symptoms. You have terrible bloating, distension, what I call a food baby, you know, you know, when you eat something, it's like get a food baby. and she also um had been on a history of lots of antibiotics and steroids for her rheumato heriac arthritis. And so I said, "Look, why don't we just treat your gut and then see what happens?" So we put her on an elimination diet. We eliminated all the inflammatory foods and things that were causing fermentation that could kind of cause the back bad bacteria in her gut to ferment the foods and cause a bloating and leaky gut. We basically took out dairy, gluten, grains, sugar, processed foods, put on whole foods, anti-inflammatory, microbiome healing diet. We gabri vitamin D, fish oil, some probiotics, really simple stuff. And I said, come back in six weeks and we'll do some diagnostics and in the meantime do do this program and then come back. She came back. She said, well, all my symptoms were gone and I stopped all my medication. I'm like, oh, I didn't ask you to stop your medication, right? But she was on stellar, which cost $50,000 a year. It's a immune biologic. She was on a host of other do drugs from her psychiatrist, from her migraine doctor, for her irritable valve, for her reflux. I mean, it was like a whole pile of pills. She was off everything and she had no symptoms and she was all better and she lost 20 pounds and it wasn't it wasn't an anomaly or a miracle. It was just following the principles of how the body works, you know, and and uh in that textbook network medicine, they talk about how we need to understand mechanisms and causes, not just symptoms and diagnosis. And we need to understand that that there's multicausality for different problems. So it may be not just one thing that causes the disease, right? You might have toxins, you might be your diet, you might have your microbiome issues, you might, you know, have some other trauma or stress and all those things like kind of are the soup that then breaks the system down so it gets sick. And so my job is basically to see where are the things that are broken down and how do I help repair them? How do I remove the root causes? whether it's mercury or whether it's mold or whether it's you know your microbiome having dispiosis or whether it's a trauma that you need to deal with through MDMA assisted psychotherapy which hopefully will be passed soon you know there's all sorts of things to do to help the body but you have to have the the framework for having the right assessment of someone otherwise they don't get better and and you know I've had the privilege as working at Kenya Ranch and my own private practice of doing tens of thousands of dollars worth of testing potentially on tens of thousands of patients over decades and seen literally millions and millions of data points of their story and their labs and their treatment and their outcomes. And so I have this really deep understanding of all the ways in which these systems interact and connect. And so I think people, you know, can map out what's happening in their biology in ways that now tell them what's really going on. And we're seeing that happening that the testing community is growing and the that people want to know what's going on their bodies and they're using wearables and they're using CGMs and all kind of self diagnostic tools which I think are important because people aren't getting the answer from the traditional medical system. Well, and a lot of physicians, unlike you, frankly, don't look very healthy, which people can say, "Okay, well, it shouldn't be about about looks." But, you know, if I was at the dentist and I look up and my dentist is snaggletooth and decaying teeth, doesn't bring me a lot of confidence. You look pretty good for 100, huh? You look great. And you're and you're super vital. I think you know this this idea of of systems biology and health um is really important for people to understand because you know I I always say um well there are two sayings I didn't say the first the first one uh was taught to me when I was a graduate student which is you know a drug is a substance that when injected into an animal or human produces a scientific paper meaning meaning anytime you manipulate a variable there are two things that if you oftenimes if you inject a drug at a high enough dose you'll see an effect if you deprive sleep you'll see an effect and that points to several things but I think both of them uh have a vector in the direction of this uh systems biology you know if everything modulates everything else so if your gut is off it's going to modulate your sleep which is going to modulate your cognition and if your um if you were to boost your uh you know some vitamin level um ridiculously high or have it ridiculously low it's involved in thousands of processes in the body and so if you look at any one of those you might see a subtle effect. I think the challenge of reductionist science and reductionist medicine is because the goal in good science is to isolate variables. You can't by definition actually look at a whole system. Although now with AI maybe you could explore how adjusting one variable impacts pretty much every major system of the brain and body. Yeah. But it's just very hard to do. And as somebody who's done laboratory science for gosh well over 25 years and instructed other people how to do it and graduate students and posttos I mean it's it's it's an art but it's a it's limited in terms of what it can reveal. Yeah. And and we work as a system. So I think this is what we're getting at here. So you're saying the scientific process itself precludes us from really understanding things because we can't study things in the way they need to be studied. Well, yeah. Like let's say you come into my lab and I want to study um how uh you know increasing lcarnitine for instance um impacts your mood immune system function and sleep. I can do that study but even that is just an infinitely complex study. I can do dose response. I'll probably do oral versus injectable and then I can't control unless it's in laboratory animals. Yeah. On a on a same genetic background. I can't control whether or not one person's, you know, having a Snickers and the other person is having a Snickers and telling me and then one person's lying and I mean it is so hard to do controlled science. So what we end up doing is we end up creating very artificial environments, very artificial conditions and isolating variables and outcomes and um at the same time genomics sequencing proteomics have allowed us to identify interesting genes that have a potential role in longevity or stem cells and Yamanaka factors. And so I feel like it cuts both ways. And so as a physician when somebody comes in and I and I'm asking this question so that people can think about their own health. If people are feeling like not well. Yeah. Right. Where do you start? Yeah. Like like this thing like where do you start? You start with how you're sleeping, how you're eating, uh skin tone. I imagine you can look at somebody and kind of get a sense of their vibrancy at the level of their eyes. Like where do you start? I can tell people's blood work sometimes just by looking at them. There you go. So, so where do you start? Like what what's the what should we when we look in the mirror in the morning? What what are we looking for? I think it's a great question. I I think that, you know, just to back up one second, I think, you know, you talked about, you know, putting high dose of something in or a lack of sleep. Functional medicine is about understanding the answer to two very simple questions and then designing a treatment model based on the answers to those questions. And the questions are one, what are you exposed to that's interrupting your normal function? Hence, functional medicine. What is it? What is it that's bugging you? What's pissing your system off? Is it? And there's a short list, Andrew. It's it's toxins and it can be internal endogenous toxins or external toxins like heavy metals or pesticides or glyphosate or a million other things. It's infections or microbes. So, it can be, you know, postcoid syndrome with persistent spike protein. It can be epsim bar virus that leads to MS. It can be Lyme disease. It can be your microbiome being off which is the truth for most of us. It's allergens which are things that your body's reacting to both environmental allergens or could be food allergens or food sensitivities which is not truly an allergen but it's more an adverse reaction to food from leaky gut. It can be poor diet which I think most of us understand what that is. It can be stress and that can be physical mechanical stress like being hit by a car or psychological stress or your the meaning you make from a psychological stress which is really what caused you to be sick. I know you've had Gabbor on your your podcast. No, not yet. We haven't had no but but we've had a number of people talking about the relationship between mind and body and stress and um certainly it's a profound connection. Yeah. So you have this list of five things that interacts with your genome and is is really what we call the exposome. What's what your genes are exposed to is far more predictive than your genome. Your exposome includes sum total of everything you're exposed to on the positive and the negative. All the things I just listed, but also all the ingredients for health. So I identify what are the impediments for health and then what are the ingredients for health. And the ingredients for health are not that complicated. We're biological organisms, right? Despite trying to live outside of our biological constraints, we need the right kind of food, right? Whole food. What does that look like? Michael Pollen said, "Eat food mostly plants, not too much, right? Or not too much, mostly plants, something like that." And it's basically eating foods that's that's as close to nature as you can find it. Grew out of the ground or had a pulse. Yeah. Yeah. Exa basically right. He says, "Eat food that's grown on a plant that's not made in a plant." And I used to lecture at these churches and I said, "It's really simple. Figure out what to eat. Ask yourself, did God make it or did man make it? Did God make a Twinkie? No. Did he make an avocado? Yes. Would our ancestors recognize it? Yeah. Like, would your great-grandmother know what a lunchable was or a Go-Gurt was or So, so this generally means eating foods that are single ingredient foods or foods that combine only single ingredients, single ingredient foods. Like you look at the label, you got to I read the labels like you look at it. Do I recognize this? Would I have this in my kitchen? Do I have butate hydroxy talamuine in my kitchen or red dye number three? Probably not, right? Unless you're a grandma making cupcakes that are really red. But so, so food, fruit, vegetables, yeah, meat, vegetables. Yeah. Quality dairy. Yeah. I mean, I've written so many books on this. The pagan diet, food, what the heck should I eat? I wanted to call it food. What the should I eat? But my publisher wouldn't let me. But nowadays, they probably would. I feel like they curse everywhere. So, there's like we can we can dive into nutrition, but just assume like you need depending on your age and your sex and your what you're doing with your life, you need the right nutrition of whole real food. Can I just ask you, we'll just quickly double click into there. What's your view on seed oils? Oi, no. Just, you know, I mean, I'll say mine. I like olive oil and butter, uh, coconut oil and things like avocados and some Brazil nuts and walnuts and stuff. So, since I don't count calories, I kind of have an intuitive sense, um, of what I'm taking in, how much fat, how much protein, how much starch, how much, you know, fibers, carbs, etc. So, for me, like I wouldn't pick canola oil because I could pick olive oil. Um, and I make sure it's real olive oil and but I don't think seed oils necessarily will kill me. But guess why? They I know they won't kill me cuz I don't eat them. We should be eating whole food fats as much as possible, right? avocados, coconut, nuts and seeds, you know, omega-3 fats from fish, olive oil, which is min the most minimally processed oil you can get, extravirgin olive oil, and and we're eating nuts and seeds. We're getting a lot of omega sixes. So, the big theory behind seed oils is that it's omega6 rich. It's imbalanced with omega-3s. It cause inflammation. The way they're produced and grown is problematic. They're usually GMO crops like canola oil. They spray lots of chemicals on them. Those chemicals get in the oil. They're manufactured in an industrial way that oxidizes them, that uses hexane to get rid of sort of some of the compounds in it, deodorizes them, bleaches them, and then they're easily oxidized. So, would I want to eat an industrial food product? Probably not. Do we know for sure that it's a problem? I think the data is mixed. I mean, there's some studies that show epidemologically that, you know, people who eat more of these plant-based oils or seed oils have reduced risk of diseases, but we don't know what they're doing. And there's food frequency questionnaires and there these studies are proving correlation, not causation and what it's replacing. Sorry to interrupt here, but you know, I'll see the uh data that seed oils are better for people than butter. Okay, I like grass-fed butter, but I don't eat it in excess. I once joked about that and I like I made some jokes early on in having a podcast not realizing the implications but anyway I'm very careful now I have some butter in moderation but so I could imagine that if you're eating a lot of lard and butter and bacon fat and you replace it with seed oils you'll get healthier but maybe maybe but you could imagine I guess it depends on what else you're ingesting because the carbo the starch fat combination is the one that gets people in my opinion but right somebody could be eating a lot of meat and fruit and don't eat like your butter with a bagel, put it on your broccoli cuz that the the saturated fat refined starch combo is what's killing us. I wish people would really hear you on this. It's not fat per se. It's not starches per se. It's the combination of fat and starch. And in particular, fat, starch, and sugar. Yeah. Well, starch sugar start sugar like below the neck. Your body can't tell if it's a bowl of sugar or a bowl of corn flakes or a bagel or a bowl of sugar. So, if I put a pad of of butter on a on a bowl of white rice, is it that bad? No, not really. But if I put a pad of butter on a muffin, it's bad news bears. Yeah, it's you're doubling down on the sugar. Yeah. And I think, you know, to to answer your question about the seed oil, the data is not really completely answering this, and it's part of the problem with nutrition. There's not enough nutrition science. the one large randomized controlled trial that was done on like 9,000 people, not on 90 people or 50 people or 30 people, which a lot of these studies are, but on 9,000 people that were randomized in a psychiatric hospital would be unethical to do today. It was done by Anel Keys. It was the Minnesota Coronary Experiment funded by the NIH where they basically gave half the group butter and half the group corn oil. Now, corn oil is a pure omega-6 oil as opposed to soybean, which is mixed omega-3, canola mixed omega-3, six oils. And what they found was striking. They found that the group that had the corn oil, for every 30 point drop in LDL cholesterol, the risk of death from heart attacks or strokes went up by 22%. Which is completely the opposite of what we think in medicine, which is LDL is the boogeyman. this LDL is the bad cholesterol or L for lousy cholesterol. It's not so simple. And I think I think the oversimplification of, you know, let's say these seed oils lower LDL, therefore they're good, is just too simplistic. But but if would I would I, for example, have a corn oil that was expeller pressed or that was organic or canola oil that was or sunflower or safflower oil? Yeah, I mean I don't I'm not worried about those in small amounts, but that's not what most people are doing. Most people are eating most their diet is ultrarocessed food. 60% of adults, 67% of kids is basically junk food. And the major oil in those are these refined oils. So is it the oils? Is it the junk food? They're just a vehicle for this. And we've increased our consumption. For example, the main seed oil or bean oil, it's not really a seed, is soybean oil by a thousandfold since 1900. Now I'm sort of an evolutionary thinker. I'm like what did our how are our bodies designed and what should we be doing with them and like you know you talk a lot about light that's like you know you went this sleep with the sun you woke up with the sun it was just how things were and you had circadian rhythms and our whole biological clocks and rhythms are screwed up because of how we live yeah we evolved under the major constraint of sunrise and sunset that's right and artificial lighting is a wonderful thing but um I think there's highly processed light it's devoid of long wavelengths the the eradication basically of incandescent bulbs and all these LEDs and highly processed light daylight savings times. It It's really messing people up. Maybe it's just an hour. No, actually it's your mental health. Yeah. When it comes to the seed oil thing, I I actually predict that seed oils will lose. I think in the end it's just obvious like why wouldn't people just say, you know what, the seed oil thing may or may not be a problem. I'm just going to eat olive oil and a little bit of butter. Yeah, that's kind of my view. Seems so simple to me. That's my view. Like until it's kind of my view is if you have a new new to nature kind of compound or an unnaturally high amount of something that we're having in our diet. I mean sugar was always around. We would get honey, whatever. But we'd have 22 teaspoons a year as hunter gathers. Now we have that every day for every American. If you had a magic wand and you could get rid of seed oils or you could get rid of um highly refined sugars in modern American diet, which one would be? Yeah. No contest. It's starch and sugar that's driving our metabolic crisis like by a huge factor. By a huge factor. If does that mean no pasta, no bread? It doesn't mean no no anything. It just means the volume of stuff we're eating is like we're eating pharmacologic doses. It's 152 pounds of sugar and 133 pounds of flour, which has a higher glycemic index than sugar. Really? Yeah. Well, that's how it's set. It's set at at white bread as 100 and then sugar is 80 because it's fructose and glucose. So you have to break that apart. And so your ins your glycemic load, which is how it affects your blood sugar. Fructose doesn't raise your blood sugar. Glucose raises your blood sugar. So where do we go wrong? Because I was a teen in the '9s. I don't until I discovered fitness. I I didn't eat poorly at home. My mom cooked. Pop-Tarts, craft macaron cheese. We weren't allowed that stuff. But margarine. We weren't allowed that stuff. But we had our like honey nut Cheerios preserved. We had our honey nut curios and things like that, but we ate mostly whole foods. And then um not from there wasn't Whole Foods market back then, but uh whole unprocessed minally processed foods, but I ate my fair share of, you know, pizza slices and burritos in college and stuff like that. But and I was active, but I wasn't a serious athlete. But then somewhere around 2010 forward, I feel like everything, you know, again, just to be very direct, there was probably one kid or two kids in my school that were were obese. Yeah. Now, depending on where you live, you see 60 70 80% of kids are obese. Yeah. So, I mean, what where what happened? I want to answer that and then I want to come back to the loop of what I was trying to complete on your the big thought of like how does the body work and how do you create health and what do you do because you asked me that question I want to lose that question. Um what what happened was there was uh this rise in cardiovascular in America and there was this thought that saturated fat and fat was the bad guy and this was the McGover report in the 70s that went on to be dietary guidelines that went on to be the food pyramid and the food pyramid essentially told us that fat was the enemy so it's only at the very tippy top fats and sparingly bottom of the pyramid was 6 to 11 servings things are bread, rice, cereal, and pasta a day, which sounds like a recipe for being hungry all the time and being obese right now. We didn't know at the time, but it became really clear that that was a bad idea pretty quick. And and the hockey stick rise in obesity, type 2 diabetes tracks perfectly with that information. The American public trusted the government. They trusted the scientists. And when they said fat's bad, carbs are good, everybody listened. Eggs, eggs are bad, eggs are bad, fat's bad, cholesterol is bad, red meats beat. So people ate less red meat, they ate less eggs, they ate less fat. And then we got snack bell cookies, you know, we got like, you know, lowfat ice cream and like and the sugar just went through the roof. And so that's when you see this this explosive rise. And then there's other factors. Our microbiome affects our weight. Environmental toxins affect our metabolism. So there's a whole bunch of things happen in tandem, but it that probably is the single biggest thing. So if someone asking for me, should I worry about soybean oil or sugar and starch? It's 100% sugar and starch. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, function. I recently became a Function member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing. While I've long been a fan of blood testing, I really wanted to find a more in-depth program for analyzing my blood, urine, and saliva to get a fuller picture of my heart health, my hormone status, my immune regulation status, my metabolic function, my vitamin and mineral status, and other critical areas of my overall health and vitality. Function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to physical and mental health, but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from top doctors. For example, in one of my first tests with function, I learned that I had an elevated level of mercury in my blood. Function not only helped me detect that, but also offered insights on how to best reduce my mercury levels, which included limiting my tuna consumption, and frankly, I had been eating a lot of tuna at that time, while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with knack and acetylcyine, both of which can support glutathione production and detoxification. And by the way, it worked. My mercury levels are now well within healthy range. Comprehensive lab testing like that is super important for health because basically a lot of things are going on in our blood and elsewhere in our body that we can't detect without a quality blood and urine test. And while I've strived to get those tests for many years, it's always been overly complicated and frankly quite expensive. Function dramatically simplifies all of it and makes it very affordable. I've been so impressed by Function that I decided to join their scientific advisory board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring this podcast. If you'd like to try Function, you can go to functionhealth.com/huberman for this week only, April 14th to April 20th, 2025. Function is offering a $100 credit to the first 10,000 people to sign up for a function membership. To get this $100 credit, use the code hubberman 100 at checkout. Visit functionhealth.com/huberman to learn more and get started. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROA. I'm excited to share that Roka and I recently teamed up to create a new pair of red lens glasses. These red lens glasses are meant to be worn in the evening after the sun goes down. They filter out shortwavelength light that comes from screens and from LED lights, which are the most common indoor lighting nowadays. I want to emphasize Roa Red Lens glasses are not traditional blue blockers. They do filter out blue light, but they filter out a lot more than just blue light. In fact, they filter out the full range of shortwavelength light that suppresses the hormone melatonin. By the way, you want melatonin high in the evening and at night. Makes it easy to fall and stay asleep. And those short wavelengths trigger increases in cortisol. Increases in cortisol are great in the early part of the day, but you do not want increases in cortisol in the evening and at night. These ROA Red Lens glasses ensure normal, healthy increases in melatonin and that your cortisol levels stay low, which is again what you want in the evening and at night. In doing so, these Roka Red Lens glasses really help you calm down and improve your transition to sleep. Roka Red Lens glasses also look great. They have a ton of different frames to select from, and you can wear them out to dinner or concerts, and you can still see things. I don't recommend you wear them while driving just for safety purposes. But if you're out to dinner, you're at a concert, you're at a friend's house, or you're just at home, pop those Roka Red Lens glasses on, and you'll really notice the difference in terms of your levels of calm and all the sleep stuff I mentioned earlier. So, it really is possible to support your biology. be scientific about it and remain social at the same time if you like. If you'd like to try ROA, go to roka.com. That's roka.com and enter the code huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's roa.com and enter the code hubman at checkout. So, um, so the '9s lowfat thing, yeah, was a disaster. And I wrote a book called Eat Fat Get Thin where I cataloged the whole history of how we got there and what the problems were and what the science is telling us about what we should be eating about the reconsidering saturated fat being bad. It's bad if you're eating it in the context of starch and sugar. For most people, it's not. And if you're obese or metabolically unhealthy, it actually can be better for you. There's a lower risk of diabetes and epidemological studies with butter and milk fat. So I don't I think I think we have to kind of like I know nutrition is a very complicated subject but I mean or not. Right. I don't know. I'm beginning to think that nutrition is a very straightforward subject. It should be. It should. Yeah. And I I confess I've had some pretty diametrically opposed views from guests on this podcast. We had Robert Lustig on the podcast. We had Lane Norton on the podcast. You get those two on separate podcast and they are like at loggerheads with one another. Right now Lane's correct in that total caloric load matters. Yeah, it's not everything, but it matters. I would say many people have a hard time limiting their intake of starchy carbohydrates, especially if you put a little bit of fat on there. It just becomes a different food entirely. Eating a bowl of white rice is pretty tasty. Eating a bowl of white rice with a p of butter and a little bit of salt on there is a completely different experience. A piece of sourdough bread is one thing. A piece of sourdough bread soaked in a little bit of olive oil with some salt, I'm eating half the loaf. Pretty good. Pretty good. Right. I have pretty good self-control. So, so this is where I think like we there's the debates have become almost silly. Yeah. And I I appreciate that you're being very direct with us here. So, take us back. So, you said there ingredients for health and they're impediments to health. So, the the ingredients for health uh are not again not a long list because we're human beings. We need the right food. We need the right amount of nutrients and it's different for different people. You might not know this, but Bruce Ames did an incredible paper who recently died, one of the giants of science, saying that one-third of our entire DNA codes for enzymes. All enzymes require co-actors. Most co-actors are vitamins and minerals. And there's a huge genetic variability in how much different people need. Some people need a thousand units of vitamin D. Some people need 5,000. Some people need 400 micrograms of folate. Some people need 4,000 micrograms of folate. And so he he kind of explained that very carefully. So you have to find the right amount of nutrients for you. You need the conditionally essential nutrients which people don't think are absolutely essential things like CoQ10 and various things that that the body requires that we may not get enough. Then you need light, you need water, you need clean air, you need uh movement, you need rest and I would say that in a parasympathetic state kind you need sleep, you need connection, love, meaning, purpose. These are all ingredients for health. And and any one of those can make you sick, whether it's just being isolated alone or not having a purpose in your life. If you have a meaning and purpose in your life, there's a jam paper published that you're likely to live seven years longer. Now, if you cut out all cancer and heart disease from the face of the planet, the extension of life expectancy, seven years, the mind is incredible. I have a colleague at Stanford who works in the sleep uh in the in the sleep division, sleep medicine, and he said, and I shouldn't tell people this because everyone's supposed to get enough sleep, right? But he said if you positively, they've done stud he has a a study that shows that if you positively anticipate next day events. Yeah. Your sleep need is actually reduced pretty substantially. That's good. And the quality of sleep that you get is remarkable. Well, that's why I slept so good last night. I was looking forward to this. Exactly. Well, these small things, right? Because we all know the experience of like I only slept 5 hours, but I got this thing today I'm really looking forward to. You feel great. Yeah. And so I'm not I don't think people should only sleep 5 hours. Most people need more than that. Uh so the idea is basically with functional medicine you take out the bad stuff and you put in the good stuff and each person has a different set of bad stuff and a different set of good stuff and you have to be detective and it's the opposite of traditional medicine which is just use a single drug to treat a single mechanism with single disease in a single outcome you like you have high blood pressure take a high blood pressure drug to lower your blood pressure we need multimodal treatments for multic-causal diseases and so what English that means is we need to do a lot of different things like if you want a garden, you don't just say, "I'm going to put the plant in the air and not water it and not give it soil." Or you say, "I'm just going to plant it in the soil, but no light and no water." I mean, you know, and this is the way science is. I remember trying to do a study on Alzheimer's at Cleveland Clinic and the top scientists there was like, we wanted to study this multimodal dimensional approaches to call the blackbox approach. Okay, we everybody's getting a different treatment. It's super personalized, customized based on their own biology. There's no one such thing as Alzheimer's or different Alzheimer'ses. I don't know if that's a word, but you know what I mean. And that's why we fail so miserably with the amaloid hypothesis because we're just looking at the endstage phenomenon, which is plaque going into an area that's inflamed to kind of deal with the inflammation. What caused the inflammation is really the question and it can be variable things. So, we start to kind of map these out. And when when you do that and you you actually get to the root causes and you try to treat all the things that are out of balance, people get better. So if you have a vitamin D deficiency and a folate deficiency and you have a, you know, tons of small bowel overgrowth and you have heavy metals and you have all these different problems, you can't just treat one thing and expect the person to get better. You've got to look at all those things. And some are more primary, some are secondary. But that's the job of a functional medicine doctor. It's a detective. And and for me, what's exciting is, you know, you said, how many people do this? Not that many. How many people are like experts who've done this for decades and have seen thousands of patients? a few hundred. Wow. You know, have we we trained a 100,000 people? We've have 3,500, I think, certified another, I think, three or 4 thousand in the pipe to be certified. Not that many people who can do this. And this part of the why uh I created this company called function health which you've been you know so so supportive of which is to allow people to understand what's going on in their own biology to be empowered to be the co of their own health and to get the data that's going to help them identify the different things that are going on to actually do something about it. Before we move to um health uh metric monitoring I do want to ask about ingredients for health. You talk about them. They're your protocols. You don't you don't use that framing but that's the framing is take out the bad stuff put in the good stuff. the body knows what to do. It's got an innate healing system. Just give it a chance. I think what's so um terrible about traditional medicine, it has many wonderful features, is that at least the way it's communicated in this country, is that it assumes that people are lazy and uninterested in their own health. And I fundamentally disagree, hence this podcast, your podcast. I agree. I believe people want and are willing to take care of themselves if they know how. Okay. So, let's just assume that the pillars of health, right? like like sleep, sunlight, u exercise, nutrition, social connection, stress modulation, microbiome, yes, etc. Okay. Assuming that people are making some effort to do those things correctly or a lot of effort, what are some of the things that you believe cannot be accessed through diet and behaviors? Yeah. That warrant supplementation. And the and I've been interested in supplements and taking supplements for 35 years. So to me when people say oh supplements aren't regulated I say actually they are regulated to some extent right like there's they're monitored um you want to find ones that are third party tested um indeed there are a lot of junk supplements out there probably a lot of supplements that don't do much there probably a lot of supplements that are only uh use cases for certain people who have a major deficiency but what are some of the things that are just very difficult to get from food and from sun um because we hear you know the soil's depleted magnesium. It's hard to get enough D3. Like if you if you were to list out, let's just say about 10 things that you you feel like, listen, you probably could get it from food, but it's just hard to get these micronutrients. What are those things? And and by the way, folks, this is not a preloaded conversation. We've never had this conversation. I know what I take, but I'm just curious what would you because people will try hard to get things from food. Yeah. But what are the things that they can't get from food or can't get from food easily that you believe everyone should take? Yeah, great question. I I thought you were going somewhere I saw you were going where what are the things if you did everything perfectly and you're still sick what do you do? Oh well we'll get to that there's a list of the things that 80% of it you can take care of but there's some things you need help and that's we can talk about that. I I think because of how dramatically our diets changed after the industrial revolution and because of urbanization and our disconnection from nature. We have a lower nutrient intake than we did as hunter gathers. You know, I I just came back from Africa and went to the Hodza tribe, which is one of the last huntergatherer tribes, and I got to spend a few days with them, and the the nutrient density of the diet was so much higher. Omega-3s, vitamin D, outside running around on loin cloth, or if you're not, you're living in some coastal area, were eating extremely fatty fish, which is one of the great sources of vitamin D in the food. Um, they were eating phytochemicals at an incredible rate through eating 800 different species of plants. Now we have three main ones and 12 of the are altogether comprise probably 95% of our diet instead of 800 plants with all kinds of phyitochemicals and vitamins and minerals. The soils we're growing food in have depleted the organic matter because of industrial farming and soil erosion. And the organic matter, the living soil is what actually helps to allow the plants to take up the nutrients from the soil. So that there's a symbiotic relationship between organisms in the soil and the plant and it uses them to help get nutrients free so they get into the plant. So where there's less magnesium, there's less zinc, there's less all these things in our diet. And when you look at the surveys of the American population, there's an ongoing government survey called the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey and essentially goes around the country with vans test people's blood all the time. And this is like decades old survey and it's incredible because you get all this data. They find that like 90 plus% are low in omega-3s. Uh probably 80% are insufficient or low in vitamin D. 50some percent are magnesium deficient. About the same iron, you know, zinc a little bit less, selenium a little bit less. And it depends on where you live and what you do and also depends on your diet, you know, so and what your stage of life is and what your age is and how your absorption is. For example, when you're older, you know, you you get decreased ability to absorb nutrients and decreased ability absorb, for example, vitamin B12. So, at different ages, you might need different things, right? Uh, and so, what are the basics that I think everybody should take? I think everybody should take omega-3 fats, at least a gram or two of EPA, DHA. Most people need between 2 to 4,000 international units of vitamin D3. I think a good multivitamin can cover the rest for most people. And when I say good multivitamin, I mean when with the right bioavailable forms of nutrients. I was in the hospital recently for back surgery. And this resident came by and he was, you know, attending saying, "Well, I said, I think I need some, you know, magnesium because I I I'm taking all these painkillers for my surgery and I don't want to be constipated." He said, "Oh, you can get this one." I'm like, I said, "That's magnesium oxide. That's not well absorbed and it doesn't not the greatest for eating magnesium citrate." Yeah. So, I said and I was He was like, "Oh, that's really interesting. I didn't know that." He wrote it down. But like, so I think Yeah, I have a lot of friends who are physicians and I'll tell you, they come to me for health advice, so that tells you something. I'm not an MD. Yeah, folks, magnesium, magnesium citrate, l great laxative, malate for muscles, glycinate, and and 3nate for brain and sleep. Yeah. And glycinate for for also if you're not, you know, tending to be constipated, it's one that you can tolerate and not be constipated. It's also helps with detoxification and sleep and other things. Uh and and so those are the big ones and I think you know I've been diagnostically testing people for decades of nutritional testing with function. We do deep nutritional test including omega-3 testing and homocyine looking at methylation which is a really important thing you've talked about in the podcast B12 folate B6. We do vitamin D testing and we see over 67% are deficient and this is this is important to understand Andrew. 67% are deficient at the minimum level to prevent a deficiency disease. Not the optimum level that you I might think is good like vitamin D over 45 or feritin iron store over 45. They're like, "Oh, if your vitamin is 30 or more, you're okay." Or if your feritin's 16 or more, you're okay. Well, if your ferin 16, you're going to be tired. You're going to have brain fog. You could potentially have hair loss. You could have insomnia. And that's just having low iron stores. And so when we're looking at that, we're like seeing what an incredibly uh depleted population we are in terms of the of the nutrients we have. So I wish we wouldn't need them and I wish we didn't need them. But the fact is that unless we're eating a very structured diet and I had a patient once who had OCD and she's like I don't want to take any any vitamins. I said okay. She says but I'm going to eat I know there's pumpkin seeds have zinc. So, I'm going to have like 14 pumpkin seeds a day and I need 200 micrograms of selenium. So, I'm going to take four Brazil nuts a day. And she went on and on like I I know I need this nutrient. So, I'm going to have this much liver a day. And so, she she was able to figure it out, but it's not easy. No. So, it sounds like magnesium getting a gram of EPA omega-3 um 3,000 IU minimum of D3 per day. Um some iron, some zinc, selenium. Sounds like the the basics. Yeah. Yeah. And would that be true for teens? Well, for example, you're an older guy, you don't want to take a lot of iron because you're not get rid of it and you can get iron toxicity. So, if you're a menstruating woman, you need more iron. So, but but what what I think is the key is figure out what's right for you. Test don't guess. Most people don't know. And some people may need, you know, 10,000 units of vitamin D to get the same blood level as somebody else with 1,000. And that's because there's different vitamin D receptors and they're genetically determined. And you can't know by just guessing, right? I totally agree, but I also totally know that a lot of people won't blood test. So, the argument against supplements has always been you just are creating expensive urine, which which is a silly one because that's based on water soluble vitamins only, right? And by the way, it's a stupid argument because you're like, why drink water? I just pee the rest out of I mean like why I'm creating it's silly. It's a silly one. But so, but the list that we just talked about, D3, omega, magnesium, maybe some iron if you're not an older guy, um, zinc, selenium, it seems to me those would be good things for most everybody to add to their already healthy diet that has enough prebiotic um, you know, postbiotic fiber. That's and we're seeing iodine. Interesting. Because people are eating the iodized salt. So, we're having sea salt and Himalayan salt. We got too fancy with our salt and table salt. We're not eating iodiz salt. Now, iodine is not normally found in salt, but it was added to salt. It's a fortification to prevent goiters or thyroid problems. But a lot of people have thyroid issues. One in five women and one in 10 men have low thyroid function and 50% are not diagnosed. And sometimes just a little iodine supplementation can help. Or you can eat seaweed, you know, or fish, but a lot of people don't eat seaweed or fish. So, you know, that's that's how you would get iodine otherwise. So, I think I think people need to kind of figure out what's going on with themselves and based on their diet and their preferences. And if you're a vegan, I mean, you know, I I think, you know, we're we're we're seeing tremendous deficiencies in vegans if they're not supplemented. We hear a lot nowadays about methylated B12. I decided to just start taking methylated B12. Is there a danger to taking methylated B12 if you quote unquote don't need it? If you're not a poor methylator, it depends how much you're taking. mostly not, but you you you you can overmethylate or undermethylate. And so you don't want to be doing too much of either or the other. And there's genetics that are involved in actually assessing how your methylation pathways work. So the genetics around B12, around B6, around folate, and you have multiple genes that regulate all these different pathways. So it depends is the answer. Um and and uh but for most people taking a good multivitamin, and when I say good, I mean it doesn't have any fillers or binders or additives. It's not blue. It's doesn't have titanium dioxide in it. It has forms of the nutrients that actually can get utilized and absorbed better by the body. We talked about magnesium oxide versus glycinate or citrate. Um, and that you that you uh make sure the company has integrity, that they've third party tested for the purity and the potency, meaning if it says a thousand units on the label, it's a thousand units, not 10,000 or 2,000 or and that it hasn't have any crosscontamination with additives or chemicals. So sometimes, you know, you get something with an herbal product that comes from China. The the company didn't realize it was full of lead or whatever, you know, like now we're seeing all these plant proteins with lead in them. Yeah. I want to make sure that we talk about the impediments, things like mold, air, um, water, cleanliness, things of that sort, but I want to spend just a little bit longer on this um, supplement thing. Um, maybe because it's so near and dear to my heart and because it's has sparked a lot of confusion for me. not supplements per se, but the reaction to them by traditional medicine or Yeah. Why is it that supplementation has received um so much push back from the medical community and yet I would argue that since 2020 you're going to find vitamin D3 and omegas uh essential fatty acids and magnesium in many many more people's kitchens meaning they're taking it than prior to that. Yeah. And and this reminds me of yoga, resistance training. You know, yoga was for yogis. Resistance training was for bodybuilders and people in the military. Now everybody knows men and women, maybe even young people should do it. Is there some argument that they should? Um I have my thoughts about young people lifting really heavy. But um in any case, the breath work, you know, there's a lot of science now. Meditation, there's tons of science. So these things that at one point were considered niche, biohacking, woo, and unsafe. Yeah. Inevitably have be seemed to become uh mainstream. And I think supplements is starting to happen now. Yeah. Well, it was interesting. When I got to Cleveland Clinic in 2014, I said, "Let's do a survey. There's 3,000 physicians. Let's do a survey of the physicians about their beliefs, practices, desires, goals, needs around supplements. I was shocked. We got a lot of answers and I I'm I'm not remembering the exact percentages, but I'll give you the sort of ballparks. Like it was over like do you take supplements yourself? Like over 70% of the doctors did. Do you recommend supplements to your patients? Probably like 20% or less did. Would you like to have a source where you knew the quality and had recommendations about the safety? Yes, we desperately want to do that. Would you prescribe them to more patients more if you did? No. like and it's used if you look at every medical specialty cardiologists are using CoQ10 right and fish oil and you've got gastronologists using probiotics and obviously OBGYN recommend supplements for prenatal vitamins and you've got you know pediatricians recommending certain vitamins for kids and so you look across all the specialties and you're like well they're already kind of integrated kind of on the margins but integrated into their practices. I think there's this kind of weird thing where you'd go to a conference and I would do this doctors, how many people recommend supplements to their patients and you know a few hands would go up. How do you guys take supplements and like most of the audience would raise their hand and I thought that was so peculiar because in medicine we're told from a scientific perspective that they're probably expensive urine and yet most doctors personally want to take them for themselves. That says a lot. does say a lot. And I think we're entering an era where I think there's more and more science. We're understanding more about the complexity of individuality and biochemical individuality. And this was this is, you know, this personalized precision medicine. This is where we're all headed, right? And uh one of the one of the fathers of sort of the thinking in functional medicine was Roger Williams who discovered pantaththenic acid or vitamin B5. He wrote a book called biochemical individuality. And actually his book was the one that got me interested in this in college because I live with a nutrition PhD student who was talking about the basically the gut flora of cows when he was studying to understand fiber and the microbiome and he gave me a book called nutrition against disease by Roger Williams and it was this is like in 1980 and I read it I was like oh wow this is nutrition is such an important thing. So I think doctors are beginning to understand the value of nutrition the value of nutritional uh sort of supplements the value of testing for nutrients. It's still slow, but you know, I think I think we're gonna get there. There's a whole generation of physicians and scientists that I do think in the current shift in funding for science, different conversation entirely, are going to retire. And um I'm not sure it's a bad thing. I I I don't mind saying this. I I I'm don't mind saying it. I think they've done a really wonderful job and and now it's time to pass the baton. the younger generation and the forwardthinking, you know, uh people in their 60s and 70s are changing the game. It's a very different game now and I think it's hard for them to understand that and um and it's got to be scary. Um but the younger generation is much more versed. I will say I actually would like your reflections on something for someone that's listening to this conversation. They think, "Oh goodness, now I have to buy organic foods and buy all these supplements." And let's say somebody has a limited budget. Yeah. Yeah. Do you think it's fair to say, okay, if you have a limited budget, you would be very wise to get cardiovascular exercise at least three days a week, do some resistance training, uh, which can be done with body weight. And could you say eat, you know, eggs, fish, meat, fruits, and vegetables, and olive oil, and you and you're there. Yeah. Right. And if you look at the cost of buying food out versus that, you're you're probably coming out ahead. Cuz I'm thinking about the college student. Yeah, I'm thinking about me in college or as a posttock or a graduate student. So, I think for for people that have more disposable income, it makes sense. You know, you you eat as well as you can organic, you supplement, you do you blood test. And I want to talk about those things. Let's talk about some of the impediments. And um I I do want to keep budgetary uh restraints in mind because I think people fall into the category of poor, some disposable income and lots of disposable income. And all too often in the bio, you know, the biohacking sphere, we're talking about that last category. And we don't want to we don't want to lose anyone along the way. So air, we had fires here in Los Angeles. It was dreadful. The beach now all the way down to Marina del Rey. I ran down there yesterday. It was completely littered with chunks of charcoal. They mow it under the sand. It's going out to ocean. Um, most people don't listening to this probably don't live in Los Angeles. How bad is our air in the United States, Northern Europe, Australia, like like is is there any clean air left? I mean, yeah, maybe in the mountains in Colorado. Okay. So, so the air is dirty. I think I think you know compared to what is the answer? Like if you go to India or China or some of these developing nations or not even developing anymore, the air is so bad. I mean they have all kinds of petrochemical products they they burn. They have coal factories. I mean it's just it's really bad. So in America I think the air quality in general is much much higher. I think when you have things like wildfires it's a different ballgame then just the wood smoke itself if it's just a trees burning is bad enough but then you burning houses and batteries and plastics and fire. You've got PAS chemicals and we actually found that those chemicals go up on their function testing in people living in LA who've actually been in the fires. Yeah. I need to get tested again since because I haven't been tested since the fires. I mean, I feel fine. Yeah. But I got out of town. I drove up to St. Louis Abyispo, parked myself at a um at a big pink hotel called the Madonna Inn and uh looked looked at the horses and worked on my boat. That's good. Uh the air felt clean. Yeah. But is the air clean when there isn't a fire? I mean, not necessarily. I mean, for example, in just just help people understand that air air moves. It's not like there's just LA air or, you know, Colorado air. In Seattle, they had a big mercury problem in the air because of China because northeast China like Beijing and Harbin in the winters, they just burn huge amounts of coal and it goes up in the air and it goes across in the in the Gulf Streams and the and the the air streams or whatever they call them. Uhhuh. and it gets all the way to Seattle and it rains, heavy metal rain. And so no matter where you live, you're you're kind of exposed to the collective air. There's some for sure areas that are much cleaner, but but I think that you most people if they have an air filter in your house where you spend the most of your time, you're probably okay. So is it a separate unit air filter or not? You can get one for your house or which most houses have. Make sure you change the filters or you can get a special HEPA air filter if you live in a more, you know, urban area or more environmentally toxic area. I love to exercise outside is running and breathing harder outside in LA or in general. Well, I like to do that wherever I go, but like when when I'm in New York City, I love to run along the the freeway. Yeah. Um probably breathing in a lot of junk. You are. Yeah. I mean, and the question is what what's going to be a problem for you? Like all of us are toxic soups, right? So, it's just the amount over time that builds up and then eventually sometimes things can happen. It causes cardiovascular disease. It causes dementia. It causes cancer. It causes diabetes. So toxins are direct causes of these things among other things, diet and other things. So I think, you know, you can't go crazy about it. I mean, we living in the 21st century. We are where we are unless you want to move to like some remote island in the South Pacific or something. Looking pretty nice. Is looking good. Yeah. I mean like Greenland seem to be the 51st state maybe. Is that going to happen? I don't know. I'm just joking. I'm making fun of it. But I mean, you know, like there are places, but I I think for most of us, we have to just manage it and like we filter our water. I think, you know, I wouldn't drink tap water. There's an average of 37 or eight wastewater contaminants, including drugs, including pesticides, including glyphosate. I mean, in hor like hormones, if women are taking the pill or taking hormone replacement therapy, where does that go? There's some amount that gets excreted in the urine. It goes into the water treatment plants. They don't filter that stuff out. I mean, they get the the bugs out, but you're getting all that stuff in your water. So, having a reverse osmosis water filter is a good idea, but I think the cost thing is really important, Andrew. I think I think one of the people problems people think about is that, oh, it's expensive to be healthy. And I think that's a myth. I think you mentioned a lot of foundational things like eating real food, exercising, getting enough sleep, managing stress, breath work. These are things that are free. Your breath is free. You know, you can move your body. You know, you can do body weight if you can't even, you know, afford bands. Food is interesting because the food industry has been very good at brainwashing Americans that they need highly processed, cheap junk food, not accounting for the actual cost of that food, which is $3 for every $1 you spend on that food. You're going to spend $3 in collateral damage to your health, to the economy, to the environment, to social fabric. I mean, this is a Rockefeller report on the true cost of food. But if you actually just look at the the actual price of the food, uh if you eat real food, it doesn't have to be expensive. Now, you might not be getting a $70 ribeye that's grass-fed from New Zealand. You might be getting like a short ribs that, you know, that aren't organic or grass-fed. That's okay. Like whole grains, beans. I mean, I I'm I'm grew up, you know, like poor and we used to like, you know, have, you know, liver and onions, you know, which is like the cheapest. I mean, that's chicken liver. Chicken liver. Yeah. Chicken, chopped liver. You know, what are you kidding? chicken liver not. But you know, there's been studies that it may cost the same or maybe 50 cents extra a day to eat well. And there's a guide from the Environmental Working Group called Good Food on a Tight Budget, which is how to eat well for you and for your wallet in the planet. And there, you know, we we grew up we have borched like it was was short ribs, which is like the cheapest kind of meat, onions, cabbage, carrots, tomato, can of tomatoes. It's pretty darn cheap and you could feed your like a family of like six for a few bucks, you know? So, and there's been a lot written about this, but the food industry is great at convincing us that it's elitist, that it's expensive, that it's all organic. Forget about organic, non-organic, regenerative, non-reenerative. If you don't have a lot of resources, just focus on eating real food and and you will do better and feel better and be more productive and walk around not feeling like crap. Do you think that one of the reasons food and nutrition is so complicated in this country is that with the exception of the hamburger, the hot dog, apple pie, and ice cream, that there isn't really an American cuisine, you know. What's wrong with all that? Years ago, hot dogs, hamburger, apple pie, ice cream, right? Well, years ago, I I uh I I had a a girlfriend who was from the south of France. Um she did she grew up very uh modestly did not have um wealth at all but her family ate very well. They put a lot of effort into food. They put a lot of time into food and she knew about um she was in her early 20s. I was in my my mid20s and um she knew probably 200 recipes for soups and soulets and like I mean it was like it was amazing. I ate very well. So I feel like one of the things that's really missing in this country is a sense of pride in the healthy food that we can produce here. And there's never really been a history of it. We have kind of a picture of the farmer and the rancher and then on the west coast you have more of the kind of like natural food movement, the healthy food movement. Um uh Alice Waters and Michael Pollen and that kind of thing, but that's considered kind of hippie- dippy. I lived in Berkeley so I can say that. And so and and they've made great effort to try and um popularize that. But I think that's one of the reasons that we've commoditized food now. And so American food is junk food, cotton candy. True. But you know what what happened was and it was the after the World War II and because my mother and grandparents were pre that generation. So they had an incredible food culture of real food. You know, my grandmother tells me stories or told me story she died of, you know, plucking chickens at the local butcher so she could get a nickel to go to the movies. You know, but I feel like that came by way of people's ethnic past because they were first and second generation. Fair enough. Fair enough. But still, like what happened was the industrialization of the American food system. So after World War II, there was all these bomb- making factories and all these biochemical biological warfare factories. So they got turned into bomb factories got turned into fertilizer, which was nitrogen. And the bio biological weapons were pesticides and and herbicides. So basically pesticides are biological weapons. They're neurotoxins. That's how they kill the insects. They or sterilized. And then we thought everything industrial is good. You know, remember in the 60s, you probably remember they had like better living through chemistry through Dupant and didn't realize it was killing everybody, right? And the World's Fair and I mean I I grew up in Queens and in the World's Fair was in Queens in 1965 and I went and I I didn't obviously remember that skit, but I've seen things about it. So the the the industrialization of the food supply, the agricultural industrialization with mechanization, the destruction of the soil, the the growing of starchy carbohydrate crops to feed a growing hungry world. We we we wanted that like we now produce 500 calories more per person in America than we actually need to eat and we export a lot of that. So the industrialization was a thing and then in the 50s the food industry started to make a lot of processed food and they were completely taken off guard because there's this woman named Betty who was an home teacher who was part of the federal extension workers that was a paid for federal program to send people out to young families to teach the mothers how to and it was sexist because it was the mothers how to cook and how to garden and how to grow their own food and how to be independent and how to eat real. It was like really great. And there was a big meeting of in in in Minnesota around that time, General Mills sponsored, but all the big food companies came and they decided convenience had to be king. And we had to make that a value. They invented Betty Crocker, not a real person, Betty Crocker cookbook. You might remember that cookbook, but it was like, oh, add one can of Campbell's cream of mushroom soup to your casserole or add one roll add one roll of Critz crackers to your broccoli casserole. So, they insinuated that. And there were TV dinners and I grew up in that area. And then there was like you know the food of astronauts like Tang and Fleshman's margarine better than butter and so a cup of noodles. Yeah. Yeah. We basically got this whole culture of like convenience and then you deserve a break today from McDonald's. And we basically disenfranchise people from their kitchens. We we have whole generations of Americans who don't know how to cook, who don't know anything about shopping or where vegetables come from. I mean, Jimmy Oliver done a whole television show series in West Virginia where kids didn't know what a tomato was if they saw a tomato or a carrot or they couldn't name a vegetable, right? Because they had never seen one. And and and now most of America is like that. And so they have succeeded in disenfranchising ourselves from our kitchen. We need to they've hijacked our kitchens, our brain chemistry, our metabolism, our hormones. We need to take it back. And it's like the body snatchers. like we need to take our bodies back, own our own biology, understand that we're in charge, understand that we shouldn't abdicate our health to anybody else, including the doctor. You have a doctor as a partner, as an adviser, as a collaborator, but like they're not God and they don't know everything. And and now with the advent of, you know, self- testing, like like function health is like a$137 a day. It's still money, but it's affordable for most people. And our a lot less than a than a latte. Yeah. It's like, and we do $15,000 worth of tests for for $4.99 a year. And you get a panel of tests that tells you what's really happening. And people can own their data and own their biology and be proactive and preventive and actually understand what's happening way before they get into real trouble. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also contains adaptogens. I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before I even knew what a podcast was. I started taking it and I still take it every single day because it ensures that I meet my quota for daily vitamins and minerals and it helps make sure that I get enough prebiotics and probiotics to support my gut health. Over the past 10 years, gut health has emerged as something that we realize is important not only for the health of our digestion but also for our immune system and for the production of neurotransmitters and neurom modulators, things like dopamine and serotonin. In other words, gut health is critical for proper brain function. Now, of course, I strive to eat healthy whole foods from unprocessed sources for the majority of my nutritional intake. But there are a number of things in AG1, including specific micronutrients, that are hard or impossible to get from whole foods. So, by taking AG1 daily, I get the vitamins and minerals that I need, along with the probiotics and prebiotics for gut health, and in turn brain and immune system health, and the adaptogens and critical micronutrients that are essential for all organs and tissues of the body. So, anytime somebody asks me if they were to only take one supplement, what that supplement should be, I always say AG1 because AG1 supports so many different systems in the brain and body that relate to our mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drink AG1.com/huberman. For this month only, April 2025, AG1 is giving away a free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As I've highlighted before in this podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 plus K2 have been shown to help with everything from mood and brain health to heart health and healthy hormone production and much more. Again, that's drinkagg.com/huberman to get the free 1-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your subscription. The confusion for me has been the push back on self-directed health. Yeah, you know, it's I I had something come to mind as you were saying all this, which is that I do believe that until health becomes a point of national pride for Americans that we're going to become the sickest nation in the world. No, we are really, you know, well, well, we're going to continue to be, right? But there's this thing that happens when you start taking care of your health. And I know this because in college, I decided to stop drinking as much as everyone else around me drank. It was it was insane. It was unbelievable the amount of binge drinking and just the frequency like Wednesday, Thursday, Fridays. I was like, "This is crazy." And and I got really into working out and sleep and studying and you know, I had to be a bit lonely in order to preserve that life. But I got teased a lot for being healthy. Yeah. But the point being that it still takes some self-confidence, rigidity, and um kind of determination to push off the people like, "Oh, it's so self-focused to, you know, focus on your health." You know, you're spending money on these on vitamin D3, you know, um or oh, you can't have a slice of pizza. It's like, no, you can, but the point is maybe you don't want to because you have a certain amount of of self-ride, not because pizza can't be amazing. There are some amazing pizzas by the way, but most pizza's crap and some pizza is amazing and it's worth it to wait for the amazing pizza in my opinion. So the I guess the idea here is what we really need it seems is a it's kind of a psychological cultural uh medicine revolution and a true revolution given the way things are going with the obesity rates. And so I do want to talk about MA, make America healthy again. I'm not formally involved in Maha. Um I know people um involved in it and know people who know people who know people. I know people who know people and and and I I am in discussions with them. They've asked questions. I've provided answers where I could provide answers. But the push back on maja is what I'd like to understand because you and I sit from a unique vantage point and you in particular where you have a lot of colleagues and understanding of the traditional med medical community. So as they they always say like uh that's not the guy you got to get. You don't need to get the guy that's like watching podcasts and and taking supplements and um but what about the guy or gal who is like I don't know my doctor says this is crazy. They want to like get rid of vaccines and they want everyone doing push-ups and you know and they don't want to take and you know and so maybe because I see you Mark as somebody who can potentially bridge this divide. Um knowing people on both sides I really see you as somebody who can do that. I'm not saying that just because you're sitting here and large part you're sitting here because of that. So, how do you change millions of people's mindset about health when now maja has become a red label thing? Yeah. How do you do it? It's crazy. Either Republicans are going to get healthy and Democrats aren't. It's crazy to me. Or or there's an opportunity here. And and I do think that they're I know they're drawing you in for this and I'm so glad they are because I do think that you're somebody who really believes in in inclusivity in the real sense of the word. So, what do you think it's going to take to make America healthy? And this is not Maha propaganda. This is just can Maha do it? What do they need to do better? What do they what can what can you do? What can we all do? It's a great question. And you know, it's funny to me. I was thinking as you're talking about how, you know, when Michelle Obama started her Let's Move campaign, it was a blue issue. A lot of the people who were like pushing this agenda was Shelley Pingry who's a Democrat from Maine or uh McGovern, Jim McGovern who's from Massachusetts or Cy Booker introduced all these bills about food safety in the last Congress and all of a sudden it's like it flipped and became a Republican issue which is staggering to me and we now see bills in you know a few dozen states or more actually. Now every day I hear about new bills that are helping push forward an agenda to fix our food system. And before you dive in, I will I just want to seed this answer with one thing. Forgive me audience. They don't like it when I interrupt. But the goal of the left, if I may, seems to be to make anyone associated with health and maja on the right a jock, not a scientist. Yeah, that's what I'm seeing. They're trying to take away their science credential. Yeah. And make them a jock. Now, Bobby Kennedy is not a formerly trained scientist, but um the scientists that are going into NIH directorships, who I can't share who they are besides Jay, it's been announced the other ones, but you know who they are. These are serious scientists. These aren't jocks. No, these are people that may or may not lift weights. These are people, but but there seems to be this effort to say we're going to we're going to strip Maha of its power by making it a bros science biohacking jock thing. Real science is about reductionist stuff. And I just say, listen, it's all it's all valuable. Yeah. And so I'm I'm fundamentally frustrated and it hasn't even begun. So educate us. I mean, listen, you know, my friend Rick Warren said, "I'm not leftwing or right-wing. I'm for the whole bird, otherwise you'll fly around in circles." I like that. Who said that? Rick Warren. Yeah, we did. Rick Warren is a head of Saddleback Church, which is an evangelical church in Southern California. I we did a whole program with this church where we got auh 15,000 people to lose a quarter million pounds in a year by doing health together in groups and it was it was amazing actually. I love that quote. It was a great quote and and you know health isn't red or blue or purple. It's like a human issue and it's to make but to make it partisan. It doesn't make any sense to me. And yet we live in a partisan world and anything the Democrats do the Republicans going to hate. Anything the Republicans do the Democrats are going to hate. It's like, "Hey guys, can we just talk to each other and have civil discourse and agree on the things we can agree on and disagree on the things we're going to disagree on?" And I and I know that I know behind the scenes there's collaboration bipartisan on these issues. There's bipartisan caucus that Well, on the psychedelic issue, I was at a meeting where, you know, Governor Rick Perry, former Governor Rick Perry, Texas, like who describes himself as a knuckle dragging Republican. Those are Rick's words, by the way. Rick's a very nice guy. And there were several members of the the Dems there. And you got Rick Doblin who was like a you know counterculture uh conscientious objector during the Vietnam War and they're all up there being proponents for psychedelics for the treatment of PTSD and veterans. So they've joined hands. Yeah. I think that's one area that's very exciting. It's not happening in nutrition. No, it's not happening on this thing of get exercise. Those have become red labels. Yeah. It's unfortunate because you know Americans are suffering. You know, Americans are really suffering now. 93% of us have some metabolic dysfunction. Psychiatric illness is on the rise in both kids and adults. Autoimmune diseases are skyrocketing. Obviously, obesity is a huge problem. Diabetes is a huge problem. You know, heart disease deaths are going down, but the incidence is going up. Meaning, you're there's more people getting it, but because we have better treatments, they don't die from it. Same thing with cancer. So, we're not winning on the health front in the war on on chronic disease. we're losing disastrously and so we have to come together as a country to solve this and it's unfortunate been polarized. I think I think the good part about um COVID was that people became aware that this edifice of science and medicine had cracks in it and that they needed to be more empowered around their own health and to start questioning things. And I think that's part of the genesis of this bigger wider movement around make America healthy again and why Bobby Kennedy was able to catalyze huge base. He was Democratic candidate at first, then he was independent, now he's in a Republican administration. It doesn't mean he's shares all the ideology that they have, but he cares about this issue. And so I think I think what's happening and behind the scenes is that there's a lot of bipartisan interest in how do we begin to address this? Look, the healthc care bill is $5 trillion. Of that, the government, federal government pays 40%. It's one in three federal tax dollars. So one in $3 that you paid for your taxes goes to health care. Of that 80% is mostly for chronic disease that's either preventable or reversible through intensive lifestyle therapy and and you know some things around the margins. If insurance is private, how does that work? Like how is it that my money is going to take care of somebody who has heart disease? For example, like like if you get on to Medicare Advantage, that's that's a government program, but it's administered by Humanana or by Sigma or by these insurance companies kind of deploy federal resources to deliver healthcare. But if you actually look at the end to end, whe it's Medicare, Medicaid, Indian Health Service, the federal employees, children's health program, you just add up all the things that the government pays for, it's it's almost $2 trillion a year for for health care. And most people don't realize that. So the government has enormous levers. And when I was sitting in my office treating my patients who are, you know, just endless stream of people with chronic illnesses coming in, diabetes, obesity, autoimmune disease, this that the other thing, I'm like, why is this patient sick? Well, it's mostly because of the food they're eating. And if that's the problem, then what's the cause of the food they're eating? Well, it's our food policies. And what's the cause of our food policies? It's the food industry that has pressured our government to into creating a food system that's harming us. And we have very different policies than they do in Europe. For example, they don't allow many GMO foods or glyphosate. They don't there's 10 high fructose corn syrup. They have it there, but it's limited. I mean, more limited the toxins. There's 10,000 additives to food in America. There's 400 that are allowed in Europe. Okay. Let me ask you a question about toxins because I've been watching this very closely online recently. And folks who are more of the traditional science background who are kind of like to spend a lot of their time trying to debunk folks like you um or people that talk about food additives say that these are infantestimally small amounts of these dyes that the amount required to kill a rat like the you know is 3,000 times higher. My stance on this is the same as going through the x uh you know the x-ray machine at the um uh at the airport which is true. you can walk through and not get cancer. But dose frequency, but if you're going but if you're going through it multiple times per per month or year, then you know and it's compounding with other things. So it's it like you said dose, frequency, and duration and the interactions like you know when these things are studied they might be studied one at a time but what if you put thousands of them together whether it's environmental chemicals or food additives and I don't think the food added themselves although there are many that are problematic that are linked to cancer linked to allergy linked to ADD I think there are there are a lot of data about this but the real issue is where do you find these you find these in extremely low quality quality health destroying foods that are ultrarocessed foods that are high in starch and sugar, high in refined oils, high in these additives, right? They're not creating orange stakes. Yeah. You're not like you're not getting these chemicals when you order broccoli at a restaurant, right? So, how do you tease out all of it? How do you do human trials on this? It's very hard. But in in Europe, they have the precautionary principle was you have to prove it's safe before we add it to the food supply. Krisco is a great example. Krisco was invented in 1911. It was shortening because there was a butter shortage. And so they basically created this product which is blowing hydrogen atoms into liquid vegetable oil that makes it act like a like an animal fat like lard or butter. And it was cheap and it was good. It was so it was in the supply from 1911 to 2015. It wasn't until 50 years after the data be started to become clear that this was a cause of heart attacks that this was very dangerous. We shouldn't be eating margarine. I remember a tub of that in our cupboard when I was a kid. I grew up on flesh's margarine, you know, and and it wasn't until the scientists who've been studying for 50 years, who was 90 years old at the time, sued the FDA and forced them to really do something about it that it got taken off the generally recognized as safe list, which is called the grass list. Now, you asked about maha. One of the first things Robert F. Kennedy did and I helped advise him on this was to help address the grass problem because there's something called the grass loophole. If you're a food company, you can go to the FDA and says, "Hey, I got this great new chemical. We checked it out. Totally safe. Not a problem. We're going to add it to the food. Just take our word for it." And the FDA goes, "Great. No problem. You go right ahead." Imagine if a drug company did that and said, "Oh, we have this great new drug. We've done all our tests. It's perfectly safe. It's very effective. Can you please give us approval? And we're not going to give you any data. That's exactly what happens in America. Now, that's different than in Europe, which they do the opposite. You have to prove that it's safe before it's added to the food supply. Here, you're you're innocent until proven guilty, which is fine for humans, but not for chemicals we put in our food. The other day I saw something on X that if true, and I'll put a link to it, uh was probably the most troubling thing I've ever seen in public health discourse. And um and I want that to lead to a question for you. Um this was an example of a a hearing in Washington where a young woman um I believe she's from Austin who's a kind of like health health food advocate. Yeah. advocate but with training uh from uh university down there uh was lobbying against soda in the um government funded lunch program. Lunch or food stamp um SNAP program. SNAP is the food stamp. Okay. It's called supplemental nutrition assistance program, but there's no N in there. Okay. Our goal is to put the N back in SNAP. Got it. Okay. Because just to just clarify, food security is having enough calories. Nutrition security is having enough nutrients. We provided for food security, meaning you can get all your calories from soda and, you know, sugar, but that doesn't mean you're have nutrition security. And we see many of the people who receive these federal aid programs are the ones who are most sick, right? The most using our healthare system. Thanks for that clarification. Uh, this young woman advocating for healthier food was, uh, arguing for getting sugary soda. This wasn't diet soda, sugary soda out of the SNAP program. Mh. and she made her case. It was terrific case. Well, well articulated, I think, and was wellreceived by both the um blue side and the red side of the room. Yeah. Yeah. And then someone tapped into the microphone. This was a gentleman representing the American Heart Association. Oh. The American Heart Association and he proceeded to say that he opposed the removal of sugary soda. Do you know why? I thought, okay, this has got to either be AI generated, it's fake. But then one of the women who on the panel who was listening, okay, one of the people making decisions or at least running it up the flag pole for decisions said, "Wait, wait, do you realize what you're saying?" And he just kept repeating this like a broken record. And I thought, "Okay, the American Heart, if it was the American Soda Association or Beverage Association or Hydration Association even, I would have thought, okay, maybe there's something here." But but he was there representing the American Heart Association. I have no skin in this game. Okay, I don't drink sugary answer that question. I was shocked and I will provide a link to this in the show not captions. I was shocked. He shouldn't be. He shouldn't. And I thought to myself, this guy's arguing for sugary soda on on behalf of the American Heart Association. And these are sugary sodas that the American taxpayer is paying to try and help some of the least healthy and lowest income people in the country drink more soda. And it wasn't like take away soda and don't replace it with anything. It was, you know, replace it with some other there's double bucks for fruits and vegetables or even water, right? So, um, I was shocked. Yeah. I verified it's real. Yeah. And Okay. So, I'd like your thoughts on that, but I'm guessing what they are already, but here's what I want to know. Is the FDA and our government so strongly impacted by these food companies? You hear this, but it always sounds like a bunch of conspiracies. Is General Mills like and um really like like lobbying behind the scenes? I mean, is it is there really a network of of people trying to harm us for profit? 100%. Yes. So, I was telling the story I was in my office seeing patients with diabetes. I'm like, what caused the food policy? And then I started to go down that rabbit hole and I wrote a book called Food Fix: How to Save Our Health, our communities, uh, our economy, our communities, and our planet one bite at a time where I mapped out from field to fork the problems with our food industry, how it's making us sick, how it's costing us trillions of dollars, and how to fix it. And then I started a nonprofit where I've been in Washington doing this work over the last 5 years, way before it was Maha was a thing. And you know what you just described is part of a large cohesive strategy by the food industry to undermine science under on manipulate public trust and information to control the government and academic institutions and many things. So I'll just kind of lay it out for you. Sounds conspiracy. It sounds like it is. And it it kind of it's kind of I won't say it's a conspiracy. It's just their business strategy, right? Which is to circle the wagons. Okay. They fund the American Heart Association. So the food and farm industry spent $192 million that they give to the American Heart Association. What does the American Heart Association do with it? They educate people about nutrition. They hold meetings. They have scientific panels. But what is the basis for sugary soda? Like there can't there's no single argument for sugar. If you get if you get $20 million from the soda industry, I mean it's like that. Andrew, I'm think diet soda of all. Then we could we could argue artificial sweeteners, but at least we know it can help people lose weight. They're ingesting less sugar and no this is like 40% of the academy of nutrition and dietetics, which is the National Nutrition Organization comes from the food industry, the American Diabetes Association, the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Family Practice. This has to change. I mean, there was a there were Coca-Cola gave a multi-million dollar donation to the American Academy of Family Practice, and there were family doctors that quit in droves because of this. When did this start? I think it's been growing. And so, so there's multiple strategies they have. One is massive lobbying. Two is funding professional. Was this in the 80s, the '9s? I think it's been slow creep over the since probably the 70s is my guess. You look in the 60s and the beach pictures like there's nobody overweight, right? When I was growing up, there were probably two fat kids in school. Yeah. Yeah. They've done all these strategic things around lobbying around funding professional associations, funding academic research, 12 times as much academic research on nutrition as the federal government spends. They co-op uh social groups like NAACP and the Hispanic Federation so they won't oppose things like uh things that they care about or they'll oppose things they care about like soda taxes. And they fund fake science groups like the American Council on Science and Health. It's attacked me, maybe attacked you, too. I I'm sure they will have unbiased science, unbiased science and all these great sounding organizations that are simply front groups for for misinformation, crop life and and so they have a whole strategic approach that is very detailed and and I map the whole thing out in in my book and and how it's so insidious and how it happened while everybody else was asleep. And I know personally now that the the some of these big uh associations that are the lobby groups for these big food companies and a companies and sea companies that they're circling ranks that they're creating a war plan that they have a complete strategy of how to put forth mis mis kind of I would say manipulative science. They they have grassroots lobby efforts where they're activating fake grassroots movements. They're lobbying. They're look looking at how to pressure state governments to not do what they're doing. I mean, I know personally the governor of West Virginia who's has a now there's a state bill to actually which probably hopefully passed by the time this podcast comes out that gets rid of uh chemicals and the food in West Virginia, which is the fattest state in the nation. And they know the amount of pressure, millions and millions of dollars of pressure they're putting on him to not do it. It's going to destroy their businesses. It's going to destroy the economy. It's going to create the people of West Virginia suffering. I mean so much pressure on politicians who don't actually understand these issues and so they're like and you know I remember what's confusing even as somebody who is fairly versed in health and nutrition like I'm I'll give you an example I mean it's not confusing I'll give you an example. So, so I was working on a bill that was uh with Andy Harris, who's a doctor in Congress, to do a pilot study to see the impact, not to change policy, just to say the impact of what would happen if you took soda off the list of acceptable things you could buy with food stamp dollars, just to do a pilot in a couple of states. You think, well, let's just do a scientific study and see what happens. The Democrats were completely opposed to it. They shut the whole thing down. On what grounds? The hunger groups. It's based on this idea of like we're going to take care of the poor. It's discriminatory. It's aggressive. It's going to hurt the poor. And the hunger groups that are these big groups that that that try to deal with hunger in America are funded by and their boards of directors are staffed by people from big food. So it if you just follow the money, you see how it all is connected and how it all flows together. And what are big food? So like what are the companies? Okay. So there there are companies you know about. There's even things like Primal Kitchen which you think is like a great natural brand and started by Mark Sis and it's salad dressings and ketchup without high fructose corn product. It was they're all bought up by the big food companies like Manderlay or by Craft Craft Hind for example bought bought that or Hugh Chocolate which thank God will stay the same forever because Jason Carp was a friend made sure they would but they bought Hugh Chocolate which we think is a natural brand. It's the biggest selling premium chocolate in America. So they buy all the other companies. So it's Nestle, it's Gun Lever, it's the known, it's Manderlays, it's Craft Hinds. So it's it's a few companies that that really probably 10 or so companies that basically are the big companies and then there's all the A and seed and chem companies. It's all consolidation. So So there used to be like hundreds of seed companies. Now there's five. There used to be like dozens of fertilizers companies. Now there's just a few. If I take a step back from this, I say, okay, well Mark I haven't tried Primal Kitchen, but I hear good things, right? I Mark seems like a very healthconscious guy. So Mark Sison, right? So if his if his brand was bought up by one of these major companies, why aren't they promoting the healthier foods in in their catalog? Well, they do. They do, but also without if there's like Jason Carp with Hugh Chocolate made them in the contract promise they would never change the ingredients ever. I see. And and when you often get these other products that have been bought up by these big companies, they modify the recipes, they make it cheaper, they squeeze their margins to be bigger. So it's it's not like you're going to get like, you know, Amy's whatever pizza or whatever sounds like great healthy pizza, but they modify it. I see. And so I I think, you know, as a whole, they still get most of their profit margin from their legacy products of junk, right? So they don't they don't want to cannibalize that, but they also want to suck up the rest of the market. So they have a monopoly. I see. And but it's but it's there's probably a few dozen cos that c that that uh are in control of everything from what seeds are planted to what chemicals are sprayed to the the uh food companies that process the food to the fast food companies. It's not that many companies and it's a few dozen CEOs that control the biggest industry in the planet that employs more than everybody else because everybody eats. It's like 16 trillion dollars. Are you and Bobby going to change the uh the way that works? I mean that's the goal. I mean, the idea is is to to raise awareness, to create transparency, to help people understand what's what, and to take the the veil back and say you can choose whatever you want to eat. We're not taking away your McDonald's. We're not taking away your soda, but like at least you should know what's going on. If you go to South America, you're from Argentina. I'm sure you've been there. Not in too recent past. You know, if you pick up something that's not good for you, it tells you on the label. It's like black warning signs and hazard signs and stop signs and well there the opposite problem exists. You know as as the child of a first generation immigrant my dad always said you know the United States is the one country where the poor are overweight because calories are cheap. You go to Argentina and you see these neighborhoods are t of immense poverty right and people are not overweight. People are struggling to find food. Some are, some aren't. Like if you look at there was a whole series in the New York Times a few years ago about how for example Nestle went into the the the the ghettos of of I think Peru and Colombia and they they were just Brazil and they were just pushing through local like community members and reps would drive around like with little carts or push the carts around where there's not even a street to sell all this crappy processed food to people for pennies, right? And so that's what they that's what they've done. They've infiltrated everywhere in the planet. So it was far back as 1986 and I did a public health expedition with Johns Hopkins to Nepal. We got off the plane at some remote airport on a grass strip and then we walked for a week up into the almost to Tibet and you know there were no roads, there were no cars, there was no electricity, there was no running water, but there was Coca-Cola. And you see these these sherpas literally with like probably I don't know 100 200 pounds of Coca-Cola on their back climbing up the mountains bringing into every little village, right? I mean I there's even a TED talk on this by somewhere Melinda Gates or something about how Coca-Cola is a business model for how we, you know, get safe stuff around the world because they they had the incredible distribution. So even where you can't get water, you can get Coca-Cola where they actually need quality. Protein is what's scarce. It's often cheaper than water in many countries like in Mexico. So I think I think we we we have to face the fact that we've had had this sort of unadulterated uninhibited run from the industry and now there's somebody talking about why they need to think about doing things differently, how they need to reformulate, how they need to be partners. I mean there was a big meeting with the Consumer Brand Association and Robert F. Kennedy last Monday in in the White House where he said to them essentially, "Here's what you need to do. Do it or we're going to make you do it." you know, get the crap out of the food and let's get focused on the harm that this is causing in terms of the amount of starch and sugar and processing and products in there that are not good for human health. And and if you don't, we're going to do something about it. They they they can create better front of package labeling to trans to transform people's perception of what's good or not. And labels are super confusing in this country. I mean, I know how to read them, but you have to be a PhD or study this your whole life to understand how to read a nutrition facts label, how to read an ingredient list, what it means, what the serving size is, what the calories are, what the this and that is. It's like, you know, it's not easy for the average American. It should be easy. Like, it's intentionally confusing. 100%. Well, single ingredient or minimal ingredient foods solve that. I'd like to take us from one controversial topic, and thank you, by the way, I I should say before moving on from that, um, for being involved and staying involved. I know your uh inherent goodness and your desire to keep things nonpartisan and to do what's best for people um and to keep it out of the politics as much as possible. So these are these are not these are things I've been working on for years and so I'm just whether you I'm just being me whether it's medically tailored meals or raising the awareness around chronic disease or the effect of toxins in our environment or the role of sugar and starch in our metabolic crisis. I mean these are things that are not new. I've talked about these for decades. Now all of a sudden it's a political issue. I don't understand why you're not putting on a new hat. uh you're not putting on a new hat. Government's putting on a new hat, getting involved in these things. I'm I'm hopeful. Um they've always been involved, but they just have been involved unknowingly by by allowing policies to be implemented that support things like soda and junk foods. If you look at other countries food food assistance programs, you can't buy that Right. Right. Let's talk about something almost as controversial one something that I have kind of a neutral opinion on um that I think is a beautiful scientific story um which is GLP1 agonist. Yeah. Um you know discovered on the basis of the the Hilo monster which doesn't need to eat very much over um or synthesizes a lot of this peptide which limits its hunger and uh it works at the level of the brain and at the level of the gut. Um there are however lots and lots of cells including neurons outside the appetite system that um use and bind GLP-1. The drugs that increase GLP1. We had a guest on here. So um Zachary Knight came on here beautifully explained how the drugs that increase GLP-1 increase it many thousandfold. Yeah. Above natural levels to have it exert its effect of um of reducing hunger. It is reducing obesity. Yes, people lose muscle. They're break it down for us. Let's assume that somebody has just had a terrible time losing weight. They don't even feel like they can exercise for either motivational reasons or they're structurally. Let we all know they should exercise and maybe they'll get there, one would hope, but although you can't exercise your way out of a bad diet, right? Right. Um do you think there are use cases for GLP1 that warrant its prescription? And what's the controversy with GLP-1 all about? Is it the dependence, the the insurance? I mean, we don't have three hours to parse this, but I can give you the quick Yeah. What's your view on GLP1? Because I think, you know, some people have clearly benefited from it. Other people probably don't need it all. I don't take it. I wouldn't take it, but I'm pretty good at regulating what I put in my mouth. So, look, I mean, I think that like you said, this is a molecule that the body naturally makes to regulate appetite, but is being given at doses that are far greater than that which our body naturally makes. And when you overdo something, there are downstream consequences. Insulin is a peptide. Ompic is a peptide. GP1 these drugs are peptides. These are small mini proteins. Think of that as what a peptide is. And insulin if you take too much of it will kill you. Like literally you you'll go into hypoglycemic shock. So when you start messing with big doses, it has not side effects. We call these side effects. These are just effects we don't like and we call them side effects. They're effects of the drug and they can lead to everything from things you mentioned like muscle wasting which is a big problem because you lose the weight and you lose muscle and fat and if you lose half it is muscle then your metabolism slows down because muscle burns seven times as much calories as fat and when you gain the weight back if you stop which over 65% of people do. Is that right? Yeah. People who come off it gain the weight back 100%. They just start eating more again and they have lower muscle mass and then you're in a worse situation because you have a lower muscle mass. So you could eat literally the same amount of calories as you were before you lost weight and gain weight because your metabolism is messed up. What if they exercise using resistance train? I personally think it should be illegal to prescribe these drugs unless they're combined with a nutrition consult to educate people about their protein requirements that are increased and with an exercise or a trainer physiologist or trainer to help them develop a strength training program and then I'd be more okay with it. And I think doses also, do we need the doses that people are prescribed through pharmacologically approved drugs or there's a whole black market of GLP-1 peptides you can buy for 20 bucks a month, not 16 or 1,700 bucks a month. People are starting to discover those. They're very inexpensive. They're very inexpensive and you know you have to know what you're doing and you have to probably get the guidance of the physician and there are doctors who do prescribe these sort of subfarmacologic doses that that are being given and they work and they can be that can be a useful tool but they're a tool like anything else and I you know I I was mentioning my nonprofit food fix you know the woman who's working with us there lost 112 pounds in the last few years working with me without GLP1s you know I've had literally probably dozens and dozens and dozens of patients who've lost 100 pounds or more without these drugs and naturally keep their weight off and regulate their appetite when they understand how to use food as medicine to regulate their hormones, their peptides, their brain chemistry, their microbiome, all of which regulate our appetite and weight. So, there's ways to do it. It's harder and some people are stuck and I'm not opposed to using these drugs, but we have to understand they come with risk and they they they have, you know, increased risk of bowel obstruction, increased risk of pancreatitis, increased risk of potentially thyroid issues, of kidney issues. And I think people need to if they're monitoring their cells, fine. You should get a DEXA scan before and during and after. You should be checking your kidney function test and your amalayise and your lipase because it can cause pancreatitis. You'll be checking what happens to your other hormones and to happens to your liver function tests which can be affected by these drugs. And the longer you take them, the more the side effects are. So for example, initially we're seeing very little data. And then the data started coming in. And for example, if you're on it for four years, your risk of bowel obstruction goes up by four and a half fold. That's by 450%. Or your p risk of pancreatitis goes up by 900%. That's that's you know it seems like a lot. It is a lot but pancreatitis is a more rare condition. So but it does have an adverse impact and a lot of people have nausea, vomiting, all kinds of other side effects that are sort of more mild, not as serious but but they come with side effects. So I think can they be used as part of an overall strategy with nutrition counseling, exercise counseling, and and integrating lower doses and modifying the dosing regimen? Yeah. But I don't think most people need it if they understand how to change their hormones and their brain chemistry and their biology without that. And that's the power of food is medicine. And when I say food is medicine, I'm not saying that as a sort of a general, oh food can be healthy or not healthy. I'm saying food literally can be used as a drug and different foods have different properties and again you don't use the same drug for every disease. You would prescribe different diets for different problems for such as for example if you look at the the crisis in mental health in this country. We have a severe mental health crisis and and we've used uh ketogenic diets and neurologic conditions like epilepsy in medicine for decades. We now know, for example, that ketogenic diets can be very effective for schizophrenia, for things like autism, for Alzheimer's, for people with bipolar disease or depression or anxiety. And and this has to do with its effect of the metabolism and and the way in which affects our brain, our mitochondria. And and I wrote a book about this ultra mind solution. I say this, I wrote a book about everything. I pretty much have. You've written a lot of books. I've written like 20 books. So it's like I'm impressed. I'm you know, you're working on one. Yeah. I mean I mean it's it's uh it's uh big enough to serve as a a workout for lifting. No, it's not that thick, but it doubles as a advice book and training training. It's got a it's got a lot in there. It's got a lot. But um you have an impressive catalog of of really terrific books. Uh but the Mayo Clinic just got funded over $3 million to do research on the role of ketogenic diets and serious mental illness. You mentioned Stanford has a department of metabolic psychiatry. At Harvard, they have a similar department of nutritional psychiatry. What about other diets? So, ketogenic, a lot of people um think of that as high protein. It's really more high fat, moderate protein, very low starch, right? Um what about for um cancer and cancer avoidance? Again, you know, when you look at the data, cancer rates are going up and it's because our metabolic crisis is going up and many cancers are obesity related. colon cancer, breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, many, many prostate cancer, and they're driven by insulin resistance. And we know the cancer has a metabolic capacity to only burn carbs that can't burn fat. So, if you stop carbs and you eat fat, you can often change the trajectory of cancer. Is that true for all cancers? Are there any cancers that react negatively to Yeah, I I don't think that's true for all cancer. For certain lymphomas, I probably don't think it is, but Sedartha Mukerji, I don't know if you've had him on the podcast, but he's an incredible giant in the field of medicine. brilliant scientist at Colombia who's actually a oncologist who wrote a book called The Emperor Balm Malades and he wrote that book. Yeah, he wrote that book. He wrote the cell. He wrote That was a book about cancer. Yeah. He wrote a book called The Gene, the Cell and that and and he talks about his research on ketogenic diets for reversing stage four melanoma, stage four pancreatic cancer. Very impressive stuff. Yeah. You probably could like a connection. Well, I remember the emperor of all maladies. I I um I read that and I read the eighth day creation in the same roughly the same time period. both super impressive books. I didn't realize he was involved in a ketogenic diet. Yeah. But there's a whole metabolic theory of cancer. So I think that's that's key. And certain cancers like brain cancer responds incredibly well. If you have a glyobblastoma, which there's really no treatment for, it can be very effective. Yeah. I'll tell you, having lost some friends to cancer, pancreatic cancer and glyobblasto are the two I I mean I want any cancer, but those are the two I really don't want to get. These are all super important topics. It seems to come back over and over again to these pillars of health. Food, circadian rhythm, meaning sleep wake cycles. Obviously, um the last 50 years in this country were characterized by like smoke less or don't smoke. Um we now know alcohol is problematic for cancers and other things. Not to say that one can't enjoy a um drink every once in a while, but you know, I I I don't personally drink, but I I don't have a propensity for alcohol either. So, it's easy for me to say. I've had to become a little bit softer on my stance on this because I think like if you told me that caffeine was bad, I'd tell you I'm drinking it. I'd say, "How long do I have?" Yeah. It's like Martin Buffett says, "I don't care if I eat the Makes me live a couple years less. I'm still going to do it." Right. So, you know, some people like a drink now and can and I'm I sure I always say do do as you do as you want, but know what you're doing. Um, but I'd like to talk a little bit about markers that are an outgrowth of this conversation about food. So, blood markers. So, APOB is one that gets a lot of attention nowadays. For years, all we heard was you want your HDL high, you want your LDL low. Um, now we also realize that elevated APOB can be problematic. Yeah. And I and many people I know who eat some meat, it's not meat heavy diet, but some good quality meat. We're not talking about deli meats and things like that. Um, fruit, vegetables, and limit starchy carbohydrate intake to some extent, maybe not completely, but to some extent have observed elevated APOB when we do that, including olive oil, butter, coffee, yerba mate, this kind of thing. a healthy diet, um, largely anti-inflammatory diet, noticed elevated APOB as compared to when some of that red meat, even if it's grass-fed meat, is replaced with things like fish or chicken and so on, which makes me wonder if there really is a red meat, again, quality red meat, apo link. Yeah. And should I worry if my apo is elevated? My apo is a little bit elevated, but I haven't yet gone on any prescription drug to lower it. I'm taking some other approaches. Yeah, it's a great question and I learned that from function and yes, they're a sponsor of this podcast, but I hadn't had an APO test and that was the problem. I go to the doctor, I get a blood panel and it didn't include AP. No, you get like your 19 tests and they the same old stuff and you get your regular cholesterol like height, weight, you know. I mean the regular cholesterol panel is what most doctors use to manage cardiovascular risk which is your total your LDL HDL and triglyceride levels that's just like so 20th century the way we look at cardiovascular risk now is way more complicated and we need to look at the quality of the cholesterol which is the particle size and number and we were talking earlier about sugar and starch insulin resistance. Insulin resistance is essentially a metabolic state where your body can't respond like it normally should to insulin and you need more and more insulin to keep your blood sugar normal. That has secondary consequences which causes your cholesterol to become abnormal. So it may not raise your LDL per se, but it'll lower your good cholesterol trigly or HDL which there's good and bad HDL. It's a little more complicated than that, but it'll raise your triglycerides and it will raise your apo B. It'll raise your particle number of of LDL particles and it'll make the size of those particles small. These are all things that people should be testing. Do all these biomarkers including Apo B. But Apo B if all you can get is an Apo B from your doctor. Even the American Heart Association recognizes this as a better predictor of your risk of having a heart attack than your LDL cholesterol. And yet they're trying to include soda. Sorry, I had to go back. And the way I think about the way I think about Apo because there there's really cool tests now. You can use massspec to look at C peptide and insulin and look at your insulin resistance, which is really cool. But if you can't get that, you can ask your doctor for an APO because it's it's a sort of a surrogate marker for every non-good type of cholesterol particle. So what do you advise somebody if they're if their APO is 90 or above? Yeah. So you can test yourself. Everybody's in one. So the next thing I was going to say was that we treat all lipids as sort of a uniform approach which is everybody should drive their LDL over 70 that under 70 that's what cardiovascular uh recommendations are exercise nutrition can be diet can be exercise can be drugs do you are you a fan of statins? Uh not a big fan but they're a tool like am I like am I a fan of like hammers? Well yeah when I need one you know like but but not for everybody. And I I think the key thing to understand is that if you're looking at your cardiovascular risk, you have to look at the quality of these cholesterol particles. And there's also a large amount of variation or heterogenity in the population in the response to the exact same food. And I'll just tell you a quick story. I had a one patient. She was overweight, couldn't lose weight, pre-diabetic, inflamed, and she was really struggling. And I said, "Well, look, you know, let's try a ketogenic diet. There's good data on it. Let's see what happens." Her cholesterol dropped 100 points. Her triglycerides dropped 200 points. Her HDL went up 30 points. She lost 20 pounds. She felt great. Her inflammation levels normalized. She did great. Another guy heard about a ketogenic diet who was in his 50s. One of my patients, elite athlete, was like riding his bike 50 miles a day. He was in his mid-50s, super fit, thin, lean. He He said, "I want to try it. I heard it's good for performance." I'm like, "Okay, but let's monitor your numbers." And we did. And the opposite happened. He his uh total cholesterol went through the roof. His LDL went through the roof. His particle number went up through the roof. I'm like, "Wow." Same diet, different response. And I've talked to Ron Krauss about this. He's from Oakland. You might know about him. He discovered the particle size concept. He basically used MRI machines and now he's got a different technology which measures the quality and the the number of your cholesterol particles not just the weight of them which is what you get with a regular test. And and so we saw this variation and we realize now in the population it depends on who you are. So there's a whole category of people called lean mass hyperresponders. you're maybe one of those where you're fit, you're healthy, you're athletic and you eat saturated fat and boom, you know, your numbers kind of go wacky or you could be an overweight diabetic person and they do the opposite like you'll lower your LDL like this woman. So, it depends on your metabolic type, on your level of insulin resistance, on your overall health and people can switch over. So, let's say you're an overweight diabetic and you become ripped and healthy and fit, then the same food might have an opposite effect on you at that point. And it all has to do with cholesterol transport, cholesterol synthesis in the liver. It's kind of a little complicated scientifically. I know you might have a guy named Nick Norwitz from Harvard on the podcast who's great. Who's he can talk about this all day long. Nick has great online content. Folks should check out Nick Noritz's uh ex Instagram handle. Very smart kid. Very smart kid. Very spirited. I've encouraged him from from the first time I saw his content to keep going. He's great. Yeah, he's like he's a Oxford PhD in metabolism. He's got Harvard MD. He's graduating medical school this year. not afraid to go against the grain. He just goes with his experience and the data. Yeah. You're explaining about about different diets for people. He had colitis and almost died. He went on on a carnivore/ keto diet and actually ended up curing it and is fit and healthy now. Right. And and but his cholesterol, his LDL went up to 500. Is that where it sits now? Yeah. And and so there's a whole group of these people that have LDLs that are through the roof. It would make most cardiologists have a heart attack just looking at the number. So what do we do? Let's say someone takes a apo test function or from their doctor and and they've got an APO that's like 110. What do you do? Well, the NIH basically is great. They now said that the N of one research is among the highest quality research and that what that means is you compared to you, right? I don't want to compare myself to a 70 kilogram white male from Kansas or some, you know, a 5 foot tall woman from like, you know, I don't know, like Afghanistan. Like we're all different. And so we we need to see what happens to our biology. That's why I believe test don't guess and do something follow it up and track it. You know how often depends on what you're doing. Lipids change very quickly. Typical typical person. Lipids can change within a month. So I'd give people a month of changing a diet or changing a lifestyle or behavior to see what happens. Vitamin D can take longer. If you're low, it can take up to three months to rebuild. If your iron is low, it can take three months to rebuild your iron. So it depends on the test. But but you know you can quickly see changes in your insulin resistance in your insulin levels and your blood sugar levels in your lipid levels by changing diet and but you have to be systematic, right? I mean yeah I mean I I had a patient who was was I have a program called the 10day detox diet which essentially is a whole foods diet which eliminates a lot of the inflammatory foods that are problematic for people and it creates an incredible uh like quick response. Like I I call it setting your body back to its original factory settings. And she was like, "I want to check my blood after 10 days." I'm like, "No, it it's going to be a waste of money. We shouldn't do it. Your numbers aren't going to change that much." But she insisted and I was like, "Okay." And she did. And the numbers just dramatically change your lips, her insulin, her blood sugar, inflammation levels. The body is like a you change the inputs and the outputs change dramatically. So I think it's really about finding out what's going on for you. So Andy, I say, "Well, try to go off of meat and see what happens to your AOB or try to add more this kind of fat." I started eating more tuna and eating a little bit less beef and then I did a function test and I discovered my mercury was elevated. By the way, I learned something the hard way also a few years prior to that, which is I know this sounds crazy, but check your dishwasher. Some of them have mercury thermometers that are that are leaky. Yeah. Now, I was told the mercury from the mercury thermometers in dishwashers is is biologically inert, but I'll tell you, it's not pleasant to see a bunch of little mercury beads floating around in on on your dishes. I mean, considering it's the most potent toxin known to humans other than plutonium, I would probably avoid all forms of mercury. So, do you eat tuna? Rarely. I love tuna sushi. Raleigh. Okay. But I I I actually, you know, have little hacks where you can take a keelating drug after you go to a sushi restaurant. Like what? What's it? DMSA. It's FDA approved drug for heavy metal keilation. Prescription. Prescription. DMSA. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. What what dosage? Uh, depends. You can do like 500 milligrams or you'll take that after you go out to sushi. Yeah. I mean, that it's kind of like a doctor hack I can do where you can ask your doctor for it. I don't I don't recommend it. It's like, you know, well, as long as we're on this, I Let's talk. I like I love the range of topics we're touching into today, by the way. By the way, I almost died from mercury poisoning. So, I know how to manage it, how my body works. I've checked my genes and why I don't detox. This was from the China. Yeah. I know how to upregulate my detox pathways through food, through supplements. Are you a fan of sulforophane? When I did the episode on microplastics and pases, I started taking sulforophane and increasing my cruciferous vegetable intake. upregulates glutathione which is the body's main detoxifying compound. So do you also take um an acetylcyine? I do. Yeah. Daily. Daily. Yeah. How much? 600. 600 mill. Okay. I'll do uh three or four times that if I feel a cold coming on, but I don't take it daily. I should probably take it daily. Well, considering we live in a toxic soup. Yeah. I mean, we just can't get away from it in the air, the food. An acetylcysteine. We already talked about the omegas and the basics, magnesium, etc. Um what are some things that when people start to hit their 40s, 50s, 60s, um that you think they should add in for their health? Um and is there anything uh female specific or male specific? For sure. I mean, you know what's really frightening, Andrew, is that because of the diet we have, which is hormonally regulating sugar and starch tend to screw up both men's and women's hormones. It makes women more like men and men more like women. So, you get PCOS in women, which is hair growth on your face, loss of hair on your head, and and androgens androgen. Yeah. And then for men, their testosterone goes down. The bigger your belly, the lower your testosterone. So when you start your sugar, you get belly fat. So I mean, young young men have low testosterone. I I would have I would have said if you asked me 20 years ago, I said, well, you know, you start checking in your 40s and seeing the changes that happen, but now I think we got to start looking earlier. And a lot of guys are get are getting on TRT young. I I'm on a bit of a campaign now to discourage that. I think that if they're doing everything right, like eating right and exercising, and that doesn't mean overex exercising. if you overtrain, like if you're running running, your testosterone is going to be um going to be diminished for sure. But encouraging them to do everything they can with behaviors and include nutrition and some supplementation before getting on TRT because of the reduction in sperm count um that comes from TRT unless you offset it with hCG. Yeah. So, you know, I I I've said before in the podcast, I I take 25 milligrams of cipionate every other day, staggered with hCG, 600 IU every other day. I had been open about that for from the beginning at but I started at age 45. Yeah. And I do freeze sperm every year. Um just because there's some age related effects on sperm and like why not? It's very inexpensive to crowd preserve. But I think young guys are are um it's scary that their testosterone is so low. Yeah. Especially if they're not overweight. So what's going on? Well, also there's endocrine disrupting chemicals. So her heavy metals, pesticides, a lot of these are what we call xenobiotics. Mh. meaning they're foreign kind of compounds that are biologically active. And there's a whole book on this that I read like almost 30 years ago called Our Stolen Future by Theo Coburn which lays out it was kind of like the Rachel Carson silent spring version of a few years ago which talked about the reproductive effects of these petrochemical toxins that are everywhere in our food and our water and our air and they affect fertility rates. they affect birth rates in terms of Shauna Swan is was on this podcast and gosh, if it wasn't for her and her incredible work and the fact that she's such a skeptic of any data that I don't think people would um respect the uh the data on pesticides as much as they do because I think it took somebody with her kind of front-facing image to you know she she's not like she talks a lot about the environmental working group and the real hardcore science types are like oh they They're anti-environmental working group. I was shocked to learn that a lot of people in the scientific community are like anti-environmental working group. I thought, how could that possibly be? They call it woo science. I mean, the politics and all this are really complicated. But, um, what do you do to remove heavy metals? Just to answer your question about what you should be testing. I think most people should be testing, you know, depending on where you are and what age you are, but your hormonal panels on a regular basis. So sex hormones uh male would be free testosterone, total testosterone, estradi, DHT as well, DHEA, DHT. Sometimes we have hair loss that can be treated for men. For women, same thing. They need you know FSH, LH, uh sex hormones like estradiol, progesterone, testosterone for women as well, DHA sulfate, which can be indicator of PCOS. And we seeing with our function because we've had 150,000 members now. We have literally tens 150,000,000. We have tens of millions of biological data points and we can see anonymized data showing the trends in the population and it's not good and and then the good news is you can do something about it. Can insurance cover a blood test like function? Yes. If you get your health savings account or your FSAs, you can use those for function health testing. But you you if you don't have that and you can't use that, regular insurance doesn't cover it yet. I'm hoping we're going to change. Yeah. Is that in the is that in the cards? That's in the road map for sure. Um because once we can prove that we create value and we're seeing this when people use function, they get their lab test done and then we follow them for you know every six months and we can see the changes in the biomarkers toward the positive. How many people go from abnormal to normal and it's not just by knowing their tests and there's tens of thousands of pages of content that have been highly curated and scientifically referenced on what to do if you have this or that normal biomarker. So you ask me yeah what do I do for mercury? Yeah. If you get a positive mercury and you double clicked on that, you would get a very deep analysis of what you need to do. Here's the way to reduce your exposures through your water and air. Here's how you reduce your exposure through food by reducing these kinds of fish, eating more of these kinds of fish. Are you a fan of using charcoal as a chilator? I don't think charcoal is great for heavy metals. No, I think I think it's good for binding anything. So, we use How do you How does one take charcoal? I've been a little bit cautious about taking charcoals. When I was in the ER, though, we used to use it if people came with a drug overdose. We'd make him drink a cup of charcoal. Literally, their teeth would turn black. It was awful. So, if I you try to kill yourself, then it's punishment for trying to kill yourself. Um, this is gallows humor that only a physician could could could laugh at this. I know enough physicians and they all have this gallows humor. I think it's a survival tactic. You have to you have to because you're like in situations, but you're maybe you otherwise go crazy. Let's say I want to um remove some heavy metals and toxins from the body. I could take a charcoal tablet. No, you can take a tablet, but I wouldn't do that. What I would say is one, reduce your exposure number one. If you're eating tuna, big fish, you know, it's basically the bigger the fish, the more the mercury. I don't eat much tuna anymore. Yeah. So, so small fish, s I call it the smashers. While small wild salmon, mackerel, anchovies, sardines, and Harry fish, all your but is there anything I can take? So, here's what I would do. I would I would, you know, there there are there's a and I don't have any relationship with this company. It's called Ctopia.fish fish. It sources fish around the world from regeneratively Yeah, I've seen their stuff regenerative fish farms. So, it's farmed, but it's healthy and it doesn't have all the heavy metals and you can get good fish. Uh there are some small tuna farms that are like smaller tunas where they actually do this too. Um but they don't source from there. Second is I would I would upregulate all of your indogenous detox pathways. So this your body has a system of elimination and doctors say detox is Baloney you poop, you pee, you breathe, you sweat. Like this is your your liver has a whole series of pathways that are detoxification pathways. Your kidney does, your gut does. I mean this is what your body does, right? Your poop, pee, sweat, you know, all these things. So you have to upregulate your body's own system. So you need to take foods that upregulate your liver. You mentioned eating more cruciferous vegetables. You could add more garlic. You could actually juice cilantro is a great hack for getting rid of heavy metals. Really? Yeah. It doesn't taste very good. I like cilantro. But juicing like a couple of bunches of that every day will help bring it down. Um and then there are uh things like fiber to help bind it. So you talked about charcoal, that's a binder, but just f eating a higher fiber diet will help you eliminate things faster through your colon like heavy metals. And do you believe in in gut cleanses? There's this uh this I don't I want to just talk about it. There's this um fermented plum uh product someone gave me. No, it it comes in a beautiful packaging like this orange and black packaging. It's a fermented plum or pomelo that uh a friend of mine said, "Listen, you have to stay home the next day, but you take this before you go to sleep. You drink a like, you know, 16 ounces of water. You go to sleep. You wake up in the morning and you're not going anywhere that day except a few trips to the bathroom, but you it completely empties your digestive tract. I think you got a colonoscopy and get that too through the prep. Yeah. So, it's not something that I Well, I tried it because I was like, "All right, I'll give this a try." Is it healthy or unhealthy or um neutral to do a complete uh digestive tract uh I mean, I think you you you it depends how you do it and what's causing it like you know, but it can it can disrupt your gut flora. So you you your gut will really repopulate often with the flora that it had. But you know part of the reason we're so sick is our gut flora is so harmed by C-sections, antibiotics, lack of breastfeeding. The infant formula itself is a microbiome harmful compound for many reasons. Not saying women shouldn't use formula, but there's better formulas and worse formulas. And and so we we've kind of like had a lot of gut issues. We've taken antibiotics. We've eaten food that's harmful to our microbiome. We exposed to toxins. somebody might want to flush their system. I think it can be helpful and and for example we do this for example if people have uh liver failure and you're an alcoholic and you have liver failure now liver failure comes mostly from eating sugar and starch non it's they changed the name by the way from non-alcoholic fatty liver disease to metabolic associated fatty liver disease which is just kind of tell you and so those people if they come in with liver failure they get crazy literally it's called hpatic and sephylopathy they get delirium they are seeing things they literally go nuts. The treatment, you give them a sterilizing antibiotics. You kill everything in their gut called neomy. And then you give them laculose, which makes you poop your brains out. And then they they basically flush all that out. And all the toxins that you can't metabolize from your microbiome get flushed out and you come back to normal cognition. Wow. And it's a standard medical treatment. It's like basically what you learned in medical school. So there there is an argument and I've done this with autistic kids who've had gut issues with certain different issues. Parkinson's if you're constipated goes up by your risk goes up by 400% and that's a toxin related neurological disease. Well this is this thing is a hammer. It was sort of given to me as a joke and I thought all right well this is going to be no you're going to be fine. Don't worry. Yeah. No, I only did I only did it uh twice um on separate occasions and I was like, "Okay, that wasn't um super pleasant, but um I just wanted to know is it a valuable tool?" And I wasn't interested in taking a drug and it's like this fermented fruit or something like that. I I did hear that um from a colleague at Yale who studies the microbiome that if we fast or if we evacuate our digestive tract in kind of an aggressive way like that that the healthy microbiome needs some time to replenish itself. It's not like you like when you fast you start eating away at the unhealthy and healthy microbiota. They or they they aren't fed, right? And so it's not not across the board a good thing necessarily. Yeah. So you want to be careful of that. But I I mean I think um in terms of answering your question about metals. So you you want to upregulate you reduce your exposure. You want to upregulate your pathways by food and then you can upregulate the pathways by nutrients. So we talked about an acetylcysteine. So anything that boosts glutathione lipoic acid all the methylating B vitamins B12, folate, B6, making sure you have enough protein because a lot of the phase 2 pathways in your liver that help you detoxify are dependent on amino acids like gluconation and glutathione. It's it's a an important detoxifying compound and you want to you want to basically open up all the pathways to get rid of. So I have a very specific detox protocol for heavy metals includes all that and sometimes DMSA and binders but I I use silica. I use algenates from seaweed and others. I don't use charcoal for that. But you can safely remove metals from your body. That's what happened to me. I I was able to do it and I you know I'm not demented anymore and I don't have like chronic fatigue syndrome. And if you looked at pictures of me in my 30s you're like wow you look terrible. Well, I met you 10 years ago. Yeah. And you truly have aged backwards and you looked great then. You look super vibrant then. Like you have a ton of energy. I mean, I think you you embody a lot of the things that people would like for healthy aging. And I I know you also exercise and you you do all the things. Um I'd like to talk about some of the kind of more um cutting edge things that are happening that I've not tried but that I'm curious about. Um and you want to know if I've done them or not? Well, or maybe or just what I've tried everything pretty much. Let's let's actually um something I have tried but that I'm not an expert on but we've done a couple of podcasts about but I'd like your thoughts on peptides. Yeah. What are some of the peptides that you think can be useful to people if they can afford them and work with a doctor where they can get it safely? Let's just assume all that. Um what are the peptides that you think are of of real value to to people who aren't like really sick but are doing everything they can? Optimization. Yeah. optimization and just yeah generally trying to point all the boats in the direction of health and it depends on what your needs are what's happening with your health and like anything you're using it should be used for a purpose right and and peptides are simply many proteins uh that have biological effects and I think of them as this the your body's super highway of information and connectivity that drives everything so they regulate your sex hormones your growth hormone your metabolic health nerve function I sexual desire. I mean there's million peptides like GLP-1 is a peptide. Insulin is a peptide, right? So there's tens of thousands of peptides that are made by the body that are used to regulate everything. And so there's a number of them that have been available that have been studied well. Some of them are on the market like you know ompic or insulin or by ly which is something called PT41 for hyposexual hyposexual women. Yeah. For women but you use it for men. It works for but it's FDA approved for women. It's FDA approved for women. It works for men, too. Is it kissepin? Is that what No, it's not kissepin. It's a I'm going to butcher the name. It's like starts with a blem tide or something like that. Okay. And and you know it it does make you nauseous. So, you need to take a be careful. You want to you don't want to throw up while you're having sex, but definitely not not too sexy, but uh it does work. Um but there's a number of depending on your needs. For example, if you're athletic and you're, you know, in the gym a lot, you want to increase recovery and repair, there's peptides like BPC 157 and TB500 and uh GHK that are regulatory peptides for tissue repair and healing. There are peptides that you can use for immune function like thyos and alpha 1, which is great if you're getting a cold or you have an immune issue or you have COVID or what's the pathway for thymus and b alpha thymus and alpha? Um I we don't have to go through every biochemical step, but is the logic there that you're increasing the number number excuse me of T- cells and B cells? Yeah. So basically you you know when you're born you have a giant thymus gland which like takes up your whole chest and as Yeah. If you look if you look at a baby just you take a Google image and put up there it's like basically like your whole sternum. It's like this big, but it involutes or shrinks as you get older and it kind of becomes smaller, but it's still a source of your immune function and it helps with building your immune resilience and it and as we age, it gets worse and worse. And so the thyus one does increase your your white blood cell function and and number and it helps improve that. Um, then there's peptides that are like a great like PT41 for sexual function. There's peptides like that increases testosterone. There's ones like epomorlin that intestine that may help growth hormone. Do you do you take it? Um you don't have to share what you take, but do you um think any of these are kind of mainstays for people over 40 if they can afford them? Some of them I think, but you have to be careful because they're they're they're not like just taking a vitamin. I mean, if you take an overdose of vitamin D, yeah, you'll get in trouble. Or if you have other fats soluble vitamins like vitamin A, you get in trouble. Most water soluble vitamins, you're not going to get in trouble. Although B6, you have to be careful with an overdose. That and magnesium, if you take too much of it, you just poop your brains out. and vitamin C the same thing so your body can manage but peptides are very powerful compounds I mean look at ompic I mean look at insulin I mean these are very powerful compounds not to be messed around with no so you really need someone who's educated and it well and they should be usually a doctor or some licensed professional who has studied and understands this and they should be used with monitoring to the side effects the effects effects on your lab work and hormones what about cycling them yeah so so you don't want to ne always take them all the time and you want to do cycle them particularly ones stimulate things like growth hormone. You don't want to be on that all the time. I worry about BPC57 because in my experience it is effective at treating uh minor injuries and things like that, but people now just take it continuously and it increases angioenesis um growth of capillaries and vessels and things like that. And if you have a tumor, you do not want to increase angioenesis to the tumor. Exactly. You just wouldn't know if that was happening. There's no way to know until that tumor, you know, starts creating problems, right? Although that that's another thing cancer screening are is so antiquated right we do such poor jobs of cancer screening with you know a colonoscopy pap test what's a better cancer screen there's a new technology that was been developed using fragments of DNA uh that are released into the bloodstream from cancers way before it ever shows up on a scan or an imaging which you can pick up cancers a year two or three before they ever show up on any kind of test and it's called Gallery. It screens uh 50 of the most common cancers, many of which there's no screening test for. And uh it the false positive rate, which is what you worry about, is very low, like half a percent. That means it shows you have a cancer when you actually don't, which can be very terrifying. It it's about 75% accurate and finding the cancer if early if you find it. And it's great. I mean, we we've picked up so many people with issues. One in 1888 of our members who've tested with this test have a cancer that they wouldn't have known about otherwise and they can catch an early stage before it it kills you. The push back on this early detection was surprising to me. Not this one in particular, but like a few years ago I paid for a penovo scan. Yeah. Yeah. Then I started seeing some of the push back on whole body MRIs um from people in the standard medical community. So I asked my good friend at neurosurgery at UCSF, Eddie Chang. I said, "Hey, what do you think of these whole body scans?" And he said, "I get people coming in all the time who have identified brain tumors and aneurysms and issues that they were completely unaware of that they would probably be dead in the next 5 to 10 years." And by the way, I don't get paid by Prouvo. I I don't have any deal with Prouvo or any other of these whole body imaging things. And I realize there's a cost. So, I think the implication is from the people that give push back like, "Oh, these things are expensive and we and we're going to kind of push back on them as a tool because we don't want people to feel badly if they can't get them. We want we don't want to um they're going to become commoditized. They're going to become cheap just like we're able to get like $15,000 test for $4.99. We're going to be able to get a whole body scan for 300 bucks. It's happening. It's not it doesn't have to be 3,000 bucks." So that's coming and I think we're going to lean into that in function in the future. But it's really uh it's really important to understand that you want data on your body as much as you can have and as much as you can afford and the healthare system should pay for it. They don't because they don't they don't understand the value of this because they they don't see the benefit as they people transfer insurance companies so regularly and jobs so regularly that they figure oh if I invest in somebody's health then the next guy's going to get the benefit. You know if I'm United then Etna will get the benefit or signal will get the benefit. I see. You know, it's kind of like a it's it's a perverse incentive system, but I I I think, you know, datadriven healthare is the future really. Imagine imagine a place where you can have all your personal health data. And this is where we're going. where you can have all your biomarker testing, where you can have all your wearable data, your full genome, your microbiome, all imaging data, not just a whole body scan, but looking at your body composition, looking at AI heart scans that tell how much plaque you have and and and much more with your medical history with all the world scientific literature informing it with knowledge experts also overlaying their knowledge and expertise onto it in a platform that allows you to query it. So, think about like an AI chatbot that's just based on you. Like it's your data. And what what now in medicine is so amazing is we try to like make diagnoses and understand what's going on with people with such limited data sets about them about them. They're so antiquated. And so you've got guys like Lee Hood who's literally measuring thousands and thousands of data points on patients and he's using his project called the phenome project. I think it's called phenome health where he's he's been able to say, "Oh, geez, I can detect this from a few molecules in the blood. I can see what's going on with your microbiome or a few molecules in your blood. I can see if you're going to be at risk for Alzheimer's." And now we offer this for for you think there was no test for Alzheimer's, right? You had to do a brain biopsy or you had to wait till you got, you know, you forget your, you know, name of this or that or the other thing. And now we can through blood testing look for things like PTA 217 and amaloid 4240 made amaloid 4240 ratios. What can you do in response to that? Let's say somebody That's a good question. That's a good question. I mean Alzheimer's is a tough one. I've followed this this field for a long time. I had people working in the bench right across from me as a postto. There were there have been so many hypotheses. Not just the plaques and tangles thing. Um not just the beta amaloid hypothesis. But I I'll tell you, my friends who are neurologists are not optimistic. They're not, but they're not looking at the problem the right way, right? It's it's sort of like the blind man and the elephant. They're looking at their one thing and they don't see an answer. But you guys guys like Richard Isacson who was at Cornell and now he's in Florida, who who if you haven't had on your podcast, you should. who was a who's a neurologist studying Alzheimer's and looking at deep diagnostics and personalized approaches to address the root causes and seeing remarkable outcome reversals. He had a special on uh was I think CNN with Sanjay Gupta where they looked literally showed that you can take these biomarkers and if you find them early enough you can intervene and again I've done this with dozens of patients who had dementia who were able to stop or reverse it. I have more with diet not just diet it's everything. So Alzheimer's is is like it's like saying um it's like just saying you can't remember stuff like you know we have all these fancy names we give to diseases and then we say oh I know why you can't remember things you have Alzheimer's no Alzheimer's is the name we give to people who can't remember things it's a certain specific type of problem but then the question is what causes it and there are multiple causes it's called type two diabetes of the type three diabetes of the brain or it's caused by insulin resistance we know diabetics have four times the rate of Alzheimer's could be caused by environmental tox toxins like heavy metals. It could be caused by mold or it could be caused by Lyme disease like Chris Kristofferson had or it could be caused by changes in the microbiome or by nutritional deficiencies. I had one woman who was like diagnosed with early dementia and she had she was older, brilliant woman but was starting to lose it. Turned out she had severe methylation issues and B vitamin deficiency and folate deficiency and I treated her with a vitamin B12 shot and some B vitamins and she came right back. So it's a multi again multicausal multimodal treatments. You got to figure out all the causes and you got to treat all the problems. If someone has mercury issues and mold issues and they have Lyme disease and they have gut issues and they have pre-diabetes and they have methylation issues, you got to treat all those things and then you can see real change in people's biomarkers. Ketogenic diets have been affected. But it's not like a keto diet will fix everybody with Alzheimer's or that keation will fix everybody with Alzheimer or that fixing their diabetes will fix everybody with Alzheimer's. You have to find all the things and treat all the things. Like if your roof have has 30 holes in it and you plug 25 of them and it rains, it's still going to get wet in your house, you know, and that's the opposite of how medicine's practiced. And I I ran into this at Cleveland Clinic and we were trying to study Alzheimer's and we had a guy who really wanted to look at the black box of functional medicine. People come in, you do personalized care out the other side, what happens? And the the head of science there was like, "No, no, we can't do that. We can only study one thing at a time. Vitamin D, we'll do that study, then we'll do fish oil study, then we'll do diet study, then we'll do exercise study, then we'll do whatever study." I'm like, "That's not how the body works. You need, you know, if you want to grow a plant, you can't just say, I'm just going to give it water and soil but no uh light or I'm going to give it light but no soil or, you know, like it just doesn't make sense." So, the whole context, yeah, functional medicine is really about understanding this model and how do you apply it in a personalized way and Richard Isaac has done it. Dale Bredesen's done it and their their results are amazing. And I and I personally have seen this in in my patients where they either stop progressing or they reverse it. Now, sometimes they do progress and it's hard, but I've had patients who've done incredible for years and years and years. Well, about a year ago, somebody who's probably one of the finest cardiologists in North America contacted me of all people and asked, "What do I know about ketogenic diet for the treatment of Alzheimer's?" And I said, "Well, this I've known him since I was a kid." because he's a family friend, a phenomenal cardiologist. And I said, um, you know, this is an odd moment because I remember years ago I said I was going to go into neuroscience and he said, "Why would you go into neuroscience? Like there's nothing to like neuroscience is a ridiculous field. Why would you do that?" Uh, the joke the joke about neurologists is you diagnose an adios like there's nothing to do. You could diagnosing problems, but you can't do anything about it. So, exactly to that point. So um but he was very curious because his father had Alzheimer's and um he was exploring the ketogenic diet for the treatment of Alzheimer's for his dad and he was observing some really impressive results. So here's a a cardiologist among the best asking me what I've seen about this and I said well I know of Dale Bredesen's work and um and I'm I'm learning as I go and we will cover this on the podcast. This is very informative. Um I want to make sure that we hit the other kind of cutting edge things. I'm curious if you take anything to augment NAD. I take sublingual NMN every day. I don't get paid by a company that makes NMN. I take it. The most noticeable effects that I've observed are increased energy. My hair grows super fast when I take NAD and my nails grow super fast. Those are not effects I was trying to achieve, but that's what what what I've observed. Do you take NN NR or do you do NAD infusions? Yeah, I do. And why? I think you know when you look at the data and I I wrote a book called Young Forever I talk about longevity and the pathways and when you look at the fundamental regulatory systems in the body around cellular repair healing renewal regeneration we have a built-in healing system like everybody understands that if you cut your skin you don't go oh would you please heal and please recruit these you know stem cells and read this andis factors and bring cytoines over here to do that your body knows what to do same you break a bone it's like got an it's got a its own healing system. So in the body there's I call these longevity switches and but they regulate not just what longevity but they regulate chronic disease and and much more and they're embedded ancient pathways that exist from worms to humans uh mTor MPK sertuins and insulin signaling pathways and and NAD in the body works to activate one of those longevity switches called certuins which are involved in DNA repair. So when you get a 100,000 hits a day to your DNA as it's unraveling and rerolling and it's kind of gets damaged, you need an army to go out and like you fix it, right? A bunch of carpenters kind like repair that broken DNA. NAD stimulates that. It also stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis forming new mitochondria, improves mitochondrial function, improves insulin sensitivity, improves mTor uh autoph induced autophagy. So it there are a lot of redundancies in these pathways, but it's really quite amazing when you see how the body's organized. And so NAD is one of the things it's not going to make you live forever or cure every disease, but it's a it's an it's an optimization tool because as you get older, NAD levels decline, and so your mitochondria decline, your energy declines, and it's it's great for all of that. So I take it, and I I I think How do you get NAD? I get I get a thousand I get 1,000 milligrams of NMN. Okay. So you take that daily? Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yeah, I do the sublingual in a man and occasionally I'll get an NAD infusion, but it's so unpleasant as it goes in. It's like you're getting stomped on by an elephant. Slowly slowly, but you do feel great afterwards. Um, exoomes. Yeah. Have you had them? I've had them. I've given them. What are they and why would you get them? So again, the body has this amazing healing system and it's part of the body's healing system. And this whole deal you're talking about, whether it's peptides, whether it's exoomes, there's NM, it's part of this field of regenerative medicine. How do we regenerate and heal and repair by activating our body's own built-in systems which are way better and way stronger and work way faster than most medications if you know how to use them. So exoomes are essentially the little packets of healing information that are inside stem cells and there's thousands of them and and they get released. Think of like little kind of like you know when you blow bubbles when you're a kid. It's like these little bubbles of stuff that go out into the body and then they go to where they're needed and they release the packets of information that contain growth factors, healing factors, anti-inflammatory factors, tissue repair factors. Uh and that's how the body tends to repair and heal. And so uh I remember once uh I had CO really bad and I afterwards I I've never really felt depressed. I mean I've been sad obviously in my life and lost parents and had things happen. There were you know life issues but I felt physiologically depressed like my brain felt terrible. I couldn't think. That's how I felt with cognitive issues. I was like I'm an idiot and I'm depressed and I want to kill myself and my higher self is like this is not me. like and I I took a load of exosomes IV. I just got them because I'm a doctor. I can get them and I gave them to myself and literally within hours I was resurrected. It was it was amazing. Yeah. And I've used it for my knee. I have a miniscus injury. I've used them in my knee. I've used them in my back. So I think they can be very effective. I used them introvenously for Is it done in the United States? You can you can give extra something. So it's FDA approved. Yeah. But uh you know uh they're approved for skin issues or this thing. So there's like an off label uses what they what they use them for. Uh a lot of things like stem cells you have to go out of the country to do it and there's a regulatory issues or safety issues. I'm still scared to do stem cells. I understand. I mean it's it's you want to not play with this stuff but you also you know can be they can be used effectively. Like my wife for example was a runner and she kind of tore her knees up and had patellofhemeral syndrome and couldn't walk. And I mean she's younger than I am and she she shouldn't be feeling that like she's 80 years old in her knees. We went to Costa Rica to a very reputable center and I knew the, you know, the founders of it. I inspected the laboratory. I went with the scientists who, you know, harvested them, who grew them, what they did, their testing practice. I did my homework and she ended up having no knee problems after she got her stem cells in her knees. And I was like, that's amazing. And this is like, you know, probably close to two years later. That's awesome. I mean, I've heard great things from many people. I I haven't felt a need to do stem cells, so that's why I haven't done it. But I'm curious about exoomes and been um you know cautiously exploring the peptide space. We talked about some other supplements. Look, Mark, we've covered a ton. Uh it was a whirlwind and um and at the same ADD I'm like we No, no. At at the same time, I mean, we talked about food as medicine. Yeah. Talked about core supplements that people really should perhaps not even think about as supplements anymore, but that's sort of up to the that's in the the ear of the beholder. My joke on that is this. I said, "People say, "Do you need supplements?" I'm like, "No, you don't need supplements, but only under certain conditions. You drink pure clean water. You breathe pure clean air. You wake up with the sun. You go to bed with the sun. You have no chronic stress. You're exposed to no environmental toxins. And you're only hunting and gathering your own wild food. If that's you, you don't need any supplements and it's the 1930s, right? So, yeah, things like D3, omegas. I like that answer. magnesium, selenium, iodine, a case you made a case for table salt in addition to all the fancy salts that we all enjoy or just having seaweed and fish, you know, seaweed and fish, but not tuna. Um, and thank you for touching on uh air and uh lack of cleanliness and air uh heavy metal poisoning. Um things to be cautious about there is ways to detox and and for uh illustrating that that detoxification is possible through known pathways that anti-aging, longevity, whatever you want to call it, and bodily repair pathways are inherent in us. And so we're we're it can encourage them. Um, and I also really want to thank you for being willing to wade into the swamp, the swamp that is the uh public health debate right now, but especially the corner of the swamp that is um, for lack of a better way to put it, the big food relationship and what you and Bobby Kennedy and others. I hope that they will recruit from from the left. I know Cy Booker's been actively involved in this. He's on the he's on the left clearly. um and trying to clean up the food supply, give people options. What I heard is that it's not about forcing things, but it's about giving people options and knowledge, transparency, education. So, like I I really appreciate you and the entire population of people that care about their health, whether they realize it or not, they appreciate you because you're a real pioneer in this field and you've touched some really challenging waters. And I happen to know and I feel very good saying that it is your uh inherent good nature. I think that's allowed you to go through one swamp after another after the other with your like optimism and your your kindness of spirit intact. So, you know, thanks. You're a real role model to everyone who cares about their health and who's trying to help others care about their health. Yeah, I'm a pathological optimist. But the good news is optimists live longer, even if they're wrong. Well, I was thinking about this the other day. I met your new dog. And forgive me for saying this, but but Lenny's got a great attitude. You know what my first thought was? He's kind of like Mark. He like came in there. He crawled up on my lap. Although you didn't crawl up on my lap. I just want to make the point that he he has no stranger danger. He was very but but he's a he's a really wonderful and beautiful dog by the way. He's a impressive dog. Um and you just have that good nature about you. And I know you want the best for people. I just don't like people suffering when they don't need to. I feel like I'm I'm have a glass of water. They're thirsty and there's a giant glass wall between us. And that's why I've been working my whole life to kind of get the message out about how people can heal whether it's on their own or whether through my books or through free education, my podcast, like your stuff. I mean, it's it's it's a public service because people are suffering and they don't need to. I feel that. I know everyone listening feels that. And um thank you for everything that you've done and again for being such a pioneer and keep going. Thanks. Thanks, Andrew. Thanks, Mark. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Mark Heyman. To learn more about Dr. Heyman's work and to find links to the various sources discussed during the course of this episode, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. and you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. This is a book that I've been working on for more than five years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of 1 to three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubmanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Mark Heyman. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]

========================================

--- Video 13 ---
Video ID: Rk02H9r_E4A
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rk02H9r_E4A
Title: Why “Idiot Compassion” (Aka Yeslighting) Is Not Effective Support
Published: 2025-04-11 16:57:48 UTC
Description:
Lori Gottlieb is a world-renowned expert on relationships: finding them, being in them, moving forward if or after they end, and how to repair them.

Here, she explains a common phenomenon in which people seek support from friends when they encounter challenges in relationships. While she acknowledges the benefits of talking to friends about these matters, she emphasizes that most of the time, the compassion we think is helping people merely provides a Band-Aid in the short term—and leads to more suffering overall and in the long run.

She distinguishes “idiot compassion” from “wise compassion,” which emphasizes our role in the problems we encounter in relationships of all kinds.

During the episode, we discuss a wide range of topics related to finding and being an excellent romantic partner. She offers actionable protocols based on decades of experience helping clients find and build the relationships they want most.

It’s an episode that ought to benefit everyone, including those already in a relationship, as it also focuses on how to be a better partner.

We also discuss the impact of modern technology on relationships.

Transcript Language: English
So, idiot compassion is what, if you surround yourself with people who are only going to validate your experience. Like, for example, let's say that, you know, someone says to her friends, like, "I don't understand why he broke up with me." Or, "I don't understand, you know, why this keeps happening to me." And your friend's like, "No, you go girl, he's wrong, you're right." You know, whatever. Or, "You know, my partner's doing this." And we tend to kind of feel like our job as a friend is to support the position of our friends, that's idiot compassion. Wise compassion is what you get in therapy where we say, you know, like, "What might be going on here?" It's kind of like if a fight breaks out in every bar you're going to, maybe it's you. We don't say that to our friends in idiot compassion. Think about that. So, you're not going to grow as a person, you're not going to hear what you need to hear. The friends you want to surround yourself with are people who will tell you the truth in a kind, respectful way, and that you're willing to hear it. So, some people think that it would be drama if their friends kind of called them on their bullshit, right? That's not drama. So, that's a healthy, communicative, open, honest relationship.

========================================

--- Video 14 ---
Video ID: jgaoLdS82vw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jgaoLdS82vw
Title: Build Muscle Size, Increase Strength & Improve Recovery | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-04-10 12:01:11 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I discuss how to build muscle strength and size (hypertrophy) and cover key training principles to enhance athletic performance and offset age-related muscle decline.

I explain how the nervous system drives muscle movement, the key differences between training for hypertrophy or strength, and resistance training protocols to build muscle for performance and healthy aging. Additionally, I discuss tools for assessing recovery and the role of key nutrients—such as creatine and electrolytes—in supporting muscle development and performance. This episode provides actionable, science-backed strategies to enhance movement, preserve strength with age, and boost energy levels.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/sPY0glv

We want to hear from you. Take our quick survey to help improve Huberman Lab: https://go.hubermanlab.com/podtrac-survey

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Muscle
00:02:02 Muscle & Nervous System
00:03:24 Strength & Aging, Henneman's Size Principle, Use Heavy Weights?
00:07:30 3 Stimuli, Muscle Strength vs Muscle Growth (Hypertrophy)
00:09:31 Tool: Resistance Training Protocol, Increase Muscle Strength
00:13:16 Tool: Advanced Resistance Training & Volume; Speed, Rest
00:16:17 Testing for Recovery, Heart Rate Variability, Grip Strength
00:19:54 Testing for Recovery, Carbon Dioxide Tolerance
00:22:51 Ice Bath Timing; NSAIDs & Exercise
00:24:06 Salt & Electrolytes; Creatine; Leucine

#HubermanLab #Science #MuscleGrowth #Strength

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. Today, I want to talk about something that is vitally important for not just athletic performance but for your entire life and, indeed for your longevity, and that's muscle. One of the things that's exquisite and fantastic about the human brain is that it can direct all sorts of different kinds of movement, different speeds of movement, movement of different durations. All of that is governed by the relationship between the nervous system, neurons, and their connections to muscle. Today, as always, we're going to talk a little bit of mechanism. I'm going to explain how neurons control muscle. We will touch on some nutritional themes and how that relates to muscle, in particular, a specific amino acid that, if it's available in your bloodstream frequently enough and at sufficient levels, can help you build and improve the quality of muscle. We are also going to talk about recovery. That's when muscle grows. That's when muscle gets more flexible. None of that actually happens during training. It happens after training. Most people, when they hear the word muscle, they just think about strength. Of course, muscles are involved in everything that we do. They are involved in speaking. They're involved in sitting and standing up. They're involved in lifting objects, including ourselves. They are absolutely essential for maintaining how we breathe. They're absolutely essential for ambulation, for moving, and for skills of any kind. When we think about muscle, we don't just want to think about muscle, the meat that is muscle, but what controls that muscle. No surprise, what controls muscle is the nervous system. The nervous system does that through three main nodes of control. Basically, we have upper motor neurons in our motor cortex. Those are in our skull. Those are involved in deliberate movement. Those upper motor neurons send signals down to my spinal cord, where there are two categories of neurons. One are the lower motor neurons. Those lower motor neurons send little wires that we call axons out to our muscles and cause those muscles to contract. They do that by dumping chemicals onto the muscle. In fact, the chemical is acetylcholine. Now, there's another category of neurons in the spinal cord called central pattern generators, or CPGs. Those are involved in rhythmic movements. Anytime we're walking or doing something where we don't have to think about it to do it deliberately, it's just happening reflexively, that central pattern generators and motor neurons. Anytime we're doing something deliberately, the top-down control, as we call it, from the upper motor neurons comes in and takes control of that system. It's really simple. You've only got three ingredients. You've got the upper motor neurons, the lower motor neurons, and for rhythmic movements that are reflexive, you've also got the central pattern generators. I'd now like to shift our attention to how to use specific aspects of muscular contraction to improve muscle hypertrophy, muscle growth, as well as improving muscle strength. There are a lot of reasons to want to get stronger. I should just mention that it's not always the case that getting stronger involves muscles getting bigger. There are ways for muscles to get stronger without getting bigger. However, increasing the size of a muscle almost inevitably increases the strength of that muscle, at least to some degree. Reasons why most everyone should want to get their muscles stronger is that muscles are generally getting progressively weaker across the lifespan. When I say getting stronger, it's not necessarily about being able to move increasing amounts of weight in the gym, but rather to offset some of the normal decline in strength and posture and the ability to generate a large range of movement safely that occurs as we age. There's an important principle of muscle physiology called the Henneman size principle. The Henneman size principle essentially says that we recruit what are called motor units. Motor units are just the connections between nerve and muscle in a pattern that staircases from low threshold to high threshold. What this means is when you pick up something that is light, you're going to use the minimum amount of nerve to muscle energy in order to move that thing. Likewise, when you pick up an object that's heavy, you're going to use the minimum amount of nerve to muscle connectivity and energy in order to move that object. It's basically a conservation of energy principle. Now, if you continue to exert effort of movement, what will happen is you will tend to recruit more and more motor units with time. As you recruit more and more of these motor units, these connections between these lower motor neurons and muscle, that's when you start to get changes in the muscle. That's when you open the gate for the potential for the muscles to get stronger and to get larger. The way this process works has been badly misunderstood in the online literature of weight training and bodybuilding and even in sports physiology. The Henneman size principle is a foundational principle within muscle physiology, but many people have come to interpret it by saying that the way to recruit high threshold motor units, the ones that are hard to get to, is to just use heavy weights. That's actually not the case. As we'll talk about the research supports that weights in a very large range of sort of a percentage of your maximum, anywhere from 30 to 80% Weights that are not very light but are moderately light to heavy can because changes in the connections between nerve and muscle that lead to muscle strength and muscle hypertrophy. Put differently, heavy weights can help build muscle and strength, but they are not required. What one has to do is adhere to a certain number of parameters, just a couple of key variables that I'll spell out for you. If you do that, you can greatly increase muscle hypertrophy, muscle size, and or muscle strength, if that's what you want to do. You don't necessarily have to use heavy weights in order to do that. Now, I'm sure the power lifters and the people that like to move heavy weights around will say, "No, if you want to get strong, you absolutely have to lift heavy weights." That might be true if you want to get very strong, but for most people who are interested in supporting their muscular such that they offset any age related decline in strength or in increasing hypertrophy and strength to some degree, there really isn't a need to use the heaviest weights possible in order to build strength and muscle. There are three major stimuli for changing the way that muscle works and making muscles stronger, larger, or better in some way. Those are stress, tension, and damage. Those three things don't necessarily all have to be present, but stress of some kind has to exist. This is very reminiscent of neuroplasticity in the brain. There is a good predictor of how well or how efficient you will be in building the strength and/or if you like the size of a given muscle. It has everything to do with those upper motor neurons that are involved in deliberate control of muscle. You can actually do this test right now. You can just march across your body mentally and see whether or not you can independently contract any or all of your muscles, because everything about muscle hypertrophy, about stimulating muscle growth, is about generating isolated contractions, about challenging specific muscles in a very unnatural way. Whereas with strength, it's about using musculature as a system, moving weights, moving resistance, moving the body. The specific goal of hypertrophy is to isolate specific nerve to muscle pathways so that you stimulate the chemical and signaling transduction events in muscles so that those muscles respond by getting larger. There's a critical distinction in terms of getting stronger versus trying to get muscles to be larger, hypertrophy per se. It has to do with how much you isolate those muscles. You can nest this as a principle for yourself, which is if you want to get stronger, it's really about moving progressively greater loads or increasing the amount of weight that you move. Whereas if you're specifically interested in generating hypertrophy, it's all about trying to generate those really hard, almost painful, localized contractions of muscle. If ever there was an area of practical science that was very confused, very controversial, and almost combative at times, it would be this issue of how best to train. I suppose the only thing that's even more barbed wire of a conversation than that is how best to eat for health. Those seem to be the two most common areas of online battle. What's very clear now from all the literature is that once roughly your one repetition maximum, the maximum amount of weight that you can perform an exercise with for one repetition in good form, full range of motion, that it's very clear that moving weights or using bands or using body weight, for instance, in the 30 to 80% of one rep maximum, that is going to be the most beneficial range in terms of muscle hypertrophy and strength. Muscle growth and strength. Let's say you're somebody who's been doing some resistance exercise on and off over the years, and you decide you want to get serious about that for sake of sport or offsetting age related declines in strength, the range of sets to do in order to improve strength ranges anywhere from two, believe it or not, to 20 per week. Again, these are sets per week, and they don't necessarily all have to be performed in the same weight training session. It appears that five sets per week in this 30% to 80% of the one repetition maximum range is what's required just to maintain your muscle. Think about that. If you're somebody who's averse to resistance training, you are going to lose muscle size and strength, your metabolism will drop, your posture will get worse. Everything in the context of nerve to muscle connectivity will get worse over time unless you are generating five sets or more of this 30% to 80% of your one repetition maximum per week, okay? What this means is for the typical person who hasn't done a lot of weight training, you need to do at least five sets per muscle group. Now, that's just to maintain. Then there's this huge range that goes all the way up to 15 and in some case, 20 sets per week. Now, how many sets you perform is going to depend on the intensity of the work that you perform. This is where it gets a little bit controversial, but I think nowadays, most people agree that 10% of the sets of a given workout or 10% of workouts overall should be of the high-intensity sort where one is actually working to muscular failure. The point being that most of your training, most of your sets should be not to failure. The reason for that is it allows you to do more volume of work. We can make this simple, perform anywhere from 5 to 15 sets of resistance exercise per week. That's per muscle. That's in this 30 to 80% of what your one repetition maximum. That seems to be the most scientifically supported way of offsetting any decline in muscle strength. If you're working in the five set range and in increasing muscle strength, when you start to get up into the 10 and 15 set range. It's pretty clear that performing this 5 to 15 sets per week, whether or not it's in one workout or whether it's divided up across multiple workouts, is really what's going to be most beneficial. Please do keep in mind Heneman's size principle and the recruitment of motor units. Remember, the better you are at contracting particular muscles and isolating those muscles, the fewer sets likely you need to do in order to get the desired effect. What about people who have been training for a while? If you're somebody who's been doing weight training for a while, the data point to the fact that more volume can be beneficial, even for muscles that you are very efficient at contracting. Now the curve on this, the graph on this, begins again at about 5 sets per week for maintaining a given muscle group and extends all the way out to 25 or 30 sets per week. However, there are individuals who, for whatever reason, can generate so much force. They're so good at training muscles that they can generate so much force in just four or six or eight sets that doing this large volume of work is actually going to be counterproductive. Everyone needs to figure out for themselves, first of all, how often you're willing to do resistance exercise of any kind. Then it does appear that somewhere between 5 and 15 sets per week is going to be the thing that's going to work for most people. Now, this is based on a tremendous amount of work that was done by Andy Galpin and colleagues, Brad Schoenfield and colleagues, Mike Roberts. There's a huge group of people out there doing exercise physiology, and a small subset of them that are linking them back to real world protocols that don't just pertain to athletes. That's mainly what I'm focusing on today. Surely, there will be exceptions. Now, if you are going to divide the sets across the week, you're not going to do all 10 sets, for instance, for a given muscle group in one session, then of course it's imperative that the muscles recover in between sessions. You might ask, well, what about the speeds of movements? This is actually turns out to be a really interesting data set. For generating explosiveness and speed, it's very clear that learning to generate forces quickly and to move heavy or moderately heavy loads quickly is going to be beneficial because of the way that you train the motor neurons. Of course changes in the muscle. What this would involve is something 60 to 75% over one repetition maximum. Then, in a controlled way, moving that as quickly as one can throughout the entire set and certainly not going to failure because as you approach failure, the inability to move the weight with good form, the weight inevitably slows down. As you're probably starting to realize you need to customize a resistance practice for your particular needs and goals. We've talked about a few principles, the fact that you need to get sufficient volume, you need at least 5 sets to maintain, and you probably need about 10 sets per muscle group in order to improve muscle. That moving weights of moderate to moderately heavy weight quickly is going to be best for explosiveness. That isolating muscles and really contracting muscles hard, something that you can test by just when you're outside the training session, seeing whether or not you can cramp the muscle hard will really, will tell you your capacity to improve hypertrophy or to engage strength changes in that muscle. That your ability to contract a muscle hard is inversely related to the number of sets that you should do in order to isolate and stimulate that muscle. Now, how long to recover between sets? There's a question for the testosterone protocol, Duncan French and colleagues found that it was about two minutes, keeping that really on the clock, two minutes, not longer. For hypertrophy and for strength gains, it does seem that resting anywhere from two minutes or even three or four, even five or six minutes can be beneficial. How do we know if we've recovered? How can we test recovery? This is not just recovery from resistance training. This is recovery from running, recovery from swimming. Up until now, I've been talking about resistance training, more or less in a vacuum. I haven't even touched on the fact that many people are running and they're doing resistance training or they're swimming and they're doing resistance training. You can assess systemic recovery, meaning your nervous system and your nervous system's ability to generate force, both distributed and isolated through three main tests. Fortunately, these tests are very simple. Two of them are essentially zero cost, require no equipment. HRV, heart rate variability, has made its way finally into the forefront of exercise physiology and even into the popular discussion. I've talked about HRV before, how when we exhale, our heart rate slows down because of the way that our diaphragm is connected to our heart and to our brain and the way our brain is connected to our heart. When we inhale, our heart rate speeds up. That is the basis of heart rate variability. Heart rate variability is good, but heart rate variability is difficult for a lot of people to measure. There are two measures, however, whether or not you recovered that you can use first thing in the morning when you wake up in order to assess how well recovered you are, and therefore whether or not you should train your whole system at all that day. The first one is grip strength. Grip strength, the ability to generate force at the level of squeezing the fist or squeezing down on something, might seem like a trivial way to assess recovery, but it's not because it relates to your ability to use your upper motor neurons, to control your lower motor neurons and to generate isolated force. That's really what you're assessing when you do that. Some people will use one of these grip tools. If I've been working really hard, not sleeping very well, or I've been training a lot, any one or combination of those things, my grip suffers. I can't actually squeeze that thing down as much as I can. On a good day, I can squeeze this thing so that I eliminate the hole in the donut, so to speak. You can also take a floor scale, squeeze the scale, and see how much force you can generate. I would do that as a baseline to establish what you can do when you're well-rested. Then, if you do that in the morning, you can see whether or not you're able to generate the same amount of force. A lot of this is very subjective. With the scale, you're really trying to assess whether or not you can generate the same amount of force. If you start seeing a 10% or 20% certainly reduction in that, that's concerning. It means that your system, that your nervous system as a whole, it's not necessarily fatigued. It's that the pathways from nerve to muscle are still in the process of rewiring themselves in order to generate force. You might think, well, I trained one muscle group one day why am I having a hard time doing this for a completely different muscle group? Doesn't make any sense. There's something about the upper motor neuron to lower motor neuron pathway generally that allows you to use something like grip strength as a thermometer, if you will, of your ability to recover. Look for your ability to generate force in grip when you first wake up. It's not going to be as good as it is at 3 PM after a cup of coffee and a couple of meals, but the point isn't performance overall. The point is to assess whether or not you're getting better, worse, or the same from day to day. The other one that's really terrific is carbon dioxide tolerance. This is a really interesting tool that endurance athletes, strength athletes, I think can all benefit from. Here's how you do the carbon dioxide tolerance test. You wake up in the morning and what you're going to do is you're going to inhale through your nose as deeply as you can. You can do this lying down, sitting, whatever. Inhale through your nose and then exhale all the way. That's one. You're going to repeat that four times. Then, you take a fifth inhale as deep as you can through your nose. Fill your lungs as much as you can, and if you can try and expand, make your stomach go out while you do that. That means that your diaphragm is really engaged. You're inhaling as much as you possibly can. Then hit the timer, and your goal is to release that air as slowly as possible through your mouth. It looks like you have a tiny, tiny little straw in your mouth, and you're letting it go as slowly as you possibly can. Measure what we call the carbon dioxide blow off time or discard rate. I know you can all sit with lungs empty after you eliminate all that air, but don't lie to yourself. Don't stop the timer when you've been sitting with your lungs empty for a while. Stop the timer when you are finally no longer able to exhale any more air. Your carbon dioxide discard rate will be somewhere between one second and presumably two minutes. Two minutes would be a heroic carbon dioxide discard time. 30 seconds would be more typical. 20 seconds would be fast. If your carbon dioxide discard time is 20 or 25 seconds or less, you are not necessarily recovered from your previous day's activities. If your carbon dioxide discard time is somewhere between about 30 seconds and 60 seconds, you are in what we would call the green zone, where you are in a position to do more physical work. If your carbon dioxide discard time is somewhere between 65 and 120 seconds, well, then you have almost certainly recovered your nervous system. I'm not talking about the individual muscles, but your nervous system is prepared to do more work. I'm really keen on this tool because everybody has different recovery abilities. I realize people have varying levels of stress and demand in their life. It's just impossible to prescribe an entire protocol that says, "Okay, yes, you should train today. This is exactly what you should do." No, you shouldn't. Use carbon dioxide discard rate because A, it's valuable. It's informative. B, it's zero cost. C, it's something that you can track objectively over time. That's really the key. Recovery is a complex process. It's got a lot of things, but the CO2 tolerance test should be a valuable tool. Now, another tool for recovery that people are very excited about is the use of cold and the ice bath. This is important. Yes, it will reduce inflammation. Yes, it will reduce the amount of delayed onset muscle soreness, but it does seem to interfere with some of the things like mTOR pathways, the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway, and other pathways related to inflammation that promote muscle repair and muscle growth. Remember, stress, tension, and damage are the stimulus for nerve to muscle connections to change and for muscles to get bigger, stronger, and better. If you're getting into the ice bath after doing resistance training, you are likely short-circuiting the improvements that you're trying to create. The other thing are non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs. You know their trade names. These are painkillers that many people take. Those, as I've mentioned in a previous episode, seem to prevent a lot of the gains, the improvements in endurance, strength, and size that people are specifically using exercise for. Be cautious about your use of non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs, especially within the four hours preceding or the four hours following exercise. Let's talk about some of the things that seem to work across the board to improve strength, improve hypertrophy, and improve nerve to muscle communication and performance. The first thing that's absolutely key for nerve to muscle communication and physical performance of any kind might not sound that exciting to you, but it is very exciting, and that's salt. Nerve cells, neurons communicate with each other and communicate with muscle by electricity. That electricity is generated by particular ions moving into and out of the neuron. The rushing in of a particular ion, sodium, salt, is what allows nerve cells to fire. If you don't have enough salt in your system, your neurons, your brain and your nerve-to-muscle communication will be terrible. If you have sufficient salt, it will be excellent. How much salt will depend on how much water you're drinking, how much caffeine you're drinking, and how much food you're ingesting, and whether or not you're taking any diuretics, how hot it is, et cetera how much you're sweating. You want to make sure that you have enough salt, potassium, and magnesium in your system if you want to perform well. The other thing that's been shown over and over again in numerous well-controlled studies to improve muscle performance is creatine. How much creatine? I asked the experts, and they tell me that for somebody who's about 180 pounds, 5 grams a day should be sufficient or so. Creatine seems to have a performance-enhancing effect. There are 66 studies showing that power output is greatly increased anywhere from 12 to 20% This is sprinting and running and jumping as well as weightlifting by creatine. The ability to hydrate your body is improved by creatine because of the way that it brings more water into cells of various kinds. It reduces fatigue. When it comes to supporting muscle, it does seem that ingesting 700 to 3,000 milligrams of the essential amino acid leucine with each meal is important. Now, that does not necessarily mean from supplements. In fact, most people recommend that you get your protein, you get your amino acids, including your essential amino acids and your leucine from whole foods. High-quality proteins are high-density proteins. What do you mean by that? It is true that a lot of sources of protein are found in things like beans and nuts, and things like that all the essential amino acids can be found there. Per unit calorie, if it's in your practice, if it's in your ethics to ingest animal proteins, it's true that, for instance, 200 calories of steak or chicken or fish or eggs will have a higher density of essential amino acids than the equivalent amount of calories from nuts or plants. For the vegans and vegetarians, I'm certainly not saying there's no way that you can support muscle growth. You absolutely can. I encourage you to think about this protein density issue and whether or not you're getting sufficient essential amino acids, especially leucine. I think the simple takeaway from the literature that I was able to extract eating two to four times a day, making sure you're getting sufficient amino acids in a way that's compatible with your ethics and with your nutritional regimen is going to support muscle repair, muscle growth, strength improvements, et cetera, just fine. Last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention today. As always, thank you for your interest in science.

========================================

--- Video 15 ---
Video ID: lYK4UFf8mlc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lYK4UFf8mlc
Title: How to Find & Be a Great Romantic Partner | Lori Gottlieb
Published: 2025-04-07 12:01:18 UTC
Description:
My guest is Lori Gottlieb, MFT, a psychotherapist and bestselling author who specializes in helping people build strong relationships by first understanding themselves and the stories they’ve internalized about themselves and others. We explore how our parents, wounds and unique strengths—both consciously and unconsciously—influence our partner choices and how we show up in relationships, as well as how to avoid and break free from destructive patterns. We also discuss the impact of texting, social media and dating apps on partnership. Lori shares which signals to follow to become the best romantic partner possible and how to make choices that lead to greater vitality, happiness and fulfillment in all areas of life.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/ExnS7v1

We want to hear from you. Take our quick survey to help improve Huberman Lab: https://go.hubermanlab.com/podtrac-survey

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman
BetterHelp: https://betterhelp.com/huberman
David Protein: https://davidprotein.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman

*Lori Gottlieb*
Website: https://lorigottlieb.com 
Therapy services: https://lorigottlieb.com/services
Maybe You Should Talk to Someone (book): https://amzn.to/4clZO7S
Other books: https://amzn.to/44fOCYt
Dear Therapists (podcast): https://lorigottlieb.com/podcast
Ask the Therapist (The New York Times): https://www.nytimes.com/column/ask-the-therapist 
Dear Therapist (The Atlantic): https://www.theatlantic.com/projects/dear-therapist/ 
TED talk: https://www.ted.com/talks/lori_gottlieb_how_changing_your_story_can_change_your_life
X: https://x.com/LoriGottlieb
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/GottliebLori
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/lorigottlieb_author

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Dr. Lori Gottlieb
00:02:01 Patient & First Question; Talked Out of Feelings
00:06:15 Self-Regulation vs Co-Regulation, Tool: Pause & Perspective
00:10:04 Sponsors: Helix Sleep & BetterHelp
00:12:36 Relationships, Childhood & Unfinished Business
00:17:13 Unconscious Mind, Hurtful Parent & Familiarity, Role of Therapy
00:26:35 Excitement & Chaos, Cherophobia; Storytelling, First Date & Sparks?
00:36:27 Tool: Awareness of Death & Living Fully; Vitality; Fear vs Acceptance
00:47:27 Sponsors: AG1 & David Protein
00:50:35 Activate vs Energize; Tool: Technology, Numbness & Overwhelm
00:54:50 Numb or Calm?, Gender Stereotypes, Tool: Mentalizing
01:00:51 Feelings, Projective Identification, Tool: Owning Your Feelings
01:03:25 React vs Respond; Space, Tool: Face-to-Face Conversation vs Text
01:10:16 Behavioral Change, 5 Steps of Change, Tool: Self-Compassion & Accountability
01:15:38 Sponsor: LMNT
01:16:54 Deadlines & Rules; Idiot vs Wise Compassion, No Drama & Assumptions
01:26:27 Silent Treatment, Crying & Manipulation, Shame vs Guilt, Self-Preservation
01:33:01 Self-Reflection, Individual & Couples Therapy, Transference; Agency
01:38:56 Texting, Conflicts, Breakups, Pain Hierarchy, Tool: Move Forward
01:46:42 Relationship Breakups, Daily World & Loss
01:53:30 Bank of Goodwill; Talking About Partner, Focus, Comparison
02:01:13 Infidelity, What If vs What Is, Attention & Appreciation
02:04:56 Gut Instinct, Change Behavior, Danger, Productive vs Unproductive Anxiety
02:15:27 Knowing Oneself, Relationships, Flexibility, Shared History
02:20:30 Romantic Relationships & Teens, Social Media, Privacy
02:27:09 Online Apps & Choices, Maximizers vs Satisficers, Tool: Identify Your Weakness
02:33:09 Fixing Issues Early, Tool: Self vs Partner Lists & Character Qualities
02:41:51 Feeling Toward Partner, Calm, Content; Tool: Operating Instructions
02:46:48 Help-Rejecting Complainers; Relationships, Love & Core Wounds
02:51:22 Stories & Unreliable Narrators, Editing, Tool: 5 Senses
02:59:04 Young Men, Masculinity, Confusion
03:07:03 Grief, Making Sense of Loss
03:09:54 Maybe You Should Talk to Someone Workbook; Ask The Therapist, Choosing a Bigger Life
03:20:26 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Follow & Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Protocols Book, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Psychology #Relationships

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Lori Gotautlib. Lori Gotlib is a psychotherapist and best-selling author and is considered one of the world's leading experts on relationships. how to find relationships, how to be in relationships effectively, how to leave relationships if necessary, how to grieve them after they're gone, and how to renew them. All from the perspective of looking inward at ourselves and the stories about ourselves and others that we tell ourselves that can lead us to what we want and what's best for us or that lead us away from those things. During today's episode, we discuss how the feelings we experience when we're with certain people are the absolute best guide of how poorly or how well those people are suited for us as partners and the ways in which we miss key signals, both good and bad, in relationships by not paying attention to how we feel. Lori explains how to better our communication skills, how to determine if somebody's critique of us is valid or not. that certainly is important for everybody. And how texting and technology has changed relationships and how to navigate all of that by leaning into our own sense of agency, the things that we can control. And last but not least, Lori explains how we can all access more vitality and enjoyment of life, and how so many people don't allow themselves to do that because the familiarity of their present circumstances overrides their willingness to move forward. This was a really eye- openening episode and one that I'm certain will help you better understand yourself and what your needs really are and how you can be happier in or out of a relationship. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, this episode does include sponsors. And now for my discussion with Lori Gotautlib. Lori Gotlib, welcome. Thank you. Great to be here. What's the first thing you ask a patient when you're meeting them for the first time? Usually, it's something like, "Tell me what's going on. Tell me why you're here. Tell me what made you decide to come in." And are you listening both to the content of their words and their tone, their physicality, everything? Yeah. Yeah. I think it's so interesting because sometimes people will say, "I'm here because of" and they'll talk about something very difficult, but they're smiling through it. Um, you know, I think it's very nerve-wracking to come in and see a therapist and you don't know this person and you're about to share some very personal information that maybe you haven't told anyone in this way. And so, you want to make somebody comfortable. you want to make sure that you know you feel like they are not being rushed to share something that they're not ready to share. So it's just the process. I think it's a very human interaction. Um you know therapy to me is not like expert and this other person and then it feels very asymmetrical. Of course we're using our training and that's why they're coming to us but I feel like it's very much a humanto human interchange. Do you think, because I've heard, but I don't know if it's true. Do you think that some people um tend to create a lot of internal and perhaps external narrative about what happened, who they are, um how people are in the world, how they're not in the world, you know, a lot of lot of words to their experience either spoken or internally versus people who um maybe experience life a little bit differently. Uh once somebody said in a comment on Instagram and I still think about this um they said I don't think in words I think in feels. And my first reaction was like yeah I'm from Northern California. People talk that way sometimes. So I thought that's interesting. Maybe there are a lot of people who um for whom language isn't the primary mode of understanding what's going on around them. I think that as humans, we try to make sense of our feelings through stories. That we tell oursel a story about why we're feeling a certain way. And sometimes we aren't that skilled because nobody taught us this to access our feelings. And that happens because kids are often talked out of their feelings. So when you're young, for example, and say you say to your parent, um, I'm really worried about this. And your parent will say, oh, don't worry about that. That's nothing to worry about. or I'm really mad about this. You're so sensitive, right? Or because parents are really uncomfortable when their kids are feeling sad because they feel like it's my responsibility to make sure they're not sad, which is not your responsibility as a parent, you're there to sit with your child and be present for them. So, if your child says, "I'm really sad that so- and so sat with so- and so at lunch today." And you know, the parent will say, "Well, here's what you can do." Or, "That's terrible." or right instead of like, "Oh, tell me more." And I think that as a parent or even as a partner, when your when your partner comes to you or your friend comes to you or a family member comes to you and tells you something, often what we do is we try to talk them out of the feeling that they're having or help them get rid of the feeling because we think it's a negative feeling when feelings are all positive because they're like a compass. They tell us what direction to go in if we can access them. So when you say to someone, tell me more. Then the kid might say, well, yeah, it was really hard. And then they'll talk about maybe like why the person might have sat at a different table or what might have happened. And we really do have a lot of answers inside if we listen to the feelings. But we're talked out of the feelings and then we grow up thinking if I'm feeling sad or angry or anxious, then you know, I need to get rid of the feeling as opposed to I need to use that feeling. And so instead, what we do is we come up with all these stories like the problem is out there as opposed to, oh, I have some really good information in here. I had a now ex-girlfriend, we're still on great terms, who uh we had an agreement that served us super well and uh that I try and apply going forward, which is um nobody tries to shift anyone else. In my mind, I was the one that came up with that, but I think in reality, she was the one that came up with it. cuz now I'm like there's no way I would have come up with that. But I think it it came about through a couple different interactions where I would get off work and and sometimes like the initial 20 minutes of interacting was much more difficult than it needed to be. And and then I remember we just came up with this plan where we just decide no one's going to shift the other person unless they're like shift me please you know like help me relax or help me uh get excited about this which we would never do right. So like when so a policy of not trying to shift anybody um or somebody trying to shift our emotions I think felt really liberating. Right. I think what you're talking about is self-regulation versus co-regulation. So self-regulation is when you're having some kind of internal experience. You have choices like I'm really angry about this. Okay. How do I self-regulate? not to ignore the anger because the anger is telling me that maybe a boundary was broken or maybe somebody's treating me in a way that I don't want to be treated or maybe I'm upset with myself for the way that I acted. So, it's good information, but then what do you do with it? Can you self-regulate? Can you find ways to look at the anger without screaming, yelling, um self-sabotaging, whatever people do that's not a productive use of their anger or your anxiety or your sadness. Um co-regulation is important though. Um and that's something that you see again you can see it with parent child where if the parent can stay calm when the child is not calm that helps the child to learn to self-regulate. And with a partner like say you had a really hard day at work and you come home and you're just not in a good mood. It's not your partner's responsibility to help you through that. You need to self-regulate. But it sure helps if your partner is regulated and they can help co-regulate you just because they happen to be regulated. You you want two adults in the room or at least one adult in the room. If you have two children in the room, like grown children, adults, um then everybody gets disregulated. So it's really important that at least one person is being the adult in the room and one person is regulated. If both people like you're in an argument, both people are dregulated, nothing good is going to come from that. in which case is the best option to just pause it until somebody returns to adulthood. Yes. And that happens so often. It's such an easy fix for couples because sometimes they they think we have to deal with this right now and it feels urgent to deal with it right now because I feel hurt right now or I can't believe you said that or we need to, you know, resolve this right now. That can be the worst possible thing. So, it's not like let's forget about it. It's I'm going to go take a walk or I'm going to go to the gym or I'm going to go, you know, read for a few minutes or I'm going to go relax, whatever that is, and then let's talk in an hour about it or let's talk tonight, right? And you can stay connected during that time. So, what are you going to do in the intervening time? If you're just making up stories about the other person, they're insensitive. They don't care about me. They don't prioritize me. Then that's not helpful. But in that intervening time, if you can say, if I were telling this story from the other person's perspective, what would their version of this story be? And is there a nugget of overlap? And there is there a nugget of something that feels really genuine to me that I can understand and even have compassion for? And that's going to help you come back when you have the conversation. But you have to be regulated. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep needs. Now, I've spoken many times before on this and other podcasts about the fact that getting a great night's sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. Now, the mattress you sleep on makes a huge difference in the quality of sleep that you get each night. How soft it is or how firm it is, how breathable it is, all play into your comfort and need to be tailored to your unique sleep needs. If you go to the Helix website, you can take a brief two-minute quiz which will ask you questions such as, "Do you sleep on your back, your side, or your stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold during the night?" Things of that sort. Now, maybe you know the answers to those questions, maybe you don't. Either way, Helix will match you to the ideal mattress for you. For me, that turned out to be the Dusk mattress. I started sleeping on the Dusk mattress about three and a half years ago, and it's been far and away the best sleep that I've ever had. So much so that when I travel and I'm not on my Dusk mattress, I really miss it. And when I get home, I just find that I sleep so much better because of that mattress. If you'd like to try Helix, you can go to helixleep.com/huberman. Take that 2-minut sleep quiz and Helix will match you to a mattress that's customized for you. Right now, Helix is giving up to 20% off on all mattress orders. Again, that's helixleep.com/huberman to get up to 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by BetterHelp. BetterHelp offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online now. I personally have been doing therapy weekly for well over 30 years. Initially, I didn't have a choice. It was a condition of being allowed to stay in school. But pretty soon, I realized that therapy is an extremely important component to one's overall health. There are essentially three things that great therapy provides. First of all, it provides a good rapport with somebody that you can trust and talk to about pretty much any issue with. Second of all, it can provide support in the form of emotional support and directed guidance. And third, expert therapy can provide useful insights. Insights that allow you to better not just your emotional life and your relationship life, but of course also the relationship to yourself and your professional life and to all sorts of goals. BetterHelp makes it very easy to find an expert therapist with whom you resonate with and that can provide you those three benefits that come from effective therapy. Also, because BetterHelp allows for therapy to be done entirely online, it's super timeefficient and easy to fit into a busy schedule. If you'd like to try BetterHelp, you can go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. Again, that's betterhelp.com/huberman. One thing that I've observed, I don't have any formal data on this, is that some of the happiest couples I know are couples where I would refer to one person in the relationship as more emotive and expressive and the other person as a little bit on the spectrum. And my observation is that part of the reason those couples seem so harmonious is that the little things don't seem to bother the person on the spectrum cuz they don't register them. they don't get entangled in the other person's um downs or or ups which I guess um could be problematic in theory but just seems like they get along really well because and I won't you know kind of stereotype the labels but these these couples that I know it does happen to be the male who is um a little bit on the spectrum and the woman who's a little more emotive And it just seems like there's so much harmony there. And when I talk to him, I'm generally uh closer to the the man in the relationship. Uh although not always. Um they say like, "Yeah, like you know, doesn't bother me. There's I just like will listen or if there's something to a request, I'll respond to the request." There there isn't this entanglement of she's upset so I like have to respond or this is really painful to listen to. It's more um of like a kind of matter of fact and um I just think it's an interesting dynamic. It's obviously not one that people can pre-program themselves for. Uh but I do think it's an interesting dynamic as opposed to what you're describing where um emotions can kind of ratchet together like gears and that can be wonderful when people are in you know ecstatic states or happy or that there's like the banter of certain couples that are seem pretty emotive is something I'm also familiar with observing. But those couples also seem like more volatile like when when somebody's upset the other person gets upset that they're and it just starts to um deteriorate pretty quickly. Yeah. You don't want two highly reactive people to be together. Um, you also, I think, need to think about there's a saying, we marry our unfinished business, right? So, let's say that there's somebody who had a parent who was very kind of avoidant or withdrawn. That person, if they haven't processed that, will be drawn to the partner who is more avoidant, but not because it feels good, but because it's familiar. And so sometimes in the kind of couple that you're describing and I don't know the experience of your friends, but I've seen a lot of couples where it looks like that would be a good match because one person is, you know, sort of more in the emotional sphere and one person is less so. Um, but sometimes what that is is one person gets very lonely because they're not really getting that kind of emotional interaction that they want. So, it can be a solution for some people because they don't know how to be with a different kind of person, but I also feel like um you want to make sure that you have figured out your unfinished business, that you're not just you don't just have radar for the kind of person who hurt you. So, what often happens is people haven't processed whatever it was that they wanted more of or less of when they were growing up. And then they go out into the world and they're looking for a partner and they literally have radar for a person who is exactly like the person who hurt them but doesn't look like that. So it's like I'm going to choose someone who is the opposite of the parent who hurt me and then you find this person and after you get to know them a little bit you're like wow that person drinks a lot too. I didn't realize that or that person is really withholding too. I didn't see that at first. Or that person yells a lot. I didn't notice that at first. And you're like, how did I get into this exact situation that hurt me as a child? And that's because your unconscious is saying, you look familiar. Come closer. Because what we're trying to do is we're trying to win. We're trying to master a situation where we felt helpless as a child. We couldn't control the situation with our parents when we were growing up. And now we think, again, this is completely outside of our awareness. I'm going to win this time. I'm going to master this. I'm going to get love from that kind of person and it doesn't work out. So, I think that you really want to make sure that you are choosing someone for healthy reasons and not because there's some unfinished business that you're trying to work out with this person who is not going to meet your needs. to go a little bit further into this idea, which by the way I fully subscribe to um based on your explanation of this and um my belief that our unconscious mind is driving a lot of our choices. My understanding is that what you just described doesn't adhere to mom, dad, male, female um compartmentalization. And what I mean by that is that I think a lot of people will hear what you just said and assume okay if my dad hurt me in the following ways then and let's say it's a woman and she said you know my dad hurt me in the following ways he was a drinker withdrawn or he was violent or whatever then uh that woman will seek out men that mimic that here I'm assuming a heterosexual relationship but if her mother was the one that was the drinker, violent andor withdrawn, and she's heterosexual. My understanding is based on the dynamics that you describe, if she will find those traits in a man, yes, because she's heterosexual, she's seeking men for romantic partners. And I think that's very important. I think that sometimes we put the the mom dad um labels on top of the the uh attraction to again staying in the heterosexual framework here um the opposite sex framework and then people say well why is it that this woman always seeks out these like what end up being really terrible guys like she had such a great dad but she had a dreadful mom. That is absolutely correct. And I think it's so interesting because I think that people think that having one parent that gave you what you needed is protective. And in some ways it is, but the thing that hurts is the thing that gets the most attention inside of our bodies. So we don't necessarily think it, but we felt it. We internalized it. It lives inside of us. And so yes, having a good parent, one of the two, if you have two parents, one of the two is important, but it's interesting that it's not like we seek out the person that like the good parent always sometimes again because we're trying to work something out. We seek out someone like the parent who really hurt us. So such a flaw in our wiring. Well, I mean, I think that's where therapy is really helpful. I think that's where, you know, people are like, well, what is therapy really for? And I think it's really about what are the things that are outside of your awareness but that are sort of driving the car. So, it's like we think we're the driver of our own car, but often like someone else is driving the car and we don't realize it and we think why does this keep happening or or you know what is happening in my life that I'm not getting what I want in you know whatever dimension it is whether it's professionally or personally and so often it's because there's some force that you are acting out that you don't even realize and I think the role of therapy is to kind of hold up a mirror to people and help them to see something about themselves that they haven't been willing or able to see. You said that um people will pick um the person who's exactly wrong for them, who feels exactly right, at least at first. Um that it has this kind of um come here uh this summoning uh aspect to it like we feel drawn to it. It feels drawn to us. I mean, that's how relationships start after all, one would hope. Um but in this case um you said that people come to find that that person is exact harbors some of the exact same traits. I'm calling them that behaviors traits. So you know whatever it is that hurt them in in the context of their uh child parent relationship. Why do you think um initially it presents as the opposite? I think it's about the the familiarity that there's something so visceral about this feels like childhood and even if childhood was not optimal or even miserable, it still feels familiar. And humans in general are very afraid of uncertainty. They're very afraid of the unfamiliar. I remember when when I was in therapy, my therapist said to me, you know, you remind me of this cartoon and it's of a prisoner shaking the bars, desperately trying to get out. But on the right and the left, it's open. No bars, right? So, why do we stay in this prison? Why don't we walk? Why don't we even see that it's open? And why don't we walk around the bars? And it's because with freedom comes responsibility and uncertainty. We don't know what's We know what it's like to be in prison. That's that's been our experience. So that feels comfortable even though we say we desperately want to get out. And then if we choose the uncertain path, we're responsible for our lives now. We can't blame it on mom or dad or this situation or that situation. I'm not saying those situations weren't impactful. Of course they were. But we have choices as an adult. We have freedom as an adult that we didn't have as a child. And sometimes it's really hard for us to say, "I'm going to have to be responsible for my life." That's terrifying because we feel like we don't have the tools to do that. We feel like again the uncertainty. We'd rather have the certainty of like I know what it's like in prison. At least I'm I know what that's like and I know you know the devil you know and that's not again that's outside of our awareness. I think what you're describing is a um is a pervasive feature of like being human. If I may, uh there's this uh kid, he's now a young adult, but um I've watched grow up from a very young age who got into college. He was doing really well. Then he fell in love. He made the decision to leave school. The relationship ended and was talking to him recently and he's kind of in this kind of dizzying spin of like thinking about how great things were, how he blew it, and he's young. I'm like, "Listen, you're good. Like he he didn't drop out. He just withdrew. he can go back and you know he'll find another relationship. But um you know and I empathize with him but um I passed something along to him that was actually discussed on a uh by a former guest on this podcast who was a former child chess prodigy has gone on to do a number of things and he said exactly what you're saying which is in a different context. He said, um, we get so attached to our current identity and our past identity and trying to resolve those that we're more willing to stay in that state of discomfort than we are to step into a path of potential success, right? It makes no sense, right? I mean, and so I pass this along. We'll see what he does with it with it with that knowledge. Yes. It's kind of like the the misery of uncertainty. The certainty of misery is sometimes more palatable to people than the misery of uncertainty. So you can be certain that you're going to stay miserable if you stay in jail, but the the misery of uncertainty is worse. So it's it's really interesting that people will make that tradeoff. And the other thing about this attraction question that you're asking about, it's like I had this therapy client and she would pick people who were exactly like one or both of her parents and she would be so attracted to those guys. She would always go for them and she's like, "Men are terrible. Guys are terrible." It's like, "No, no, no. The men you're choosing are are terrible to you." But then you go out on dates with these like great guys and she's like, "Yeah, no chemistry. No chemistry." Yeah. Let's talk about that. What what what is the the flip side of this? The lack of of interest in somebody that doesn't um overtly or uh covertly harbor the the the painful thing that you're so used to, right? So, so that's the thing. She was working out this this way of she hadn't separated yet from her childhood. So, she was trying to kind of reenact her childhood, reenact her childhood with these men. And she didn't realize she was doing that. She'd just be like, "Oh, I'm so attracted to this person." or things like, you know, I just I like this guy so much. I don't know why he doesn't call when he says he will, right? And it's like, well, who is that like? Who does that remind you of? When have you felt that before that like I never know where I stand with this parent, with this boyfriend? And then the people who were really reliable, who, by the way, it wasn't about their physical traits, like these men were all physically attractive. It was she felt no sort of again that word chemistry because there's something very threatening about like oh there's no friction. It's a frictionless you know thing where he says he's going to call and he does. He's reliable. He does what he says he's going to do. I don't know what to do with that. It just it doesn't like light her up in that way because she's not having that big emotional reaction to it because it doesn't feel like the thing that would give her a big emotional reaction. And so once she sort of works that through, by the end of the therapy, she became very attracted to the kinds of guys who would treat her the way she wanted to be treated. And she was no longer attracted to the guys that she so she'd get that initial kind of like, oh, I feel something when I'm in the presence of a guy like that, but I'm I'm not really interested in a relationship with that kind of guy. So that's I think what therapy can do for people. Yeah. One of the things that I've noticed in my own life is that as I've gotten older, I'll be 50 later this year. Um been looking forward to that. I feel great. But um some of the things that I assumed for so many years, like slow is low, like when things are really slow, like it for many years it felt kind of depressive. Now I love slow, mellow, like peace is the thing that I'm just I savor so much. But for so many years, I think what you're describing that sort of activation state of excitement. I was a pretty wild youth and then you know I mean I like adventure and I'd taken on at times dangerous adventures that I shouldn't have. Lived told myself I wouldn't do them again. Picked a different adventure. But even in like my scientific career or podcasting, things that feel at times like a bit of a tightroppe walk just given the number of variables that I can't control just by virtue of what they are and the challenge of like long cycles of trying to publish like the they they're kind of scary at some level. It's your profession after all. But I did the same thing in a lot of my relationships. Lovely people in some cases, some cases not, but in most cases, fortunately for me, um lovely people. But but there was this sense that like um if something felt like a little bit of an upstate kind of like a bit more of autonomic arousal or a lot more autonomic arousal that it had this um kind of magnetic quality to it. Whereas I think um and I'm not joking or lying here. I think owning a bulldog taught me how to really savor relaxing. I'm not saying this just to highlight Costello again. And I mean, I observed his relationship to the world, and that the bulldog's contract with its owner is is an amazing one that I think I learned a lot from. The contract is, I will die for you. I will literally give up my life to protect you, Andrew. But if that's not on the line, I'm not going to do anything. We're just going to sit here and enjoy the sunshine, right? We're just going to breathe and we're going to eat food, right? Friends are coming over and I'll get excited. And you know, and I'm not I'm not trying to make too much of this. I I really noticed I was like, "Wow, he needs so little to be blissful." And yet I know that if like push came to shove, like he's on my side, we've got each other's backs. Yeah. As opposed to, let's talk about a more human contract of like this picture or story of of a couple that they have about themselves. Ride or die is something people say a lot nowadays. It's beautiful concept, right? loyalty, like you're in it together no matter what. But there's a calm version of that, like ride or die, and then there's like ride or die, like like we'll take on anything. We'll we'll bring in chaos, we'll be the chaos, and we just don't quit. Mhm. Very different activation states. Oh, absolutely. And it took me 49 years to learn this. I see it in professional relationships, too. People want the exciting thing, the big build, and then they're like, it's the chaos of like, oh, this founder left and this person. And it's like well of course it started in drama it's going to end in drama. Does this some of this resonate? Yeah absolutely. I mean two things. One is that there's this concept of cherophobia which is um kind of fear of joy. And so so many people um because they grew up in a way where whenever let's say the parent was reliable um in moments right like at certain times and then they were unreliable or they were really calm but then they would blow up and you never knew what was going to happen. It was like you were walking on eggshells the whole time, right? So you're very afraid of anything that goes well. You think the other shoe is going to drop like at any moment. So you're you're you don't want to pick something that and again again outside of your awareness like you don't pick the calm partner because it feels too good like something's going to go wrong. So I'll pick the volatile partner because I'm I'm prepared. I'm prepared for that level of volatility, right? And so people sabotage all the time whether it's about a job or a partner or you know whatever they want. They think I am not going to go there because it's not safe to feel joy because something will go wrong and I will be crushed and it will be harder to have the experience of joy and to have it crushed than to never feel the joy. So, there was a woman that I wrote about in my book who she just she wouldn't let herself feel any joy or get excited about a partner or excited about she wanted to be an artist and and doing her art and things were going really well and then she she'd self-sabotage ra it's like I would you can't fire me I quit, right? It's like I'm going to create the bad thing to happen to myself because if it happens from the universe it's going to feel even worse. So, I think we need to kind of really be aware there are lots of people out there who are terrified of good things happening even though they say they desperately want good things to happen and so they make bad things happen or they make sure good things don't happen to them because it feels so uncomfortable to sit in that space of the other shoe's going to drop at any moment and I can't deal with that. But the other thing I want to say about this this slow burn type of thing is there was a study that was done that I wrote about in one of my books where they did a longitudinal study and they looked at people over 20 years and they followed up with them every 5 years from the first date to where they are later and they had them instead of like historically saying you know when you ask people in relationships and you say what was it like when you first met and they'll tell you some story but it's retrospective. It's not like you weren't there at the time. you're sort of telling it through the lens of where you are now. What was great about this study was people wrote down at the time here's what here's how I feel. So people who were, let's say, got married and were happy would say almost unilaterally like there was so much chemistry. We had such a good time on the first date. It was amazing. Whereas at the time they might have said like, "Yeah, it was okay. Maybe I'll see this person again. Fine." Like no butterflies or you know, whatever. But that's not the story they're telling themselves about it. Now people who either are unhappily together or no longer together would say, "Yeah, there was nothing there. There was no chemistry. I didn't really like the person." By the time they might have said like, "Wow, I'm really interested in this person. It was like we had so much chemistry." So we change our stories based on our present experience. And we think we're telling an accurate version of what actually happened. And the reason I bring this up is because since people who are sort of happy couples tell these stories to other people, we think in our culture that if you go on a first date and you don't have that immediate spark that it's not worth it, like don't go on a second date. And what happens is sometimes a lot of the time when you have that immediate spark, it doesn't mean what you think it means. It's not that a spark is bad. It means that you really need to see what it means. And it's not that not having a spark is bad. If you go on a date and you feel like I it was a like nice conversation, I had a good enough time. Go spend another hour with this person. Just go on another date with them and see what happens. But we don't do that because we have this illusion that you can just go back on an app or there's so many people out there. And so we try to optimize as opposed to saying, "What would it be like? I had a I had I felt good when I was with this person. And I didn't feel that rush, but I felt pretty good. So, I think I'll go see what that's like again. And that should be our bar. Not like, do I feel this rush? Do I feel like this is amazing? But did I have a good enough time? Sure, let me go see what that's like. Yeah, one certainly wouldn't want to be bored in somebody else's presence. Um, but calm seems like a good uh touch point. Yes. to look for as opposed to this activation state. You know, I maybe it's the neurobiologist in me and I'm guilty of also working on this autonomic arousal thing for so many years. This seessaw in us of being like upstates that can either be stress or bliss and down states which can either be depression and fatigue or can just be like pleasant relaxation. Like the label becomes critical, right? Alert and stressed versus alert and elated is very different. Same level of alertness, two very different things. same, you know, depressed versus peaceful when relaxed, you know, um and looking for or or trying to figure out what sorts of interactions um bring about that that kind of even seesaw might be best. Not one or the other. Maybe a little airing even a little bit more towards peace. Yes. Um and when I see couples who come in and they've been married for a long time now and they say, you know, well, I'll say the what is the origin story? How did you meet? What was that like? what were you attracted to in the other person? And so often I'll hear words like it was so exciting. I found this person so exciting. Um and it's like that's the very thing that what you thought was excitement was actually volatility or was actually sort of anxiety as opposed to that sense of you can be calm and feel excited about the other person. So we're talking about a neurological state, right? your nervous system and then we're talking about your interpretation of what that means. So sometimes calmness is exciting. Sometimes excitement is anxietyprovoking. And so you have to be able to tell the difference between the two. Yeah. I'll just say yes and yes to both those statements. I I think um I think peace is it's not everything but it's um it's necessary but not sufficient as we say. If I may, I'd like to get um kind of uh a little deep and abstract along this dimension of um why people are so much more willing to stay in a state that doesn't feel good versus risk um the unknown and the opportunity to win in relationship, in in life, in career, etc. because I do I do believe that I happen to be reading it's a hard book a genuinely difficult book but I'm really enjoying it um I'm reading Erns Becker's the denial of death highly recommend it to everyone a Pulitzer after all you don't need my endorsement and you know I mean the the central thesis of the book right is that we're a weird species because we understand that we're going to die at some point we're all going to die and that they that humans go through these very complicated gymnastics related the ego and symbols and we create notions of meaning and story to try and distract us basically from this really scary reality. It's terrifying, right? It's terrifying. Nobody really understands or knows what happens next. We can't be sure. And I have this idea in mind as you're telling me that indeed people are willing to stay in a set of circumstances that don't work for them, even ruminating on the mistakes that got them there for a very long time willingly when all they need to do is make some new choices that they're fully capable of making. And I wonder whether or not it's because they're alive now. They know they're quote unquote safe now. Like they're not dead. I mean, the number of people I know who stayed in circumstances that didn't work for them for so long professionally, relationally, it's like, how do they do that? And I understand sometimes there's kids, sometimes there's financial issues, but there's it's always the case that um they've eventually gotten out, thank goodness, and they always say, "I wish I' I had done it so much earlier." And I wonder whether or not as as a biological and psychological being, we we do this because we're thinking, "Well, I'm alive now. Oh, I'm breathing now. I'm quote unquote safe now, but I don't know what's going to happen if I make this other choice. Like, it defies logic. But at the at the same time, if one just assumes that our like our biggest fear deep down in our unconscious is fear of death, we'll pretty much stay anywhere where we're continuing to be alive and not like in the moment of fearing death. Sorry to get a little philosophical here, but but I think this unconscious thing we make, a lot has been made of it. the word means okay well we don't it's happening but we don't know what's happening but like what are we really afraid of and I I do think ultimately we're all just really afraid of death I don't think we're afraid of death I think we're afraid of not having lived so what I mean by that is I think we deny death we're all sort of death deniers like we know it's out there somewhere but we don't know when or how it's going to happen and so we just pretend because there's no real no pun intended but deadline right and so we just think sort of we know intellectually we don't have forever, but we kind of think we do. And so when you think about sort of the stages of psychosocial development, you know, you start with um you know, these these conflicts that you have to work through at every stage of life. And sort of the the one where you're sort of the last stage is integrity versus despair. So integrity is if you have lived a life where you don't have a lot of regret. You feel like you lived the kind of life that you wanted. You accomplished the things that you wanted to accomplish for the most part. Whether that's relationally, professionally, some combination there. Um you you have a sense of integrity at the end of your life. If you didn't, you have this sense of despair. People who work through that and have integrity are not afraid of death. The people who are in despair are very afraid of death because they have so many regrets and they can't go back. You don't get a redo. And so I like to in psychotherapy really remind people that they need to keep death awareness sitting on one shoulder. Not to be morbid but to actually make you live more fully. If you are aware of death, if you really look death right in the eye, you have more intentionality. When you wake up every day, you say, "I don't have forever." So, it's not like sometime in the future I might die. It's like you could die today, tomorrow you, you know, anything could happen. Um and and I think you know when I saw I write about this in my book where I was seeing this woman who was in her early 30s and she was diagnosed with cancer and everyone thought she was going to be fine and then there was this sort of rare recurrence and um and she was newly married and her whole life was like turned upside down and she really made me as the therapist look death in the eye in that way. You know how like you want to say something like, you know, she was talking about the things that people would say to her because we all have this death denial and they would say, "Did you get a second opinion?" as if no, she's not going to get a second opinion about whether she's going to die, right? Um, you know, they'll say things like, "Well, these experimental treatments might work." You know, anything to deny the reality that she was going to die and very soon. And nobody wanted to sit with her in that. And it was my job to do that. even her husband had had trouble sort of sitting with her in that in the beginning, right? Um and and there was this one moment, this beautiful moment between them that she came in and told me about where he was like, you know, uh doing something and trying to relax and and he was a great like incredibly supportive of her. And she came in and said, "Hey, there's this thing and and I I read about this and I want to talk to you about this." and and he said like, "Can't we just have one night off from cancer?" And she said, "I don't get any nights off from cancer. There's no nights off." Right? And I understand both perspectives on that. But it brought up this beautiful conversation between them that really helped them to think about how much do we let death in and how much do we let sort of life or what whatever's left in and how do we let death inform the aliveness that we still have. So I think it's really important that you know when why do people stay in relationships too long? Why did they stay in jobs too long? Why do they make choices that are not serving them and that they will later regret? It's because they are in full-blown death denial. And I think when people really acknowledge their mortality, um it's one of the most healthy, invigorating things that they can bring into their lives. When people say, "What is the opposite of depression?" It's not happiness. It's vitality. And where do we get vitality? from knowing that we have a limited time here and we get to choose how we spend it. I agree 100%. Um this is something I think about constantly although I've never looked at it through the lens that you just presented it and I I love uh what I just learned from you which is um that vitality is the is the the state the state of of being vitality is so key. I um I think about death um probably more than I should um because for a kid who wasn't from the inner city or in the military, I've just had a lot of friends die, a lot of suicides, a lot of drug stuff unfortunately and all three of my scientific adviserss, suicide, cancer, cancer. I was very close with all of them and uh only I got to say goodbye to the second one. That was a rough conversation. anyone that's ever had a conversation with somebody where it's a goodbye conversation. I had to do the like this is it and that you know and it was brutal but I'm you know I don't want to well up I've cried before on this podcast. I don't feel like doing it today. I don't have problem crying in uh from time to time on camera but I don't want the this the uh plotline here to shift too much. But I started after that conversation to adopt a practice. I I do this yoga nidra non-sleep deep breath thing every day uh for about 10 to 30 minutes and there's this moment right at the beginning you're supposed to take a deep breath and then a long exhale to relax your body and then you go into listening to the script and um ever since that conversation I've insisted on uh doing that and as I do it I remind myself this is if I'm awake or if it's not an accident that happens very fast this is probably what it's going to feel like to like die. And so just trying to like I'm so I I like this idea of readying myself for death every day. Um as a means to access what you're talking about, which is a trying to live better, right? Again, not to be morbid, just try to like, yes, I'm like a biological vessel. At some point, my body, my brain, or both will just give out or I'll bullet buster cancer is kind of what I always say. Something will take me out and there'll be this final and that's it. And the closer that I feel like that we can get to that understanding and be like, "Okay, super scary and I'm not there now, so I'm going to go back into the world and do the best I can." And it doesn't have to be scary. It sounds like you're aiming toward an acceptance of death, which is I think the the way that we get motivated to live. So it's not fear of death. That's not what I'm suggesting at all. I don't think we should be afraid of death. I think we should say we get this precious time however long we get everybody gets their own amount of time on you know in this life and so it's an acceptance of that it's not a fear of that and and I think about how when people are afraid of death they they do things that are counterproductive like a lot of affairs happen in the wake of a death so a parent dies and somebody then feels like oh I don't have a lot of time left am I really happy in this relationship am I really alive am I really living and then they go and do something like have an affair because they want that sense of vitality because they're doing it out of fear not out of oh I accept that death is a part of our existence and if I'm not feeling alive is it because of my relationship or my marriage or is it because I am not actively doing things in my life to create that sense of vitality. So very often in the wake of some kind of brush with death, like some kind of closeness, like maybe you had a brush with death or maybe a parent died or someone close to you died or a friend or a sibling. So often people act out and they do these things to create this sense of I'm alive. Um as opposed to saying, wait, what do I need to look at in my life that will make me feel more alive that is not self-sabotaging? I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, AG1. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also contains adaptogens. I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, long before I even knew what a podcast was. I started taking it and I still take it every single day because it ensures that I meet my quota for daily vitamins and minerals and it helps make sure that I get enough prebiotics and probiotics to support my gut health. Over the past 10 years, gut health has emerged as something that we realize is important not only for the health of our digestion, but also for our immune system and for the production of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators, things like dopamine and serotonin. In other words, gut health is critical for proper brain function. Now, of course, I strive to eat healthy whole foods from unprocessed sources for the majority of my nutritional intake, but there are a number of things in AG1, including specific micronutrients that are hard or impossible to get from whole foods. So by taking AG1 daily, I get the vitamins and minerals that I need along with the probiotics and prebiotics for gut health and in turn brain and immune system health and the adaptogens and critical micronutrients that are essential for all organs and tissues of the body. So anytime somebody asks me if they were to only take one supplement what that supplement should be, I always say AG1 because AG1 supports so many different systems in the brain and body that relate to our mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drinka1.com/huberman. For this month only, April 2025, AG1 is giving away a free one-mon supply of omega-3 fish oil along with a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. As I've highlighted before in this podcast, omega-3 fish oil and vitamin D3 plus K2 have been shown to help with everything from mood and brain health to heart health and healthy hormone production, and much more. Again, that's drinkaga1.com/huberman to get the free 1 month supply of omega-3 fish oil plus a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2 with your subscription. Today's episode is also brought to us by David. David makes a protein bar unlike any other. It has 28 g of protein, only 150 calories, and 0 g of sugar. That's right, 28 g of protein, and 75% of its calories come from protein. This is 50% higher than the next closest protein bar. David protein bars also taste amazing. Even the texture is amazing. My favorite bar is the chocolate chip cookie dough. But then again, I also like the new chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate brownie flavored. Basically, I like all the flavors a lot. They're all incredibly delicious. In fact, the toughest challenge is knowing which ones to eat on which days and how many times per day. I limit myself to two per day, but I absolutely love them. With David, I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a snack, which makes it easy to hit my protein goals of 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight per day. And it allows me to do so without ingesting too many calories. I'll eat a David protein bar most afternoons as a snack, and I always keep one with me when I'm out of the house or traveling. They're incredibly delicious, and given that they have 28 grams of protein, they're really satisfying for having just 150 calories. If you'd like to try David, you can go to davidprotein.com/huberman. Again, that's davidprotein.com/huberman. Gosh, so much to go into here. Um, this thing about vitality is is so key. A friend recently said to me something. He I was talking about how gosh, there's like these certain interactions in life that are like uh I feel like they like pull me in. I don't like them and then it just like really takes away from what I know I should be doing. And but um and he said, "You know, you have to do things that energize you." Mhm. And immediately I thought, "Yes, and be very careful about the things that activate us." Like there's this difference between activation and being being activated versus being energized. I mean, it's a little bit semantic, right? But I feel like something that energizes me is like I love seeopods. I used to have cuttlefish in my lab. I I love octopuses. And by the way, it's octopuses is the plural, folks. Not octopi. We'd go into a whole thing here, but I won't. Um, and you know, looking at a a one of those guys or gals solving a puzzle like just energizes me in a way. I feel it in my body. It's energy that I can use for other things. It's, you know, it's like an inspiration for me. Um, and there are many other things that do that. Uh, and then there are things that activate us like where we it's a it's like a stress response. It's arousal, but it's negative veilance, right? It's draining. It's like pulling and it's and it's taking from these things that energize us. And I feel like it's it's being able to notice those subtleties is hard in real time. And um but I feel like vitality is about the things that energize us, right? And so when you talk about that draining kind of activation, sometimes what we do when that happens is we go numb, right? So we don't want to feel anything. So, you know, there's this great expression that the like scrolling through the internet when people mindlessly do that, it's a colleague of mine said it's the most effective non-prescription painkiller out there. Can you repeat that because I want people to understand this. So, yeah. So, it's the most effective non-prescription painkiller out there, right? And so, it's interesting when you think about numbness because people think that numbness is the absence of feelings, but actually numbness is the sense of being overwhelmed by too many feelings. And so you're shutting down. So when people say, "Oh, I'm numb. I'm not feeling anything." Actually, you're feeling so much and you're feeling flooded. You're feeling overwhelmed. And so we need to figure out what are you feeling. So it's it's actually a state of arousal that you you're you can't handle. And so then you're shutting down. But it's not that you're not having feelings. You're having so many feelings that you can't tolerate it. And that is not, you know, that is not the, you know, people say, "Oh, I'm I'm feeling numb. I'm feeling nothing." No, we need to figure out what is so overwhelming to your nervous system right now. Gosh, that's so important. I hope people will listen to that hundred times. Um because, you know, we've heard so much about dopamine hits that I think people have lost sight of the fact that when you're online and you're just a wash in all this information and videos, you're you're not getting those hits. you're in the postdopamine hit trough and we've been there for a long period of time unless we you know unless we're uh judicious about our use of social media an hour or 3 minutes or 15 minutes whatever it is but hours upon hours there's there's no dopamine hit anymore the peak is gone you're in the trough and that's why it feels kind of like how did all that time go by the importance of this really can't be overstated I I think that we hear so much about fight or flight and the stress response that I think people forget Yet that another component of the stress response of drama of of you know being a wash in all this information and like movies and and politics and violence and sex and all that stuff coming at us at once as we just scroll our thumbs is this thing of brachiardia. you know, there's this phenomenon where when we're stressed, our heart rate actually slows down. And that's the kind of the kind of numbing and you just kind of you're just kind of blanking out. And um I think that's a lot of what people are starting to experience with a lot of high drama input. Yeah, I see that in couples a lot where they come in and one person is saying, you know, like, I feel nothing. I don't know what this other person's so upset about. Right. And then when you really get into it, it's like this person's feeling all kinds of things. And it's really important that we understand, you know, when we are shut down versus when we are calm. Those are two very different states. Could you um go into that a little bit further? Yeah. Well, here's an example. So, a couple comes in. Let's say it's a heterosexual couple, but it could be any couple. Often it is the woman in the couple who will say something to her partner like, "I just feel like I can't reach you. I feel like we're very disconnected. I want you to tell me how you feel." And because of our cultural stigma around men showing emotion, he has told himself like, "Yeah, this bothers me or that bothers me or I'm unhappy in this way, but I don't feel anything. I'm fine. Our marriage is good." So, he doesn't even understand why he's there. um and he thinks he's there for her because she insisted on it. And so when we finally get to maybe something that he's feeling and he finally does open up, it's so interesting because maybe he's sharing something very vulnerable or maybe he tears up a little bit. So there you can tell like your body will tell you what you're feeling even if you aren't aware of it. You see, okay, there's some moisture there in his eyes or maybe a tear falls or maybe he actually starts crying. And her reaction and her whole reason for bringing him in was, you know, I need you to open up to me. I want to feel connected to you. I want to understand your inner life more. Well, he does it. And she then looks at me like a deer in headlights, like, "Oh, wow. I don't feel safe when he doesn't open up to me, but I also don't feel safe when he's being vulnerable in this way." And these are sort of gender stereotypes that we think we might not fall prey to, but we do. And so it's so interesting that often men are the ones who seem sort of numb or calm, right? Which are two again very different things in the relationship. But that's not really the case. It's that there's no room for him to express anything. So he has to kind of push everything down probably again outside of his awareness. And then the couple feels disconnected and both of them are unhappy. this idea that more words means more emotional. I don't buy it. Yeah, exactly. Um, you know, it's interesting because men will come in if I'm seeing them alone and they'll often say something like, "I've never told anyone this before." And they literally mean, "I've never told anyone this before." Because when men hang out, they're not it's not the same sort of level of let's talk talk talk, right? Um, women will come in and say something like, "I've never told anyone this before except for my mother, my sister, my best friend." Right? So, they've told maybe one, two, or three people, but they feel like they haven't told anyone because for women, that's kind of not telling anyone. Well, now you have people concerned. So, if somebody, if a woman says, uh, to me, um, I didn't tell anyone, that means she only told four people. I don't mean secrets. I don't mean secrets. I mean like something about themselves where they feel maybe hesitant to share that or they feel ashamed about that um or they're not sure about something. So you can see that difference. But I also think it it it happens very early. So I'm the mom of a boy. I mean he's now a teenager. But it's interesting cuz when I I didn't notice this till I was raising a boy and I grew up with a brother but I didn't notice it that um when he let's say he would like fall on the playground, right? And like at like 2 or 3 years old um everybody would say to him or the boys around him like, "Oh, it's fine. Brush it off. You're good. You're good." Right? Even if he was like in pain. And if a girl falls and she's in pain at that age, they're like, "Oh, honey, come here. How are you? Let's see how are you feeling about this. Are you hurt? Are you okay? So very early on they get these messages like girls can talk about it, boys can't talk about it. I remember when my my son was he was a basketball player and and um in high school and um he had or this was in actually middle school and in a practice he got you know pushed down and his arm was kind of like not right and you know everyone was like get back up just get it's fine. Well, his arm is like hanging off, right? And so, you know, I was like, "No, I think he know needs to go to the ER." And of course, he was mortified that I said that, but in fact, he had broken his arm. So, that's the difference. If a girl had fallen down and her arm was like that, people would say like, "Oh, why don't you get it checked out?" So, what happens when these people get into adult relationships and this was what they were told about words and talking about things? um you really see those differences. But the other thing I want to say about words is women are brought up to think that whenever you have a feeling you should share it. And my response to that is no. So, and people say, "What do you mean you're a therapist? What do you mean don't share your feelings?" You don't need to share every thought or feeling that crosses your mind unfiltered with your partner. That is not healthy communication. Healthy communication means we have filters and we get to think about and we call it mentalizing how will what I'm about to say land on the other person. It's not like you're regurgitating all of your thoughts onto the other person. They're just supposed to deal with them. It's about relationally thinking how will this person respond to that? Not like you have to take care of their feelings, but is it kind? Is it true? Is it useful? Does it meet those three criteria? And if it doesn't, why am I talking? Why am I sharing this? You said it, not me. Um, but I'll wager a theory. Mhm. That I think that some people when they feel something, um, it the the kind of, uh, relief that comes from evacuating Yeah. that feeling or trying to evacuate it with words feels reflexively better to them than sitting with it internally. Right? So I think people when when they feel an emotion I think sometimes they they feel like if they just talk about it or evacuate it then it's like get they get rid of it but they forget that it has an impact. Yes. Yes. And and what you're talking about is is projective identification. So a projection, right, is when um you like you're feeling angry about something. Say you had like your boss did something to you at work and you know they they they upset you in some way or they were you know unkind and you're angry about or they going to make you work all night and you're really pissed about that, right? So you're angry so you come home and you end up um you know yelling at your partner, right? So, you're projecting, you're really mad at your boss, but all of a sudden you're like yelling at your partner, you're angry at your partner. That's projection. You're projecting one feeling about someone onto a different person that had nothing to do with the situation. Projective identification is a psychological process where you actually insert your feeling into the other person. So, you're angry about something that happened at work. It's not that you are now angry at your partner. It's that you make your partner angry. It's like a hot potato. Like you take your feelings and you toss them to someone else because you can't tolerate the discomfort of that feeling. So I don't want to deal with the feeling. So I'm going to say something to you that's going to make you angry, right? And now they have to hold all the anger. You feel great. You're fine because you're not holding the anger anymore. And now they're the ones who can't sleep. They're the ones who are upset. They're the ones who have to deal with what you couldn't tolerate. So it again we have to think about you know do we need to like why are we saying what we're saying? Can we be more intentional about how we communicate? Which doesn't mean you have to walk through a minefield. It just means that you have to be more aware of your feeling state and owning your feeling state and making sure that you aren't using other people in your environment to release your feeling state to something else. that you need to learn how you can shift your own feeling state to one that feels better for you. I love that. I um I realized recently that thinking is something that we can practice. M I I for all the tools and protocols that you know talked about on this podcast and elsewhere, you know, like physiological size and morning sunlight and working out and zone 2 cardio and cold and you know, all the things I I realized um recently like spending five minutes just thinking about something and really trying to work through it linearly um like a like a challenge, like a life challenge is so valuable. Um, and I didn't come up with this on my own. I now have a practice of of like when something feels irritating or activating, I'll just like stop, put everything away, and I just sit and think like what's going on here? And um, inevitably there's some like some growth in understanding at the end of that. But it's hard work like to think like what's going on here? Am I activated because it's like true? Am I activated because it's false? Am I you know like having a sort all that you might think well who has the time for this but actually I would argue you don't have the time to not do it. I think that's the difference between reacting and responding. So often what we do is we react to something and that's not processed not thought through. And again it doesn't have to take like you're saying it doesn't have to take a long time to just even count to five and breathe and see you know cuz reacting reacting means acting again. So you are normally when you're reacting and it's like that 0 to 60 you're acting on something that happened in the past and you're layering it on to whatever's happening in the present. So, you're having a big reaction to something. We like to say if it's historical, it's if it's hysterical, it's historical. Meaning, if you're, and by hysterical, I mean, if you're having a big reaction, there's probably something from your past, some reaction that is visceral to you that you're having that is getting layered on to this current situation, experience, problem, and you don't realize it. So, that's reacting. You're acting again. You're acting on something that happened in the past. If it's hysterical, it's historical. responding is I'm going to take a breath. I'm having a big reaction. I'm going to sit for a minute. Again, regulating your nervous system. And now I can kind of think about this differently. So, we need space between, you know, there's that famous Victor Frankle quote of, you know, between stimulus and response there is a space and in that space lies our choice and our freedom. Um, that's a paraphrase of it. But you need that space between the stimulus, whatever the thing is that activated you and your response. So that's the difference between reacting and responding. I totally agree. And yet life happens in real time. I mean, parents with kids, they got to pick them up and they're working and there's stuff coming through on the phone. My question is, do you think nowadays there's too much um communication bombardment through text, social media, um phone, and real life that we we've eliminated all the space. I think what we've eliminated is there's so much more space in a face-to-face conversation. So, when I have young therapy clients who are, you know, maybe in their early 20s, and I I had one client who was telling me this story in therapy a while ago, and now I understand what this means, but this was several years ago. And she was telling it like this. She had her thumbs in the air and she said, "And then I said, and then he said, and then I said, and I'm thinking, what is she doing?" And then I I realized I said, "Wait, you had this conversation on text?" And she said, "Yes." Yes. And it was really important conversation. And I said I was trying to explain to her why they were missing certain cues. They were missing what it feels like to be in the space together. They were missing the experience of looking in each other's eyes, of seeing facial expressions and body language. And she said, "Oh no, but we also used emojis." And I had to explain to her why an emoji does not replace face-toface interaction. Face to face interaction slows you down, right? you can just text anything and you don't realize there's another person at the other side of this on their phone who is reacting to your reaction. And I think that you know this is when we go back to comment sections. We don't realize like there's another person out there. We know that. But when there are so many times that we would have a very different kind of conversation with our partner, with family members, with friends, in our workplace, um, in comment sections, if we could remember that there's a human there, and the easiest way to do that is to see someone like this looking across the table at you. We can't always do that. But I think when there you're having important conversations that we should remember, wait, this probably isn't appropriate to talk about on text. Even though people think that, well, of course, it's so much more efficient. Actually, it's not because now you're going to have conflict. Now you're going to have misunderstandings and now you're going to spend all this time trying to repair the rupture that just happened because you had the conversation on text. I refuse to argue over text. Yes. I just won't have an argument over text. And I'll say to people, you know, because like I have a client and and he's always sort of he says, "Well, I just get pulled into it with my girlfriend." And I'm like, "Really? Does somebody have a gun to your head?" Right? And and this is where I think change. You know, we talk about what we want to accomplish in therapy. And it's change. It's not just coming in and downloading the problem of the week and leaving and downloading the problem of the week again and leaving. I like to say that insight is the booby prize of therapy. that you can have all the insight in the world, but if you don't make change out in the world, the insight is useless. So, someone will say, "Oh, I got into that argument with my, you know, whoever, my partner over the weekend, and I'll say, "Well, did you do something different?" They'll say, "Well, no, but I understand why." Great. That's good that you understand why, but you need to do something different because we're all doing this dance with someone else, right? And if you change your dance steps, so people say, "I want the other person to change." And I said, "Well, you can't change the other person, but you can influence the other person by making changes yourself." So, if you change your dance steps, the other person will either have to change their dance steps, too, because you're not doing that old dance with them anymore, or they'll leave the dance floor. And people are so afraid the person will leave the dance floor. And it's like, well, if they're not going to dance with you in a way that is the kind of relationship that you want, it's okay that they leave the dance floor. Go find someone who will dance with you in the way you want to dance. When it comes to behavioral change, are you a fan of small onederee turns or um I'll propose an alternative, not as a counter, but just to explore next. But do do you like um do you encourage your clients? Do you call them patients or clients, by the way? Either. I don't think either is a good word. I think it's so interesting because I think that it's just we're just humans. And I don't mean to sound all woo woo about this, but I really feel like the relationship that you have in that room, it's so unique. And I have not figured out a way to describe it. And I don't think client or patient quite does it. But for simplicity sake, we use either. Okay. Um, thank you. I've always wondered about that. Um, do you recommend that your clients um make specific subtle changes, behavioral changes when they're after they have an insight or maybe even before they have an insight? I think the reason that people have so much trouble changing is because the step that they've chosen is too big of a step to take at once. That you need small, manageable steps. And I think people also forget this is why New Year's resolutions tend not to last very long because change is a process. And there's a there's a chapter in my book called How Humans Change. And I think it's so important for people to understand that there are stages of change. And it starts with pre-contemplation where you don't even realize that you're thinking about making a change. You think like something's not right, but I don't really need to change. Like something's just not right in the world. Um you know, it's my partner, it's my, you know, it's my child. it's my whoever, right? Um there's then there's contemplation, which is, oh, maybe I could make a change, but I'm not quite ready to do it. And that's when people usually they come to therapy somewhere around pre-contemplation and contemplation. Like something's not right, they come to therapy, we get them to contemplation, which is like, oh, maybe I'm contemplating making some changes. Um, and then there's preparation, which is you're taking some steps to prepare for the change. So, it's not like I'm going to dive into the deep end of the pool. It's like, oh, maybe I need to take some swimming lessons or maybe I need to get a swimsuit or maybe I need, you know, whatever it is. Like, I need to prepare to make this change. And then there's action where you actually make the change. And people think that's the last step, that's action. No, the last stage is maintenance. And maintenance is how do you maintain the change? And maintenance does not mean that you are perfectly maintaining the change. It's more like shoots and ladders if you remember that game where like kind of you go up and then you go down if you you can make mistakes during this time because you're forming a new habit. You're forming a new way of being and until it becomes familiar. Going back to our discussion about how the familiar feels really good to us and the unfamiliar feels really scary. The new thing will take a while to feel familiar. So, let's say that you say like, I'm going to eat healthy and that means that I'm not going to, you know, like eat an entire hogen or something when I'm sad that I'm going to do something different. Well, sometimes when you're sad, you might do that again, but then you don't self flagagillate. So, it's not like, oh, it failed, so forget it. I'm not going to like I I failed and I'm not able to make this change. No. Or you don't say like, oh, I'm so terrible and that was awful and I'm so weak. Self flagagillation is not helpful. Imagine if your kid came to you and they said like, "I did really poorly on this test." Are you going to say, "You're so stupid." You know, like, "What's wrong with you?" No, you're going to say, "Well, let's talk about what happened." And they might say, "I needed help and I was embarrassed to ask." Or, "I didn't understand it." And or, "I didn't study. I messed up. I should have studied and I didn't study." Okay. Well, what are you going to do differently next time? Let's come up with a plan. So you need to have just like you'd have some compassion for your child and hold them accountable both. It's hard to hold yourself accountable when you self flagagillate. In the short term you can but it doesn't last because it feels so unpleasant. You're just sort of bathing in shame. What you need is self-compassion. And actually if you have more compassion for yourself you're more able to hold yourself accountable. So you can say oh you know what happened? I was feeling really sad. I had this whole pint of hog and I it's okay that I was sad and there's another way to do this. So next time when I'm sad I didn't have enough support so I'm going to call a friend next time. Oh self-compassion with accountability or I'm not going to keep the hogands in the house because I know that when I'm sad I'm susceptible to that. Maybe one day I'll be able to do it but right now I'm not going to keep that. But there's something else I can do, which is I really feel like I want for me self-compassion is related to I'm going to give myself a treat. So maybe my treat is I'm going to um you know uh I'm going to have like a healthy snack that I like or maybe my treat is I'm going to go to a movie or you know whatever it is. But you have to figure out what works for you and what works for other people might not work for you. So it takes a little bit of experimenting. So maintenance is this kind of experimentation but having self-compassion with accountability until you find a system that works for you and the new thing becomes a habit. It becomes familiar and the thing that you used to do becomes unfamiliar and doesn't feel good anymore. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need but nothing you don't. That means the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, all in the correct ratios, but no sugar. Proper hydration is critical for optimal brain and body function. Even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance. It's also important that you get adequate electrolytes. The electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are vital for the functioning of all the cells in your body, especially your neurons or your nerve cells. Drinking element dissolved in water makes it extremely easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes. To make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes, I dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up in the morning. And I drink that basically first thing in the morning. I also drink element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing, especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and therefore losing a lot of water and electrolytes. They have a bunch of different great tasting flavors of Element. They have watermelon, citrus, etc. Frankly, I love them all. If you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with the purchase of any element drink mix. Again, that's drinkelement.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Yeah. For so many years, the field of psych popular psychology um was obsessed with, you know, how long does it take to make a change? It was like 28 days and it was like 90. as like as somebody who studies neuroplasticity um I can tell you that there's one trial learning you'll never go back and there's stuff that takes years um it's just depends on the intensity and the consequences right and and even with consequences I mean anyone that's seen somebody relapse from drugs so many times over it's you clearly they're working with more complicated dynamics there I think that um this notion of reinforcing change is is super key I'm really glad you raised Uh, I I want to ask um as a I don't know how to phrase this. As a counterpoint or or as an alternative There we go. Uh, as an alternative to uh onederee shifts or or um I'm somebody that I've always benefited from deadlines. I love deadlines. Like a deadline is how I get things done. and and I just if there's a grant deadline and a paper deadline, you know, deadlines work. Mhm. And even if you don't meet them, um it's great to see how far off you were, you know, if you did your absolute best and how the mistakes you made to lead to the place where you didn't complete things in time. It's just I I love deadlines and I love rules. And so, um I've become a a pretty strict rule enforcer for myself in my life. And I think one of the rules that's really helped me in recent times uh with visav relationships has been um no drama. Just none. Like none. I don't tolerate any drama. But that's rigid I realize. But it's helpful. I'm far happier than I've ever been truly um in large part because of that. Like no drama. But the thing that I had to accept with a with a hard rule like that is that I'm going to lose people. Mhm. Like that. So earlier you said, you know, that that this uh patient client, you know, maybe he doesn't have to put up maybe there's somebody better for him. There's someone else out there that you don't that they don't have to deal with. I think that one of the things that I notice in my own past and um with others that I know struggling with with a dynamic with people typically it's romantic relationships but could be anything is you have to be willing to let go. You you can't like always resolve the conflict. And I find that a lot of people maybe it's this childhood thing. They they feel like they have to like remain on great terms or they have to stay friends or they have to put a bow on it. And I I so admire the people in life that are like, "Yeah, that didn't work. Done." Because I look at the time wasted. Yes. And I think that in our desire to make everything kind of okay in the end, we burn valuable life energy and incredibly valuable time. And so some people might hear like no drama and think, well, you're going to lose a bunch of people. And I I will. Um, I I certainly will. Um, or they'll rise to the occasion or whatever you want to call it. Um, but I have a full life of many people with whom I have zero drama and wonderful relationships. So, I'm full. My dance card's full, right? But I'd rather I'm I feel so so firm about this um given the peace that it's brought me. Yeah. That I realize like, yeah, like I may never talk to that person again. I might, I might not. Right. But at the first hint of drama, like I'm done. And and I think it's because um I forced so much suffering on myself for so long of trying to resolve these things that clearly wouldn't work. And uh I don't know, I feel immense freedom from it. But I think I hear this with other people like, "Oh yeah, but you know, they're gonna change or you know, he's gonna stop drinking or not referring to me. I'm not a drinker, but there was a hard and I quit drinking." Um didn't have a problem with it. I just was like, I'm done with alcohol. Just like that relationship's over. Um, and they just cling to this like thing that it's got to like they just won't let go. Yeah. And and and I don't What is that about? Why Why do we hold on to the thing that doesn't work even if we know we're not going to like stay with it? Yes. What is this obsession? It's interesting. So, um I'm thinking about how when you say no drama, um you know, what does that actually mean? And it's really important because when you look at why people who are most satisfied with their lives, um you know, what is it about their lives, they're surrounded by people that they feel good about. Now, let me be clear about what that means. So, you know, we talk about this concept of idiot compassion versus wise compassion. Idiot compassion. Idiot compassion. I love that phrase. I don't even know what it means and I love it already. So idiot compassion is what if you surround yourself with people who are only going to validate your experience when you say no drama that's not necessarily a great thing. So like for example um you know let's say that um you know someone says to her friends like I don't understand why he broke up with me or I don't understand you know why this keeps happening to me and your friend's like no you go girl he's wrong you're right you know whatever or or you know my partner's doing this and we we tend to kind of feel like our job as a friend is to support the position of our friends. That's idiot compassion. Wise compassion is what you get in therapy where we say, you know, like what might be going on here. It's kind of like if a fight breaks out in every bar you're going to, maybe it's you. We don't say that to our friends in idiot compassion. Okay. So, so think about that. So, is it that you want no drama, meaning you want your friends to kind of back up everything you're saying? You're not going to grow as a person. You're not going to hear what you need to hear. The friends you want to surround yourself with are people who will tell you the truth in a kind, respectful way and that you're willing to hear it. So some people think that it would be drama if their friends kind of called them on their right? Um that's not drama. So that's a healthy, communicative, open, honest relationship. I agree. By the way, I think that my definition of drama is when challenging things are presented in a way that's not uh in effort to resolve. Right. Right. What I'm talking about is evacuative expression. Like when things, you know, um I mean, and I'm sort of chuckling on the inside too about this thing about friends. I mean, I would say my group of friends is they're amazing. I'm blessed with incredible friends and friendships. I'm so blessed. I only wish I had more time for all of them. the um were pretty hard on each other in terms of being very blunt, very um like that was dumb is maybe maybe more male specific kind of language like that was dumb. Like why'd you do that? It was super stupid. Or yeah, don't be an idiot. Don't do it again. Or um no, I totally disagree. That that's a lot of the exchange in my friend group. Um I would say maybe it's just the culture I grew up in in academia. very very little validation. Validation isn't a big part of it. Um, but I am also surrounded by people that are very self-critical. So, it's sort of inherent to the way they work in their work, in their relationships, in their life, in their fitness. Like, pretty much everyone's pretty get after it, right? What I'm talking about is when people say no drama, what they mean is um don't bring anything up, right? Don't don't challenge anything. don't bring anything to my attention that maybe needs to be brought to my attention because I could be better in this relationship. Um, you know, to me, I think what you're talking about is volatility um, which is drama, right? Like, can you express the thing you want to express in a way that feels um, like an invitation or like it comes from a place of curiosity as opposed to blame. So often people will come at the person and say you did this as opposed to I was confused by what happened back there. What what happened? Why you know why did you make that choice or why what happened between us here? Can we talk about that? So you're being curious about the other person's experience as opposed to blaming the other person and assuming their intentions or why they did something or something about their character. So drama tends to be from all the assumptions. Like I know that my truth is the right story. That's how you would come at that, right? And yours, you were wrong. And I think it's so interesting because people come to therapy with these faulty narratives. Um you know, we're all we're all storytellers. We all try to make sense of something and we all believe that our story is the absolute accurate version of the story. And it's it's actually it's so funny when you see couples and they experienced the same, you know, they were part of the same experience and they have wildly different versions and then there's some part where the ven diagram overlaps and then finally they can see, oh that person's not a bad person. They were coming at it because they in their story they believed this and that's so important. So drama happens when assumptions are made. People characterize the other person's story as inaccurate, their own story as accurate, and then there's lots of kind of there's no space for curiosity or connection. It's all rupture, no repair. As you're saying this, I realized what I mean by drama because I it's a very broad term. Um, and I I come from a a background where my dad's from South America, my mom's from New York. Like, so like emotive expression is not what I'm referring to, right? like I'm people being passionate about something or even angry about something or even having a problem like hey that didn't feel good. That's not what I'm referring to. I realize as you were saying it what it is that gets me. It's when that I put under the the category of drama which for which I have zero tolerance for unless you can convince me otherwise is when people dynamite the mind on the way out. It's yes, I'm telling you how much this sucks. This is how I feel or this is what you did and then I'm inaccessible. and um you know so they're not really interested. It's this evacuative expression or projection as you said. That's what I'm defining as trauma. That to me is far and away different than saying hey listen like this sucked. Can you think about this? Can we talk about this? Um Andrew, you screwed up. Like okay great. Like let's let's figure it out. Um absolutely. But it's this um I'm rolling a grenade in the door and I'm out of here. Right. That to me is the one that um I'm like I just I'm too old for that The the silent treatment is actually incredibly aggressive and hostile. People think that that the loud one is the problem in the relationship. Sometimes the silent one is the one who's the problem. You know, it's the person who smiles through everything and doesn't really say anything, but they're being so passive aggressive. Or the person who then, as you said, detonates the bomb and then goes silent and that's their punishment. the they're punishing you by not talking to you for a day or two or three. That's incredibly hostile. And the other way that people do that is you bring up something in a nice way to someone and here's how they they create drama and and but they're shutting something down. They're shutting down any possibility of communication is every time you bring up something to them, they cry. Now, people don't like it when I say this. They say as a therapist they should be able to feel sad or hurt when someone brings up something and they should be able to cry. And I'm saying no. Sometimes crying is a manipulation. You can manipulate someone. So I'll see a couple and one person will bring up something. Let's say, you know, like when you do this, you know, or this hurts me or I don't like this or I need more help with this and the person cries like you're hurting my feelings. this is, you know, as opposed to saying this person is trying to communicate with you. You're going to have feelings about it, but there's a manipulative way in which people will cry every time or many times. And it shuts down any possibility of communication. And so we have to say, you know, what are you doing here? Every time you cry, then the other person feels like, well, I can't bring this up because I'm hurting my partner. And now we can never have communication because if I bring something up, I'm in a catch22. If I don't bring it up, we have a problem. If I bring it up, you're gonna say I'm hurting your feelings and and then I have to stop. So, I have to be extra careful. And I don't know, there's no way to to move forward here. So, what do you do in that instance? We have to talk about the functionality of the crime. You know, why is it so hard for you to hear something that your partner is saying? Do you feel blamed? Do you feel shame? Shame is something that we avoid at all costs, right? No one wants to feel that. Do you feel like this person is making a global statement when they're not? That they're saying you're a bad person as opposed to what you did here was bad. So there's a difference between who you are and what you did. And often we paint with a big brush when we're trying to communicate with our partners, you know, like you're bad as opposed to that thing that you did that was not good. that thing you did was bad, but you inherently are not a bad person. And we we tend to tell our partners in all kinds of ways that they're bad people when they do something that displeases us. We have to be really careful about separating what they did from who they are. And we need to do that with ourselves. So often we do something and then we feel so much shame around what we did and we say, "Oh, I'm a terrible person." As opposed to, "I did something that doesn't align with who I want to be." it doesn't align with actually who I am. And that's good that you feel bad about it because if we didn't have guilt, right? So guilt is a good positive feeling. Shame, nothing comes from shame. We just tend to sort of like retreat from shame. Guilt is great. Guilt is saying you're not a sociopath. Guilt is saying um what I did did not align with the person that I am. So I am a good person. I did something that felt not aligned with that. And so I need to be aware that it's good that I feel guilt. If I didn't feel guilt, that would say something about my character, but the fact that I do feel guilt means that I'm willing to look at myself and I'm willing to do something different and I'm willing to make a change. And here I'm making a bunch of assumptions. I wonder if the crying is uh is pre-programmed in some people because it's what um was able to elicit sympathy and protect them. like if like if they didn't do it that they'd get hit or if they didn't do it it would like the bombardment would continue. Yeah. Absolutely. Everything we do is for self-preservation and we're just not aware of it. Like we we want to avoid pain at all costs and so even though a lot of what we do to avoid pain creates more pain but that's not our intent. So, anything that you know when people there there's somebody that I write about in my book who comes off as as very unlikable at the beginning of the book and people say why did you even take him into your practice? Why did you work with him? Why did you treat him? And when they get to the end of the book, not to spoil everything, but they he's probably the person they love the best. And it's because I'm looking at that person's actions as they're coming from a place of he's protecting himself from pain. So he's an to everybody because it doesn't let anybody in. It doesn't let him have the possibility of being hurt again because he was terribly hurt. And so, you know, we say hurt people hurt people. What are they doing? They're protecting themselves from more pain because if they let themselves be vulnerable, they're exposed to the possibility of pain and they don't want that. Are there some people for whom therapy just ain't going to help? Yes. Um, people who are not willing to self-reflect and it's hard, right? I think a lot of people come to therapy and they say, "I want something to change, but what they want to change is something else or someone else." And you, again, you can influence that. You can't change another person. Before people come to couples therapy with me, um, I ask them to each separately come up with the one thing that they want to work on about themselves. M so it's not what do you want to change in your partner. It's if you were going to be the best possible version of yourself in a relationship. What is the one thing that you really want to work on in our coup's work together? Well, no. I I I want to work on things, but I really need the other person. No, wait a minute. I won't even see them in the room until they each have a very clear sense of this is the thing that I want to work on. Now, that might change over time depending on what we uncover, but they need to come in with a goal. Like we all know that there's something about ourselves that we could do better at in a relationship. And so what is that thing? What do you want to work on? And if the other person happens to change, great. If they don't, that's good information, too. But you're not coming in because you think the other person's going to change. You're coming in to grow on your own. And you're growing in the context of this relationship, but you are doing some personal growth in the couples. I happen to think couples therapy moves us along faster individually than individual therapy does. Interesting. Because in individual therapy, you're telling a story. It's your perspective. I have to, as a therapist, intuitit what else might be going on out there. In couples therapy, I see how this person reacts with other people. Now, I can see that in the therapeutic relationship individually, like whatever, this is a microcosm of how they interact out there. But I'm different from the people they interact with out there because of the nature of the therapeutic relationship. So they will there will be what we call transference where they transfer some of their feelings about other people into the relationship with the therapist and that gives me a really good idea of how they interact out there. Could you give me an example of transference um positive and negative? Yeah. So um let's say that I say something and it turns out that they felt criticized. Well, it could be that I said something in a critical way, maybe. Um, entirely possible. It could be that um they have kind of transferred feelings about a parent onto me if I happen to be the age of their parent um or similar to or if there's enough of an age difference between us. And they heard something that was meant to be compassionate, but it was also true and and something they need to look at, but they heard it as criticism. Sometimes you transfer, there's romantic transference. People get, you know, romantically attached to their therapists and you have to be able to talk about that. Obviously, you know, you have very clear boundaries. Nothing can ever happen. All that, but it's okay to bring that up. People think I'm not allowed to say that, you know, I have these feelings. And then we deal with them and we see, you know, how we can talk through that. And it's generally not that the person wants to get with you. It's really more about like what it means to feel romantically loved or what it means to be loved in general and that they put like a romantic veneer over that. So, you know, love is so complicated and it's so multiaceted. Um, so there's that kind of transference that happens. But I think with with couples when I say you need to be able to work on the, you know, something that would, if you were to be the best possible version of yourself in this relationship, what would you want to work on? It might be I need to self-regulate better. It might be um I need to be less needy um of the other I need to expect. In other words, a lot of people think that their partner needs to be like everything. You need to telepathically read my mind and if you don't, you don't care. You need to intuit it what I wanted to do for my birthday. And if you didn't, then you don't really know me. Um, and these sound like kind of extreme, almost immature examples, but these are the kinds of things that that people get caught up in, you know, and I'm giving kind of like the highest level of that, but they can be much more nuanced and and and much deeper. And so, um, you know, I think that people, you asked who cannot be helped, people who are not willing to self-reflect and look at themselves. I love that uh statement you made which is um if people are coming to therapy they need to ask about the change they want to make in themselves. Yeah. And and what their role is in what is not going the way they want in their lives. And is this isn't about blaming them for the problem at all. It's about saying there might be some truly difficult situations out there. You might have a parent with mental health issues and you know what are you going to do about that? You probably aren't going to change the fact that they have mental health issues. Um, but your reaction can change. So you can do something different. We can talk about what that might look like. You cannot engage in that dance. You can set boundaries. You can, you know, there are different ways to make choices about that. Um, there are sort of like societal things that we can't change, but like what can you do so that you feel like you have agency in the world? Because we all have agency to some degree. So where do we find that agency as opposed to going into this like helpless I'm the victim position? And people don't like to hear that. They say what what are you what kind of therapist are you calling people victims? I'm not saying people are victims. I'm saying people have the mindset that they don't have agency and then they become victims. But when you realize that you have agency, you realize, wow, there are really difficult people, things, circumstances in the world, but I get to choose how to respond to them. going back to this thing about texting. How many of the challenges that people present to you in your office these days um incorporates or starts with yeah so I got this text uh versus you know somebody came to me or called me and uh we had a hard interaction or or we had a conversation or something happened at work. I mean how much of it is in the digital world nowadays? Yeah. So, here's what's interesting about texting is so many times people will come in and they'll say, "We had this conversation on text and I'll say, "Can you show me the conversation?" Which people think, why would you do that? Why wouldn't you want to hear the narrative from that person? Well, I just heard the narrative, but I want to see what was actually said because they're like, "Oh, I don't really know. All right, let me read you what they said." And so, but I want to see what both parts of that were. And then the person can see, oh, here's how I contributed to that or here's a choice that I made in that moment. Again, I prefer that these conversations that people have are face to face conversations when they're kind of about something in the relationship. You know, text is great for like your dailiness of, hey, look what I had for lunch or how you doing or I love you or whatever, right? Or, you know, can you pick up the kid? But when you're having some kind of, you know, again, rupture or or conflict between you, that's not a text conversation. But many people will do that on text. And then now we have a record. So it's not just like what my client is saying to me. It's like this is how the conversation actually went down. We have a transcript of it. And it's really helpful for people to be able to look at that transcript. I agree. Um, at the same time, I feel like breakups are much harder than they used to be because you can block someone on social media, but then the block itself becomes this thing. Um, you can mute people. You can put your phone away, but unless you block their number, they can, you know, send you things. You can um go back and read texts if you're an obsessive person. Um, you know, there just so many venues for or avenues, excuse me, for people to access our psyche when we're trying to move on. And in the old days, kids, you know, you had a phone with an answering machine, you broke up, it sucked, you looked at the photos, you put the photos in a box, or you burned them, and you put the box in a shelf, and then when you got into a new relationship, you either hid the box or you destroyed the box and you moved on. And um people's phone numbers changed and uh it was so much easier. I noticed that one tended to just remember more good stuff because there wasn't other stuff coming in. The bad stuff tended to dissipate or maybe it didn't. It was just so much easier. You weren't being uh infiltrated by the past and um you know because of the the nature of electronic stuff. I just feel like it's like the past trying to like hold us back and and this is on both sides, you know. It doesn't matter if the breakup was amicable, then you long for the person now and again or the breakup was rough and then you like you relive ele you know there's so many variants on this that um I don't know it just feels like breaking up's already the one of the hardest things. People I think don't acknowledge just how hard breakups are, right? They don't. And I think there's this hierarchy of pain that people have about certain things like, well, you only dated for this amount of time. How can it be that painful this amount of time after the breakup? You know, that like there's this hierarchy. But if it was a divorce, then you know, people understand why a year later you're still dealing with it or you know how if you were only married for 5 years versus married for 20 years. Like there's some hierarchy of pain that we have around things like it was a miscarriage but your child you know your eight-year-old didn't die you know sorry I mean that's just people say that kind of thing. No no no they don't they don't say it but that's how they treat people. It's like you had a miscarriage like that what they say is like oh it's okay you'll get pregnant again if your child dies they're not like it's okay you'll have another child right but it feels the person who had a miscarriage is that they lost their child. It's very very painful. But listen to how we talk to people who have these experiences that we tend to think that some experiences are sort of higher on the hierarchy of pain than others are. And so we think like a breakup is not as bad as like a breakup that in a non-marriage or a short marriage is not as hard as a breakup with uh you know a long marriage or whatever the hierarchy is. Um or even someone who you know it's like well and this is the reason that people don't actually get help for things because they think well you know it's just this it's not really that bad or I'm feeling kind of sad or I can't sleep or I'm having trouble in this relationship but it's not that bad cuz I have a roof over my head and food on the table so I don't need to go get help. But let's say you fall and you clearly have like, you know, broken your wrist. You're not going to sit there and go, I don't need to do anything about that cuz I don't have stage 4 cancer. You're going to be like, I'm going because I need to get my wrist repaired. So, we treat sort of physical health and mental health as two separate entities when of course the mind and the body are all intertwined. And I think that with breakups, it's the same thing. It's like people think, well, it's not that big of a deal after the first x amount of time. And breakups can really mark you depending on how they went down. Like if it was really volatile, if it was one of these things where you got no sense of um if you were cheated on, um if you didn't understand why the breakup happened, like you it was very surprising to you. um you know all those things. It can really it can really be a different kind of breakup than a breakup where a person it might be very painful but you understand sort of why the breakup is happening. Doesn't mean you don't feel the loss but there's something different about the quality of the breakup. And so then people tell stories about the breakup because they didn't get the real story. So the story now becomes like you don't really understand why the person is breaking up with you um because they didn't communicate during the relationship that maybe they were unhappy and now you watch them on social media. So you're watching a story and you have this whole story in your mind of look at them they're on this vacation or they're not even like with another person. They're just like look they look so happy but it's social media. Of course they look happy. People are not posting on social media of I'm so sad about my breakup generally. There's a whole like sort of subculture of people who do that, but it's a different thing. Very generational. Yes. Yes. But I mean, in general, you're having to you sort of like you want to move forward, but and by the way about grief, it's not like moving on because we're sort of shaped by every experience that we have, but it's about moving forward. So people always say about grief, you need to move on. No, you need to move forward. Let's just talk about that. Um, so you let's say you have to move forward. It's very hard to move forward when you're watching the other person's life. You're not moving forward at all. They're moving forward. Maybe you don't really know. But why are you spending so much time watching someone else move forward? Can we focus on how you might move forward? Whatever that might look like, but it's really hard when you have this like split screen of their life is happening and your life is happening. I definitely want to talk about grief. Um before we do that, I' I'd like to kind of double click into this uh breakup thing. Um in my observation and experience, one of the hardest things about breakups is uh this idea that we we want to somehow um come to a common narrative. And there seems to be a lot of um desire to kind of understand where the other the other person's experience of of what happened. um and a very I don't I don't think it's intentional, but I think people can be somewhat um destructive in a breakup by um changing the whole this notion like the like it was all an illusion or something or you know where you know I mean I I guess I've had enough relationships and breakups to realize that you know there's love that continues there's things that you thought were love that weren't. I mean, there's there's love that doesn't continue and and the there's all sorts of shapes and forms of this stuff, but that um like good well-meaning people that take divergent paths um I've learned it doesn't mean that um anything else. Sometimes it it literally just means that right there isn't a need to rewrite the script like it wasn't what I thought. it actually was what I thought and then it was something different or it just circumstances changed or things changed. I'm not trying to make light of this. I mean I I would argue I'm probably one of the least skilled people at breakups although I've gotten quote unquote better at it. It's always super painful. Like I've never had a breakup that didn't really hurt. It doesn't matter if I left or they left. That just didn't really hurt. And I think it's this idea of like, and this is why I think it's an interesting perhaps segue to grief is that it's almost like as something ends, we look back and and we we evaluate the story. Mhm. And try and figure out, was that real? Right. Was it not real? How could that have been real? And then we're here, right? There was all this hope and expectation. And I um yeah, I think about this a lot. Yeah. So sometimes what the loss is about isn't so much about the other person. It's about the loss of what it feels like to be in a primary relationship. So you're losing the primary relationship and then happens to be with this specific person. And so there were good qualities about that specific person and qualities that maybe weren't right for you, but what you're losing is the dailiness. So, so much of what feels good about being in a primary relationship is, you know, you get to tell the person the minutiae of your day, the little things, um, the shared history and the shared experiences that become the shortorthhand and the inside jokes and the routine of, you know, you your flight landed, who are you going to text? Oh, text your partner, right? Um, you know, just the the built-in infrastructure of being in a primary relationship and someone who knows like what kind of pizza you like and you know all those little things that come from, you know, going through daily life together and you know all the things about their families and you know all the things about the people in their lives and the people they're talking about like this friend and this boss and whatever their co-workers. Um, so it's this whole world that's been co-created and then all of a sudden when that person isn't there anymore that the daily of your life changes drastically. like you're not waking up with that person, you're not eating meals with that person, you're not talking about what's for dinner with that person, you're not um saying you're wondering how that thing with their sister worked out, but you don't know now because right and you're losing the side kind of shared people too. Like you might have liked that person's family a lot. Sometimes you stay in touch with the family, but sometimes you don't. Um so like your world changes so much in the day-to-day. You're not just losing that person, you're losing an entire world that you were living in. And now your world looks so different and you have nothing to replace it with yet. So it doesn't mean you have to replace it with another partner. You might replace it with things in your own life, but you just, you know, breakups tend to happen. Um maybe you saw the breakup coming, but you're not really imagining what it will be like after until you're in it. you can't really really understand what it's like until you're in that breakup phase. So, I think that that makes it so hard because you're losing a lifestyle, right? Like the daily of your life. And um you know, it's like it's like when you're in a relationship, you're in the present, but you're also in the future. So, you imagined that the present was going to be the future. And now, mother of all plot twist, the future was just taken away along with the present. So, it's not just you're losing the day-to-day, you're losing what you imagine next year was going to be like in five years were going to be like. So, it's a huge thing. Um, it's so interesting because in in my most recent book, it starts with my breakup and that's how I end up in therapy. And my whole thing is like, you know, the idiot compassion that we were talking about with my friends of he's a jerk and he's terrible and you dodged a bullet. my therapist, which who I thought was going to validate this position, um didn't for the for the better. Um and so by the end of the book, you know, people even write in now, they're like, "Oh, I can't believe I call him boyfriend in the book. I can't believe he did that." And I'm like, "No, no, no, no. I was trying to say he's a good guy." Like, you have to understand that I was seeing this through the lens of the breakup. And then over time, I see that I was responsible for this, too. I had a role in this, too. I chose not to see the things that I didn't want to see because I didn't want to live in that world of the breakup. Right. So, um, so I think it's it's uh wanting what you were saying earlier about wanting to have a shared narrative like we feel so wounded by the fact that the person let's say that they broke up with us um or even if you break up with them that they don't see the relationship the way you saw it. like they had a different experience of it and you feel like well they're not seeing it in the right way. No, they're just seeing it. They are seeing it in the right way from their perspective. And I think that we have this way of wanting to heal the wound by they're saying, "Oh, no, no, you were great in this relationship. It was me." Or, "We were both great and it just didn't work out." Yes. Yes. Right. Right. But and we so want that. And and and the reality is that um your partner's going to see things about you that maybe you don't agree with or maybe they're true and that's why they hurt. I always find I miss the person's smell. Yes. It's those little things, those kind of intangibles. I think that takes the longest. Yeah. Uh I have a really good uh audio memory, too. I can like close my eyes. have been able to do this since I was a kid and hear people's voices. Mhm. And um Yeah. Um but like smells I think um we come to expect them. Yeah. Um and then we don't notice they're there. Yeah. And then the person's gone and then we're like, "Wow, it smells different here." So there's this theory. It's it's from the Gottmans who do this research on couples and they talk about the bank of goodwill that you need five deposits into the bank of goodwill for every one withdrawal. And so we tend to when we're in a relationship, we don't like something about something that's happening in the relationship. We think about what's not working. We're taking all these withdrawals from the Bank of Goodwill. But like things like smell, that's a deposit. Like you smell so good. I really like your smell. Do we say that enough? Do we focus on the things like how many deposits are we actually making so that when we do make a withdrawal, it doesn't empty the bank account? And it it's usually when a breakup happens that all of a sudden we think about all those things that we didn't deposit but now we miss, right? That were sitting in our bank account and we don't have access to that account anymore. The account's closed. But when the account was open, we didn't look at what we had in there. And I think that the people who are what I see with couples who are most successful are the people who do notice what's in the bank account, even if they have to take a withdrawal every now and again. I'm always um struck by how people talk about their partners when their partners aren't around. Very important. Um the other day this kid came up to me in the gym kid. He was probably in his 30s, but there I go again. um he was a podcast fan. We were just chatting. I like to ask people like what do you do and he's in uh tech I think now I don't recall but um and uh like where are you from? And he's like he's from Brazil. Cool. You know and then we were talking about something. He said you know my girlfriend um and then we got into some discussion about about travel in South America or something and then at one point he said oh yeah yeah she's like my flower. And the way you said it, I was like, "Wow, that's beautiful." You know, again, I'm half half Latin and um but I haven't heard that enough. And I was like, "Wow." And I said, "That's amazing that you just referred to her as a flower." He goes, "Yes, she's just she's like the flower in my life." And I was like, "Wow." Like, "You don't hear that often." You know, I also don't get into conversations like this very often, but somehow he just shared that spontaneously. Yeah. And uh she wasn't there to hear it. I can't remember the guy's name, forgive me. um she'll never know that I that he referred to her that way, but it was really beautiful. Yeah. And there's certain people um like I heard Rogan one day talking about his wife on a podcast. He was like she's just so nice. Like he just the appreciation he has for her in the in the in the small details of how he refers to her. Um and those are just two examples. And then I could give a bunch of negative examples about people. Gosh, I I don't want to put it on one or the other side of the male female dynamic, but like but when people say like, "Oh, yeah, like they're a pain in my ass or like the um referring to people as their old lady or their old man." Like that's that's an interesting but kind of in my mind not the sweetest um way. Maybe it could be. Maybe it depends on the tone. Anyway, I'm I'm casting a lot of um shadows and light where where perhaps I shouldn't. That interaction was delightful and I thought awesome for him and awesome for her. That's why I often start a couple session with how did you meet? Because usually when people come to couples therapy they think the first thing that's going to happen is you're going to say so what's going on? What's not you know what's then they'll start with the problem and then they're like in that withdrawal from the bank account space. So, I like to say, "Well, tell me how you met." And immediately, usually there's like, "Oh," and they have this great story, right? And they they remember what they love about the other person. So, we start with that. And you can see them sort of remembering who the person is that they fell in love with. Like, oh, I thought he was so cute or um, you know, oh, was this really we were friends for a year and I didn't know if he liked me and then this happened and then I really admired this about him or her, right? And so they start in this different space. And I think I think about it like, and this is going to sound like a weird metaphor, but you think about like non-stick pans versus like, you know, a regular pan that you have to put something in so that the stuff doesn't stick to it. When I think about like there are people for whom the good stuff, they're like teflon pans. The good stuff doesn't stick, but the bad stuff about the other person sticks like a non-stick, like a like a a pan that sticks, right? So, it's like you think about like what is sticking about your partner when you when you think about like what they're putting in the pan, right? Like are you a teflon pan for good things or are you an you know, a different kind of pan for for good things? Because you have to think like what am I focusing on? Where does my attention go? And so, you know, why are you focusing on the things that are upsetting you so much? And you know, there there are there are certain things that you're never going to change about your partner. like your partner. We don't get to order up our partners all a cart. We don't get to say like, I'll take these qualities of my partner, but I'll take this thing that I don't like about them on the side. You don't get to do that. People come, there are no substitutions. They come as a whole. That's it. That's what's offered on the menu. And so people think, well, I can change the thing that I don't like and I can like make that person all a cart. You can't do that. You can't order them up that way. So, there are always going to be things that irritate you or that are suboptimal in in a perfect world about your partner. Are you going to focus on that or are you going to focus on the things that you really love about your partner? There's a saying from 12step which is identify don't compare which is um like because you'll hear people outside of 12step talking about for instance um you know like uh you know well he's this this and this and ambitious and this and that but he's like kind of emotionally unavailable but he's more available and and people will talk about male or female partners right um or potential partners as like or people that they're dating as if you to cluge together the best of all people and get this like perfect tapestry of the person that's got all the features you want because yeah some people are a little more um easygoing light-hearted and sometimes not always less ambitious. Those things in my experience tend to correlate not always. Some people are super hard driving. They get it done and they have the capacity to be immense providers but they have less time and sometimes they're not as emotionally available. Again stereotyping like crazy here. Um but people get this idea that they're sort of like com through the comparison they can arrive at the perfect person when in fact I think appreciation not being teflon about the positive stuff comes from kind of shutting out the idea that there's an alternative but of course you don't want to end up in a situation where the person is you know not truly not good for you right well right that's not what I'm talking about right and I don't think you are but yeah with that caveat I think that um accepting that people are complicated And there is no cluing together of people. At some point you make a choice. And this is when people cheat. What often happens is there's a there's a specific quality about their partner. Maybe sometimes it has nothing to do with your partner. By the way, and I think this is so important to talk about when we talk about infidelity that often it really has nothing to do with the partner that somebody is expecting their partner again going back to vitality and aliveness to provide that for them. And if the partner doesn't provide that for them, but your partner shouldn't be providing that for you. They're additive. They're not providing a lack or a deficit in you. Um that sometimes that's why people cheat. But other times they say like there's this quality about my partner that is really, you know, like I don't like it. Um like let's take for example, um I wish that my partner were more, let's say, ambitious. So they go and they like cheat with someone who's more ambitious, but then the person isn't loving or isn't communicative or isn't, you know, whatever the other good qualities that the partner they have has. So they think that by replacing this one trait that the other person's going to have all the other great traits that the existing partner already has. And generally you're trading like one set of problems for another set of problems. So, it's interesting that people think like, I can fix this problem because this person has that thing that I really want. Now, if your partner doesn't have any of that, like it's a degree. It's on a spectrum. So, is your partner not ambitious at all? Or is your partner ambitious about different kinds of things? Like, they want to be a really good parent and they're really, you know, invested in that or they want to do something like philanthropic and they're really invested in that but it doesn't pay a lot, you know? So like what are they like what energizes them? What where is their purpose? Where is their meaning? You know, there's different kinds of ambition. I feel like um placing one's attention on the good things uh as much as possible and and really and really letting those fill us up as much as possible is really key. I I didn't say this. I I borrowed this, but you know that um two of the most dangerous words in the English language are if only. you know this this idea like if only this you know because for two reasons one is it's very unlikely that if only comes true but the other one is it it takes our our attention away from seeing what what's there right so I like to say it's the difference between the what if and the what is and people who focus too much on the what if what if this lose sight of what is and usually there's so much good that's that they really don't want to give up in the what is so If you're going to keep focusing on the what if, you can you blind yourself to the what is. And I think the what if is a big trap. Yeah. I think this this notion of of of attention and appreciation um just seems so so fundamental. Well, it's kind of like think of it. So I I am sort of an amateur photographer and I think about it like you can take a picture of you can like focus on the same subject, you can f focus on one part of it or you can just move the camera slightly and then you're focused on something entirely different but it's the same thing that I'm taking a picture of. Right? So I always say to people like can you your focus is always on this can you like move the camera slightly and focus you know find a different part to focus the camera on. If you're always focusing on something that makes you unhappy, you're going to be unhappy. So, why don't you just move the camera and focus on the other things? You get to choose. People think they have no choice in the matter, right? Like, well, my brain just goes there. My mind just goes there. It's like, no, you get to choose what you put your attention on. You actually have a choice. What I love about what's coming through here is that you emphasize the role of these unconscious processes. we default to people that aren't healthy for us sometimes, not always. Um, and yet you also emphasize that we have a lot of agency these days. It seems like there's a default toward um looking outward. You know, for all that's been said about meditation and reflection and journaling on this podcast and others, like we all know these tools are available, they basically just take time. I mean, with meditation, you don't even need a pen and paper. Mhm. Um but we tend to look outward for for answers. Um do you ever give homework to your patients to just like think or journal or is there work tend to be more behavioral? you know, it's kind of like I feel like the work that we do in the room is about understanding um and you know, and and understanding sort of like where the gap is between what we say we want and what we actually do. Mhm. So, usually there is it's all about what is in that gap, what is getting in the way because we're very clear by the way about what we want usually and then there's like some gap between our behavior that isn't moving in that direction. In fact, moves us often either keeps us stuck or moves us in the opposite direction. So, it's kind of out in the world between sessions. We're working on the behavior around what is getting in the way in that gap. And then we're doing kind of the thinking and the feeling in the session. I don't mean that people aren't thinking and feeling outside of session. It means they're using their feelings and their thoughts differently. They're taking different actions with the feelings and thoughts outside of the session. Do you ever tell people um whatever whenever you think that just do the opposite? So, it's really funny because so many people say like your gut knows, right? Like listen to your gut. And for some people, because it's historical, right? Like what's in their gut? It's like no, no, no, don't listen to your gut. And it sounds really strange for a therapist to say to somebody, no, don't listen to your gut. But sometimes you literally have to say to people, whatever your first instinct is there, do the opposite. Do the thing that feels uncomfortable. Because your gut is what feels comfortable. And the thing that feels comfortable again is the familiar. and the familiar isn't necessarily the thing that is going to lead you to where you want to go. So, it's not like I want people to second guessess themselves or not trust themselves. It's that sometimes you have to learn how to hear that very very quiet voice inside you because your gut is the louder one, right? Your gut is your first instinct and it's the kind of the pre-program, the pattern, the automatic response. Like if you think when we talk about sort of like neurological pathways, there's this like freeway that's been built with this one response. Like here's the input, right? And here's the map that that follows. Like this person did this and you're going to like travel down that freeway because that's been the well-paved road because you've done it a million times. Doesn't really work out for you. I want people to create kind of side roads and different roads and let's take a different path and let's let's kind of dig out a new um like a new road, right? that now. So, your first instinct is still going to be like, let's get on the freeway. And I'm like, no, let's take a side road. Let's do something a little bit different. Let's take a different path and let's that path will now become the new freeway because you're going to keep going down. You know, we're going to dig out that path. The freeway is going to not be trafficked on. We're going to shut down that freeway eventually and you're going to have a new freeway that's your automatic path. So, right now, you've got to do the opposite to build this new freeway. I just mixed 20 metaph metaphors, but the the point is that um sometimes your gut is just taking you down a welltrodden path that is not the best path for you. There's a great line in that movie High Fidelity based on the Nick Hornby novel, which I also highly recommend where he's like, you know, people tell me that we should listen to our gut. Well, after what 30 years, I've come to the conclusion that my gut has for brains. you know, like, you know, he's just realizing that his his reflex on what to do with, you know, his relationship life is just completely off. Um, some people will hear what we're talking about right now and we'll say, "Yeah, but um, my gut also tells me when I'm in danger." We're obviously not talking about when you can sense danger. So, here's the thing. So, what feels dangerous sometimes, so your gut is trying to protect you. So what feels dangerous is going into this new situation because it's uncomfortable to do something different. So your gut is saying, "Oh, let's do the comfortable thing that we've always done." Even if the comfortable thing makes you miserable, let's do the comfortable thing that we've always done because it feels very dangerous to try this new thing. But sometimes doing the thing that feels dangerous is actually less dangerous. Oh my. So, so in other words, people say a lot of times people say, "I don't want to take a risk. It's too risky." But sometimes the safest thing you can do is to take a risk. Doing the safe thing is actually, you know, you say it's too risky. If the safest thing you can do is to take a risk because it's going to lead you closer to what you want to accomplish or the thing that you're trying to get toward. I um completely agree. Uh, I also in my in my life I've had the experience of I've taken big risks with my career multiple times and it's always worked out. Thank goodness. A lot of my teen years and 20s and 30s were were spent um learning to overcome the adrenaline response. Mhm. And I learned to take progressively more and more risk and you know ended up having a air failure scuba diving cage at diving with great white sharks. I don't say this to sound tough. I say this cuz it's like what was I thinking? I was I took it too far. Mh. Right? You know, so I think learning to overcome the adrenaline response and be calm and adrenaline I think has its value. Um, I also took tremendous risk in my personal life getting involved with people I never should have gotten involved with. And I blame myself. I don't blame them, right? I mean, I was in choice. So, I can imagine that some people are so averse to uh danger that they they don't put themselves into circumstances in which they could really come to thrive. And some people are just wired to um go into the fire to the point where it's destructive. Yeah. Either in with with with physical pursuits or in uh romantic relationships. You know, I I I'll take take it outside my own story. I mean, I I have a a friend, a dear friend who um you know was in an like an incredibly physically abusive relationship number 12. Mhm. And she eventually came to the conclusion that her threat sensing um threshold was just way too high. Did some really good work to understand why that was and realized that her fear response didn't kick in until it was like a nine alarm fire, right? And so, you know, she needed um to listen to that, as you mentioned, that like super quiet whisper early on um because anyone else who didn't have her history, which is sadly a very, very challenging history in her family would have um immediately been like, "Yeah, I'm out." But she was like, "This is normal." Yeah. when um when I was in medical school, I remember the people who wanted to work in the ER were like who were like, I want to do emergency medicine were people often who um grew up in environments where danger was a part of it, right? So, they're used to that and it doesn't really strike them as like their their sense of danger, their barometer is different from maybe a different person's. Um I think of it as like a thermostat. When you think about like let's say you want to set your thermostat at like 72 degrees, right? Some people their thermostat is off because in their house like they did the slightest thing and their parents treated it like it was a huge horrible mistake and they're bad and it was an emergency, right? So they don't know how to calibrate like what does 72 actually feel like? or the opposite like some big thing happened and their parents underreacted and so they don't really know kind of like what is what does 72 feel like? I don't really know what that like good temperature is like. So, I think that there's a lot of um people who stay in situations that are like it's like other people would say, "Whoa, it's like 100 degrees in here. Get out. There's a fire." Right? And this person's like, "No, it's just it feels like 72." They don't know. Um and so it's really about recalibrating. And I think when we talk about risk and danger, you have to learn how to calibrate your own thermostat. And I think that that's that's really important. We talk about the difference between productive anxiety and unproductive anxiety. So unproductive anxiety is there's some kind of danger and I'm going to ruminate and ruminate and ruminate and I'm thinking about it all the time and and somehow that's going to keep me safe because I'm thinking about it. And then there's productive anxiety which is oh it's good that I sense the danger because I'm going to do something about this. Like I have a plan for how to deal with this. So, it might be I'm in this relationship and it just doesn't feel right, but and this person is is acting this way toward me and I know I shouldn't be treated this way, but I don't know, maybe it's okay. And that's not productive. That's just anxiety. You're just circling, ruminating. Productive anxiety would be like, "Something's wrong. Like, I shouldn't be treated this way. So, my plan is I'm going to try to talk to my partner about this or we're going to go to therapy about this and see if it improves. And if it doesn't, I'm going to leave to find a different relationship." You're right. You want to sense danger but the question is is it productive or is it unproductive? What do we do with it? So people when I say like trust your gut some some somebody might say well my gut is that like when things are really unpleasant you stick with it because my parent stuck with my other parent when things are really unpleasant and that's what you do right so that doesn't make sense. So, I think that do the opposite in that case. It's like, oh, you think you're supposed to stay in this case because your parents did like do the opposite. See what happens if you do something different. We hear that um there's value to being able to be on one's own, right? Like, you know, some people seem to always need to be in a relationship and um some people probably don't. But um do you think there's value to people really understanding themselves first? I know some couples that got together in like their first year of college that are still together. Uh they have kids now in college, which is a trip and they seem super happy. They are super happy from what I know. And I know people that have had many relationships and then find somebody and some people take time on their own, some people don't. How important is this notion about knowing oneself really? Yeah. So when you look at what are the factors that determine the success of a relationship or a marriage um emotional maturity is number one. Number two by the way is flexibility. That being with someone incredibly rigid is very hard. Define rigid. Uh rigid is things have to be this way in the practical space like toothpaste has to be on the right not on the left kind of thing. And emotionally rigid like this is wrong, this is right, this is the way you do it, this is not the way you do it. um you know you behave this way, you don't behave this way as opposed to people have different personalities. They have different ways of communicating. Um, and yes, the rigidity around sort of like the household of course too, but just a rigid personality, you know, like I can't leave it this time. I have to leave it this time. We have to be here now, you know, like whatever. We can't there's no flexibility around anything. Or even flexibility around plans. Like when you get married, you don't know what 5 years, 10 years down the line is going to be like. Are you flexible with how you're moving in whatever direction the other person is moving in whatever direction? Like if you need things to be static, that's very rigid. And it's hard because people are not static. There are things about their core personality that tend to be static, but people evolve. And so you have to leave room for the evolution of of there are three entities. There's you, there's the other person, and there's the relationship. And all three of those entities are going to evolve over time. And if you don't have flexibility and you insist that they stay exactly the same, that's going to be problematic. Going back to whether somebody needs to spend time alone before they get into a relationship or how much you need to know yourself before you get into a relationship. I think people have this misconception that they have to be fully formed and then before they can get into a relationship. And the thing is that you grow in connection with others. And so people you're saying you're so surprised that these people met in college and you know they've been together all this time and of course they were so young. Oh no I'm not surprised. Okay. No, no, no. I'm I'm envious. Okay. uh because they in a in a in a in a light way because they got their first jobs in parallel. They they uh sadly their parents passed away in parallel. They they went through a number of life evolutions together. Their life story is a co-mingled story. Yes. You know, it reminds me of um I had a therapy client who was divorced and she was talking about dating again and she met someone great and she said, "I love this person so much and this person is actually a much better person for me, but there's a sadness that she said he will never have met my parents cuz they had died. um he will not know like all these things about who I was when I was 25 or 35 or you know what it was like when I went through this particular thing in life or you know again like the you know wasn't there with with the birth of our children um didn't know our kids at that age. So it's true that there there's something very um important about having a shared history. It's not end all beall. She's happier in that second marriage. But there is something to be said about people think, well, I have to wait until I'm at this point before I can seriously consider dating someone who might become my life partner. And I think that you grow in connection with people or people say, you know, like, I'm not ready to be in a relationship because I don't know enough about myself. You're going to learn so much more about yourself when you are with someone because you're forced to. someone's holding up a mirror to you. It's like how I say that, you know, I was saying earlier that when I see couples, people grow individually so much faster because they're in relationship with someone and really having that mirror held up to them. I mean, you can sit there and think like by yourself till the, you know, till you turn blue in the face. But the reality is no one's giving you feedback. You're not interacting. You're not pushing up against anything. Yeah, I totally agree. I mean certainly most of my uh evolution has been in relation to other things and not just romantic relationships. I mean like like jobs that didn't feel right that I eventually moved on to a different job. Like you just learn so much based also on what didn't work. Yeah. I mean there's there's real information there. I definitely want to uh go back to grief and talk about loss, but I feel like um there's a hatch that we opened earlier that I'd like to um peer into for a bit, which is this um male female distinction dynamic uh that nowadays is very prominent especially in um I would say people like 40 and younger. Um it's so different now um in terms of the dynamics of what boys and men hear about boys and men generally what girls and women hear about girls generally and therefore how like we think about ourselves. But um you have a son. Mhm. What do you think are some of the positive things that have evolved in this kind of landscape and then what do what do you think are some of the things that are are creating problems for for sake of romantic relationship but also just relationship to self? I think romantically um it's very hard for young people like in their teens and early 20s because they they don't have kind of an infrastructure around romantic relationships. Um there's not the typical kind of courting um because it feels kind of old. Guys don't ask girls out on dates anymore. They they they do but they don't really know how or they do it on text, right? um as opposed to just like there's something really profound about having to call someone on the phone and ask them out on a date. You grow so much as a person by doing that and it kind of sets the stage for the relationship as well. Um or asking someone out in person. It's hard. You're really vulnerable. So, it's easy to kind of avoid vulnerability because you can do so many things on text and, you know, pretend that it's not a vulnerable act. Um, and people, you know, don't necessarily even call it a date, you know, it's like, hey, you want to hang out? Um, you know, which is just it's kind of the language around it. So, there's not sort of like the structure of we're going on a date that's much less common. Whereas in in your era and my era, it was much more like you knew when you were being asked on a date. It was it was not so ambiguous. Um, and I think social media makes it really hard because, you know, any misstep someone's going to post about it potentially or they've got you on video or things that are really embarrassing or scary when you're first getting into a relationship with someone. You know, that could become if you're with the wrong person who's emotionally immature. And many young people, you know, they're they're learning and growing. Um they do all kinds of things that humiliate the other person, you know, like here's a list of someone's red flags that I'm going to share with everybody. Can you imagine? And it's on social media. So teens are doing this, people in their 20s are doing this. Yes. Yes. Or can you believe someone, you know, like information that should remain private does not remain private. I'm not talking about things that are bad that someone did that are like need to be reported. I'm talking about like embarrassing things or someone was, you know, socially unskilled. Her breath was bad. His his his he smelled bad. That kind of thing. Yeah. Anything like or or you know, this is this is what or this is what he did on the date that was, you know, embarrassing. Um, you know, he did this weird impression or, you know, whatever it is. Um, but also just like sexual encounters or you know like nothing feels totally private like you just the level of trust that you have to have in your partner now that were just was just taken for granted. Like sure people might have said something to their best friend but they also had better boundaries around that. Like you kind of knew in our society what was private and what was not. And because people grow up on social media, they don't really have experience with this sort of there's a private sphere and there's a public sphere. So, it's all kind of blurred and they don't really learn like what is private and what is not. And I think it's really nerve-wracking for people. So, people don't take we were talking about risk. People don't take risks in relationships. They don't they aren't really vulnerable because they're afraid that um you know they will be humiliated. So what do you think the need is to um to share that with the world? Is it because then they don't have to acknowledge that it might have been at least in part them like like if you paint red flags on somebody then it it can't then you're the person painting is not the one under scrutiny, right? I think they just feel hurt and they want to feel and so they feel like a dip in their self-esteem and they want to feel validated. And of course, if they make this list, their friends are going to say, "Yeah, you dodged a bullet. This person wasn't right for you. You deserve better." Um, and then they feel better about it. But you don't grow from that. So the thing is that if you can sit with that really hurts and this isn't and like this person is not the arbiter of my selfworth whoever broke up with me and for whatever reason you know just because someone doesn't value you doesn't mean you don't have value and I think that's a really important lesson for people to learn. So, you know, if I took like a a a some gold, right? Like a a brick of gold and um you know, and someone said like, "I don't like that. I like silver or I like whatever I like, right?" Doesn't mean the gold inherently lost value. It means that for that person that block of gold didn't have value, but the gold has the same amount of value that it had. And I think that we tend to kind of consider somebody else's opinion of us to be the arbiter of our worth. And it's not like your worth is stable and people some people will value it, some people won't. Find the people who value it because those are the people that you want to be with. But it doesn't mean that you have less value because somebody doesn't value it or you have more value because someone does value it. You have the same amount of value either way. But I think young people are not, you know, it always hurts. We talked about breakups earlier, they always hurt. And especially when you're young and you don't have experience, but my concern is that they're not getting the experience of um of kind of sitting with it. And yes, you want you want to, you know, have your friends support you and all of that, but I think once you start posting about it or once you start kind of vilifying the other person, you're not learning the lesson. you're not learning how to deal with loss in your adult clients. Um, how much of the struggle that you hear about in terms of romantic relationships relates to again uh online aspects like uh apps and things like that? Do you think they facilitated things or or made them um relationships more challenging? Well, I think what the apps do is there's a phenomenon that Barry Schwarz talks about in his book, The Paradox of Choice. And it's the idea that the more choice we have, the less happy we are. So, you need some choice, but it's kind of like, think of like a fishbowl, an aquarium, and an ocean. Fishbowl is not enough choice, just too constrained. Ocean, too much choice. You're like, "Yeah, there's no direction. Oh my gosh." The aquarium is perfect. It's a certain amount of choice, but it's manageable. You don't get flooded. you don't get overwhelmed. So, they did these experiments where like you'd be able to test out like we have this new jam and um we have uh 10 different flavors and which one do you like best and which one are you going to pick? People would get so overwhelmed they didn't even want to try them. They're like it's too much or we have two flavors. Which one do you like better? Right? Manageable. Um so there are people who are what we call satisficers and people who are maximizers. So, satisficers, well, let me tell you about maximizers first. Maximizers are people, let's say you want to buy a sweater, okay? You go into the store, you find a sweater that you like. Um, it's the right material, it's the right price, it fits you well, it's the right color, it's good. Great. The maximizer says, "But maybe I can find something better." So, I'm going to take that sweater. I'm going to put it on bottom of the pile so that nobody buys it. I'm going to go to the store next door and I'm going to see if they have something better. Maybe something's on sale. Maybe it's slightly higherend material, whatever it is, right? Um, but they keep going to stores and they keep doing this and then they think, "Oh, well, I found the greatest sweater ever and I'm going to get that one." Guess what? They are less satisfied with that purchase than the person who the satisficer who would have bought that first sweater in that first store and would have been super happy with that sweater. It's all opportunity cost. Okay. Because all of the the the energy, the emotional and cognitive energy that went into maximizing something for what kind of benefit? Like what percent benefit? Not much. compared to the amount of energy that they spent trying to maximize, they're never satisfied because even when they get that great product, something better is going to come out. There's going to be a new color that comes out like two weeks later that was in none of the stores. So, you're always kind of looking over if you're a maximizer, you're always kind of looking over your shoulder for like, what if something better is out there? In dating, that's what the apps are like. You go out with someone, you have a good time. You think, well, no butterflies, you know, no sparks, pretty good time, but I don't know. Um, I can go back on the apps. You go back on the apps, look at all the people there. Maybe they're better on this dimension or that dimension. And so what it does is it turns everyone into maximizers because there's an illusion of choice. Like not everybody you see is going to be better. And again, we don't get the allocart option with people. So there will be different dimensions in which people are more aligned with what you're looking for. But no one's going to be like perfect, right? So why are we looking for perfection? Why don't we look for And by the way, the satisficers are not settling. This isn't about like eh I'll just settle for something. It's like that sweater was great. You liked everything about it. You don't need to look for anything more. Will there be if you pick a partner, will there be someone more attractive? Of course. Will there be someone less attractive? Of course. Right. And by the way, if we treat dating like shopping, we forget that um in shopping we're the choosers. But in dating, someone has to choose us, too. And we, by the way, are not perfect. So, an exercise that I like to do with clients is I want you to write down all the reasons that it would be difficult to date you. So instead of making a list of all the qualities you want in a partner like the partner has to be this, they have to be that, they have to, you know, have these interests, they have to have this amount of ambition, they have to um look a certain way, they have to have these interests, whatever it is. Um I want you to write down everything that would make it difficult. What a great exercise to be with you. And some people, it's kind of like in a job interview and they say, "What are your weaknesses?" And we tend to say things that sound positive, you know, like my weakness is that I work too hard, that I'm too dedicated, that I can't, you know, let go. It's a non right. So, you have to be scrupulously honest with yourself. So, what makes it hard to be with you? And if you're really honest with yourself, suddenly you're less of a maximizer, right? because suddenly you're like, "Oh, someone is thinking about the things that, you know, they're looking at me holistically as well." And overall, I'm a pretty good package, but there are things that, you know, maybe they could maximize if they really wanted to, but then they're going to have to give up some other qualities that I have that the other person might not have. So, I think it's really important not to think about dating as shopping. And I think that people who grew up on apps tend to treat dating like shopping and they don't sit there and make the list of, oh, I can be this way and that makes it hard, you know, for someone to be with me. And you could name a million reasons. Oh, and by the way, I tell them that for all the traits you're looking for, however, whatever that number is, because they tend to have a lot, right? It's not just like I need these three things. It's like I need these 20 things. The list, right? The list. So I said for every um quality that you're looking for, whatever number that is, if it's 20, you need to name 20 things that make it hard to be with you. So it can't be like there are two things that make it hard to be with you, but you have a list of 20 things that you want. Do you think that after people make that list that they might take a look at that list and and make some effort to um like reduce or eliminate some things from that list? Is that good selfwork? Like if somebody is super rigid about punctuality, anyone that knows me clearly uh that's not me. Um like I know some people that are so rigid about that. Let's say someone identifies that as one of the things that can be really difficult. Like they get really upset if somebody's 5 minutes late. I've interacted with these people. You're very difficult. Um to be around as an academic everything starts 10 minutes late. We end late. That's how it works. But um should they try to resolve that or or reduce that that feature or should they look at the list and say you know what like I'm not going to change that or this thing well I should probably change that. What else can the list do for for people? Okay so relationships are like cement. So when you're first putting down right the cement it's wet and it's malleable. Um when it dries it's very hard to then now you have to like dig it up. So, let's say that punctuality is really important for someone and they think, well, I don't want to rock the boat. It's the beginning of the relationship. So, yeah, this person comes late all the time, but I'm going to say nothing about it and I'm going to be cool with that even though I'm not. And I'm sitting there seething every time they come late, right? And it's kind of like in the first three months of a relationship, I think it was Chris Rock who said this, in the first three months of a relationship, you're not you, you're the ambassador of you. So sometimes people will, you know, who really are not punctual will be punctual and then they'll change. That's not what I'm talking about. Um, I'm talking about someone who, you know, someone has they're just not a punctual person like you're saying you are. So if you're dating someone and that person is is telling themselves like, I'm not going to bring it up. I don't want to rock the boat. It's early in the relationship. The cement is wet. This is when you need to bring it up. So because if you don't, what happens is it's like 6 months down the line. The person is like, "I can't believe you're late. What just h you know, why are you you're always late? You don't prioritize me." It's like the person's like, "I'm this is the first time hearing about this." Like the person has had a no opportunity to change it if they want to, but b no opportunity to explain. So, it might be that as happened with one of my therapy clients, the person was always late, but it was because he was trying to please her cuz she wanted to have dinner. He knew that she liked to eat on the earlier side. He worked really late. So, he was trying to kind of like get his work done and get there. And he was always late because he was trying to like be there when she wanted to have dinner. So, he said like, "I'm late because I do prioritize you. I'm actually leaving work early to be with you, but I should have just said I can't be here at this time." That's what I should have said. And I was worried you would get mad because it would be too late for you. So, you see the assumption that she made was you don't care about me. I'm not important to you. Your work is more important. And he's saying no, I actually was leaving work to be with you and I still couldn't get there on time. So, we need to figure out how to work this out. Like, can we have dinner later because I'm just going to be late if we do it earlier and you know what can we work out? So, that's an example of if you just bring it up early, you don't build up all these stories about the other person. This person doesn't care. they don't prioritize me, whatever the story is that you're making about that person. Um, and you have a chance to see is the person willing to do something about it or if they're not, are you willing to be flexible and say, you know what, this person, they just run late. And I like so many other things about them and I'm going to adjust to the fact that this is one thing that in a perfect world, I would like them to be more punctual, but there's so many great things that this is one thing that I'm going to adjust to. weaving this with what we were talking about earlier about gut sense um and the validity or lack of validity of gut sense. Um I certainly have had the experience and I know many other people have that after a relationship ends or when it's ending they think back and they go you know there was that thing at the beginning and I knew it then but I pushed it aside like I is that just a story we tell ourselves. I think that the most important question to ask yourself after you go on a first date or a second date or a third date is how do I feel when I'm with this person? Because all the other stuff is just kind of like a a cognitive exercise, right? Like so one of my clients, she was said to herself like I don't want to date any she was in her early 30s and she said I don't I want to have kids with a partner. Um, I'm 31 years old. I don't want to date anyone. I'll date someone who's divorced, but I won't date someone who has kids. She met someone online. Um, the it didn't have the kid question in that particular app that she was using. Um, she went to meet him on the first date. She's having such a good time and it comes up that he has a kid. And she was having such a good time that she really debated like, should I go out with him again? not go out with him again. This is not what I want. I don't want to deal with that. It's too messy and it's not what I imagined. If she had known on that dating app that he had, you know, it had asked if he had kids and he had put that, she would never have met him. That is her husband. She is so happy. I mean, they've been married now for like 15 years. They have kids together. They have the other kid. She's so happy. So I think that when we make that list that you said like do you should you take things off the list. I think that you need to have flexibility about things that may not matter but you have to be very inflexible about the things that do matter. So character qualities they matter. Um values that align that matters. So those are things that don't be flexible on that. So I just want to make sure I understand. So we're talking about two different lists here. One is a list about a features about the other person. This is what I we hear is like the list. Um the number of times that friends are like you have to make a list. I never get around to making the list. But I like this other list that you described which are all the things about ourselves that would make us difficult to be with. Which list or both do we need to have rigidity versus flexibility on? I'm saying that when we think of that list and by the way a lot of people don't sit there and write a list but they have it in their head. you know, there's this process of I know what I'm looking for or whatever. Some people say like I know it when I see it, but there's really a list in there because you you know what you're looking for and it matches this list in your head. Um, so on that list, I'm saying you need to put more things like character qualities. Are they honest? Are they reliable? Um, can I trust them? Do we have the same kind of vision of the kind of life that we want to lead? Um, you know, where are we aligned on those important things? cuz those things are those are those are sort of hard to bridge those gaps. Um you know like they're just going to keep coming up and and be very difficult to deal with things like do we have to have all the same interests? No. Um you know do we um you know does the person have kids or not? Well, you may that may not be the the ideal choice, but look what happened to this other person that you know like you don't know. I think that question that I'm going back to of how does this person make me feel? if the character qualities are there because sometimes people who don't have the character qualities that you want are very charming and they can make you feel great but if they have the character qualities do I feel calm around this person going back to the this idea of peace and calm um I like this idea somebody had mentioned that I I love this metaphor of of being able to bring your rough drafts to the other person meaning that you don't have to be on all the time with this person that you can bring sort of the rough draft of yourself of this idea of um you know your your kind of imperfect draft and they collaborate with you on that and I think that's so beautiful right that like you can be what it means is you can be yourself and yourself doesn't mean I can be I can act in any way I want I can have no boundaries I can be abusive no that's not the rough draft but it's kind of like I am working this through I'm trying to understand this I'm I'm not perfect sometimes I will make mistakes and can you be comfortable enough around each other to hold yourself accountable but still feel loved by the other person? I love love love the um the criteria for lack of a better word of you know how do I feel when I'm around this person? Yeah. Peace being a uh an anchor point or a place to look for. Um, and when I say how, I mean, do you feel calm? Mhm. Do you feel um content? And so calmness is different from sort of the activation. Um, contentment is different from like out of your mind happy. Of course, in the beginning and hopefully throughout the relationship, there will be times when you feel this like incredible energy around happiness and joy and being around the other person. But most of the time, what you're going to feel around your partner is a sense of safety, a safe place to land, contentment. Um, I enjoy this person's sense of humor. I enjoy sitting with them, even through our silences. I enjoy like sitting on the couch and watching a show with them. Um, I enjoy basically doing anything with them just because I like their presence. That's what I mean. Like, how do you feel? Does their presence feel additive to you? Does it feel like you in just are happier with their presence than you would be without their presence? And sometimes people feel like, "Oh, we have such a strong relationship. We're so drawn to each other." But what you're drawn to is when you're with each other, the presence is volatile. It's it's either like the high highs and the low lows. And that's not, you know, I'm talking about that sense of contentment just being in the other person's presence, the daily of it. There's um so much made of these love languages like their acts of service and I like you know gifts you know all that kind of stuff. Um, you know, I've I've heard it said, you know, what what's what's your love language? And someone, you know, I say all of them. You know, that person was me. All of them. Who doesn't like all of those? You know, both, you know, I like to think I I offer them too, you know. Um, you know, who doesn't like all of those things? But I realize that some people place more value on on certain um gestures and expressions and and I think that's all fine and good. Uh, what I love about what you're saying, however, is that it's more about like a now we're sounding woo, but it's more of like an energetic match. This feeling of safety. You know, that the word peace to me just feel like hold so much value these days. I feel like the two things that I've come to really value more and more are peace and self-respect. Because it's hard to have um peace without self-respect. Yeah. Certainly hard to have self-respect without peace. Now, sometimes lack of peace can be from external things, but then we have to ask ourselves like, do we have any control over these external things? Yeah. I'm curious what your reflections are on on like energy like an energy match. So, instead of love languages, I look at it as understanding each other's operating instructions. We don't get a manual like when you get buy a car or a piece of technology, right? comes with operating instructions so you know exactly how it works like don't push this button do push this button this makes it run more smoothly this will destroy it right so you understand those things so we don't know that about the other person like we make so many assumptions um you know if this person is coming to me to talk about this here's what I would want in that situation so we do that and the person's like no no no I came to talk to you about it I just wanted to vent I don't I I didn't come for you to fix it right but maybe You like it when people fix it. So you you have to learn the other person's operating instructions. So we talk about this idea of love languages. People like all those things. As you said, operating instructions is something so much deeper and more intimate, which is I understand that um being late means this to you, right? I understand that it helps you when you're anxious if my voice gets quieter. instead of, you know, I understand that you need a hug in this moment. Um, I understand that when we're going on a trip, you like to pack this way and I like to pack this way and let's do it our own ways, right? But or you know, just like I understand these things about you and you understand these things about me and so if we understand them, we know how the other person operates and we're going to operate ourselves with an eye toward that. And there's something so loving about understanding somebody's operating instructions and honoring them. And we don't try to figure out the other person. We try to think like why are they acting that way? We don't get curious and ask, "Hey, why are you acting that way? What's going on?" And you learn then, oh well, this is why. And then now you know that in those situations, here's how they can go more smoothly. I rarely ask uh guests on this podcast to editorialize about other guests, but here it feels uh appropriate. Um, Bill Eddie was on this podcast. He's a therapist and lawyer and he wrote the book uh I think it was like five types of people that will ruin your life. And one of the um cardinal features of a person that he claimed will ruin your life is somebody one of the early warning signs, let's not say cardinal features, but is um somebody who has a story about their past failures that's always about how they were wronged by somebody else. Yes. like the victim stance like there's no other word for it. People who are constantly talking about how they were a victim of somebody else. There is a word for it. It's called helprejecting complainers. Help rejecting complainers. So, a help rejecting complainer is a person who is always telling you, you know, this went wrong and it was somebody else's fault and they're seemingly coming to you for advice or guidance and no matter what you say like how about this or have you tried this or have you thought about this? No, that won't work because no, I've tried that that's not going to help. No, because people are like this and that won't help. So, they don't actually want help. it serves them in some way to be to complain and be the victim and be wronged. And so it's almost like, you know, that's that makes them feel better. Um, they don't want to look at themselves. They don't want to look at their role in things. So beware of help rejecting complainers because they're always going to come to you and you're going to at first feel bad for them. You're going to be like, "Wow, they've really had a hard time. Wow, you know, I wonder if I could help them this And then you start to realize they don't want help. They don't want to be helped. They will reject any help that comes their way because if they get help, they can't complain anymore. I'm guessing you see this sometimes in therapy. Oh, and in the world. In the world. We've been making a fair number of assumptions about relationship structure. There so many different permutations these days that we don't have to explore them all. But um do you think that some people are just not well suited for um romantic relationships? Um I've known a few people in my lifetime, a former uh adviser who he passed away as I mentioned earlier, but who um had tried romantic relationships and decided they weren't for him. Um most everyone I know in my life is either partnered or Yeah, pretty much. um thank goodness h happily so um but are there people for whom like they just opt out of the game for reasons that are healthy as opposed to fear of rejection or or otherwise I think that we are wired to want to love and be loved whatever that means it could there's all kinds of love there's all kinds of ways to love um I think that people don't know how to love and be loved if they haven't seen it. So, generally, you learn that because you've had it modeled for you. Or if you haven't had it modeled for you, you by trial and error start to learn these things. Maybe you go to therapy and you learn more about it. Um, but I think no matter what people come to therapy for, no matter what we call the presenting problem, you know, they're coming because whatever they want to say it is, deep down something got kind of ruptured in the love or being loved area of their life. And really, that's the core of it. And we have to solve that problem so that the problem they came in for, you know, it's it's kind of like you're dealing with content which is like here's the problem and process which is what's going on underneath. And if we can solve the process, then you solve content in multiple areas of your life. It's not just this one problem that you came in with, but generally if you learn at the core what the issue is that gets in the kind of love be loved area. You learn how to navigate through the world differently in your professional life and your romantic life and your platonic friendship life and your family life. Um so it's not just therapy isn't just about solving like that one discreet problem. Sometimes it is, but many times it's about if we can get to the deeper process issue, then you will solve so many different problems simultaneously. Throughout today's conversation, I feel like um what seems to be in contrast is kind of our stories about ourselves and other people and life versus just really being present. Yeah, this image of the Teflon pan is really um kind of looping in my head because this idea that you know positive thing happens it slips right off. Negative thing sticks. What does that mean? It's like we create a story about the negative thing and that the the story about the positive thing was a very brief brief story. It was like one of those three sentence poems or something and then it's gone. Um versus presence. It's like the more um presence we can bring to something, the more positive meaningful experience we can extract from it. I really believe this. I I um I learned this in science actually um because I had a a absolutely spectacular neuroanatomy professor when I was an undergraduate and he said when you look down the microscope if you're looking for something you'll find it but you're going to miss all this context of like the inputs to that structure and and you you lose the pattern recognition that's going to serve you going forward. So I learned I had this be I had so much time back then. I would just sit at night as a graduate student after I left, you know, my undergrad and went on to lab and I would just like stare at brain tissue and you you learn that and and about it in conscious and unconscious ways and then later when you're doing an experiment, you see things like, oh, you know, there's a there's a deficit here. There there's a real effect here. And and you and you learn that that through presence you um you're like experiencing things so much differently than if you go looking for something. science if you go looking for something it's actually bad science right and I've tried to transport that onto relationship in some ways like if like in relation to things and people and dogs and all the things in life if you're really present like the story is writing itself but you're not um scripting it out I don't know I don't think I have a language for this Rick Rubin talked a little bit about this in his book the creative act like we need to be on the front end of the of the vehicle experiencing space and time as it's happening as opposed to sitting next to it or in it and kind of creating a narrative about what's happening around us. Does that make sense? Right. So, most of us, all of us are, myself included, you all of us, we're unreliable narrators because we're only telling the story through our own lens. And so, it's really important for people to kind of be expansive about what the story might be about themselves. Like, someone might have a story, I'm unlovable, or I can't trust anyone or nothing will ever work out for me. that's their story that they're carrying around from childhood or from you know some experience that they had in life and they don't realize that they're carrying that story around. everything that they experience is viewed through that lens. And so, of course, they're not finding, you know, they're not finding people they trust because their whole world view is I can't trust anyone even though the person might be trustworthy or they feel unlovable. So, of course, they can't take in the love that they're getting because again, what are they paying attention to this predominant storyline? So, they need to rewrite the story. I created this workbook that's a like a step-by-step guide. I'm not sort of doing this to plug the workbook. I'm saying it's a very methodical process. You have to break down the story. And my background is that, you know, I I come from a writing background. So, I feel like I'm almost like an editor in the therapy room when people come in and they bring this story and my job is to help them edit the story so that this faulty narrative that was never true or someone, you know, whoever told them that story, whether they explicitly said you're not lovable or showed them through their actions that they then felt not lovable, that story was told by another narrator. So that narrator was unreliable gave you this story that now you take as gospel and you move through life with that story. So let's examine that story and can we look for examples of counter examples of when that story is not true because generally there are stories of you being lovable. There are stories of people being trustworthy. There are stories of things working out for you. So, we have to really rewrite those narratives and say, you know, what is true and what is an artifact of somebody else's story that we're carrying around and why why are we like writing the next chapter with somebody else's narrative that we never owned anyway? Yeah. It seems that like one of the challenges of being human is unless somebody is a narcissist where they basically dismiss anything that doesn't make them feel good. um in which case they miss out on so much of life and everyone can't stand them anyway. Um if you're a a permeable person like you you you're paying attention to what people say you're trying to integrate that you're trying to do better be better. Um the hard part is being semi-permeable. You have to know what to let in, what to reject, what to accept, what to work on. I mean it's it's a challenging thing this process of being a person in in relation to others. Right. Well well right. And and again the story, think about like how much we tell stories about ourselves and other people. That example I gave you earlier about the person who said, "Well, he doesn't prioritize me because he comes late and work is more important to him." And in fact, he was prioritizing her. So we we tell all kinds of stories and we make meaning of interactions with people and generally we don't have enough information and we need to say, "Can we expand this story? What would that story look like if I got curious?" and ask more about it or even just things that happened in our own lives. Can I can I examine that story for myself? Is that the story I want to tell myself about that experience that didn't go the way I wanted or can I look at it a different way? Like am I a failure or am I actually growing? Right? You can look at the same story the same way. I'm a failure that didn't work out or oh that's really interesting. I learned something really important and I'm I'm really a courageous person for trying that and now I learned something. totally different experiences of the same event. And I think sometimes the way we get to that story in the moment is to look at our senses. So we have five senses. We don't tend to pay much attention to them. We just think through everything. So can you say in a moment, right? Like even about your partner when you're upset with your partner, can you say like with each sense like here's one thing I see about my partner that I really like even though I'm upset about something they just did. Right. Here's something I hear. I like the tone of their voice or I like the the way they laugh. Um, you know, I like the way they smell. Um, you know, whatever it is. Um, you know, I I like the way you can just reach out. And by the way, touch is so important. What I have couples do sometimes when things are getting a little bit uh escalated in the therapy room is I'll say, "Can you take each other's hands right now?" And this is the last thing they want to do in that moment. I say, "Can you just take each other's hands?" Calmness, right? Their nervous system is calming down. And all of a sudden, they feel, "Oh, yeah. I forgot what that touch feels like." And they feel connected now. So, can we use our other senses? Sometimes when we get really in our head and use it to kind of expand the story and and connect and uh whether it's connecting with yourself, sometimes, you know, with anxiety, we do that. You know, something I can see, hear, taste, touch, smell. Um, we can do that with a partner, too. I feel like the the whole landscape around relationships has changed so much in the last 20, 30 years. It seems like in some ways for the better. Like there's a lot more discussion about the sorts of things that uh you're explaining and and um better understanding of self, how to show up better, better choice um and so on. Um, I was thinking about the uh at the same time this example you you mentioned before of like uh someone in their teens or 20s will a couple will break up and then somebody's posting all these things about them. That that kind of quote unquote feedback because it's not really feedback. It's more um signaling and posturing about what they aren't as opposed to what the other person is um has has got to create pretty detrimental stories in the in the person that it's about, right? because they either they have the choice of either believing those things. Um or disbelieving them. Um but it's not really an opportunity for growth in the same way that sitting down with somebody and saying like, "Hey, these were some things that you did well and here are some things that didn't go well." Um, and I guess how much of the story for um for men and women, young uh men and women nowadays and and older, do you think like uh is being uh written through the like what we hear about the the the opposite sex, right? like that like um in the last I would say 1015 years there it hasn't really been a moment of really trying to prop young boys up and men of it's like like maleness is great like that's not something you hear very often. Yeah. And I certainly understand why there was a need and an effort to balance um opportunities, right? But uh a lot of young guys grew up hearing that maleness having a Y chromosome is a bad thing, that testosterone is bad or something like that. uh you know and I've been asked to comment on this more and more recently in the press and you know I only know my experience and what I observe but um I mean you take any group and and tell them that they're bad and that hasn't really worked out well for any group and and or for society. When my son was in preschool, um there was a a shirt that girls would wear, little, you know, preschool girls, and it said, "Boys are stupid. Let's throw rocks at them." And it was supposed to be somehow girl power, empowering, but you don't empower by putting down another group, right? You lift up, but you don't bring down. And my son was so confused by that. I remember he was like, "Why? What does that mean?" And can you imagine if some boy showed up at preschool that said, "Girls are stupid. Let's throw rocks at them." Yeah. He'd be in a different preschool pretty quick, right? I mean, you know, it's um so so I think it's it's interesting to think about um how it became that um it's very hard for young men to navigate what does masculinity in a positive way look like? And they get all kinds of messages, you know, all men are bad. Um, men should be more like women. Men need to um, you know, be this way or that way. But no, if they are more communicative, then they're weak. But if they aren't communic, you know, like there's there's no kind of right way uh to be. And I think that um I think it's very confusing for young men. if a if a a young like a teenager or someone in college wants to kiss a girl, right? like on a date um and they don't do it because like it for like they don't know what to do like do I need to say can I kiss you right which feels a little bit like takes away from the moment but at the same time they don't want to assume that she wants to be kissed but like it seems pretty obvious to him that like they're standing out in front of their cars in front of the restaurant and like maybe she wants a good night kit you know and it's just so confusing um and I I think that um you know there's definitely I think a positive correction in you know what we call toxic masculinity um the ways that that men didn't really assume the personhood of women. But I also think that it's gotten to a place where it's so confusing for both young men and young women to understand sort of how do we how can we be with each other? How can we relate to each other? um where we won't be criticized, cancelled, uh you know, we don't know what's right. Like, is it do I do I put myself out there? Do I not put myself out there? Um will I get in trouble? And so it, you know, obviously it's a good thing that that people are having conversations and there's more communication around like what is okay, what do you want, is this okay? But at a certain level, it becomes people are afraid to do anything. Yeah. Talk about lack of presence. It sounds like they have to like write the story all the way to the 10 different outcomes for a given action, you know, evaluating if then they're no longer reading the other person's signals. I mean, it it sounds incredibly complicated, right? It it it is very complicated. I think there's progress, too. I mean, I think it's much better than having these situations where men just assumed like it was okay to do certain things whether, you know, the woman consented or not. But I also feel like um the education that they're getting around this, which again is again it's so complicated because it's positive that they're getting this education, but they don't know what it looks like in practice because the way that you know even when you think of like corporate training and you have to watch those videos, right? And and you know what is okay and what is not okay. They give the most obvious examples of what is not okay. But then there's just sort of like how like say you're at work and there's someone that you you're a woman and you're at work and there's a guy that you're attracted to because a lot of people meet at work, right? Because it's hard where do you meet people when you're an adult. Where do you spend all your time? You spend a lot of your days five days a week at work. So you might meet someone through work and then there's this sort of and maybe it's not someone you directly report to or reports to you. They're in like a different department. There's like a cute guy. What do you do? People don't know. So women are confused too. What is okay? What is not okay? In the ways that organically people used to be able to say like, "Hey, that guy, you know, I'm going to go talk to him, right?" But people don't know what to do. Wow. Tricky landscape, but you're offering tools for people at least, not at least, but to communicate better and certainly to understand themselves better so they know what they're bringing to the table. Well, I I I think that it's about understanding that whatever we see in TVs and movies, you know, it's it it doesn't look like that. You know, there's always like no somebody doesn't know what to do in a certain moment or something doesn't go the way that you imagine it will go or sex is can be ridiculous at times and you know, all these like weird things happen. I don't mean not consent. I'm talking about like it's just it doesn't look like it does in the movies all the Well, and sometimes there's great chemistry and guess what? Sometimes there's not. Like this chemistry thing is a real thing and sometimes it develops over time and sometimes it doesn't. The the idea that there wouldn't be much uh room for um ex healthy exploration, error, and adventure kind of breaks my heart because that's what I was referring to about things, you know. Um but young people are smart. they can figure it out. And and they also like to throw off the um uh the kind of like rules and standards of the uh of the adult generation. So, I trust they'll come up with with a better alternative for themselves, right? Um I want to make sure that I ask you about grief. Mhm. When a client is grieving a a breakup or a loss of some sort, um do you tell them to feel their feelings or do you tell them to compartmentalize and only feel their feelings certain times a day or do you um you know ever have to say, "Hey, listen, you know, it's it's time to bury this thing." Um, I'm laughing because there's there's no one way to grieve a loss and even the same loss like um you know siblings can lose a parent and they'll have very different ways of grieving the loss of the exact same person. um you know there there's just no right way or one way and I think you really have to honor that person's process and what I mean by that is it doesn't mean sort of you know just spend the rest of your life um like dwelling and not living right but I think people have this misconception about grief that somehow you're going to get over it and um often we carry those losses with us throughout our lives. Like you lose someone important to you, you're going to feel that loss and you might feel it in different ways at different times. If someone was important to you and you lost that person and you hadn't thought about them in a while and then you're in an elevator and you hear this music, this song and all of a sudden it's like someone just stuck a knife in your heart even though you were doing fine. So um people you know I I think that we are the accumulation of all the different people who have been in our lives for better or worse and um everybody makes some kind of impression on us that sticks with us. So I think it's really important for people to understand um what the loss is about because the loss can represent lots of different things. You lose a parent, maybe it's the loss of your youth. you're like, "Oh, no. I'm now the older generation." So, part of it is the parent, but part of it is this kind of I'm closer to death. And what does that mean? Um, you know, you lose a marriage and it could mean, oh, look, just like my parents, they got divorced and I failed, even though that's not necessarily the meaning of it. So, we make meaning of the loss, too. So, it's what does this loss mean to you? How do you make sense of it? um how do you sit with the loss and then how do you again not move on but move forward? I love that concept. Uh we integrate the the things better for better or worse into us but um moving forward is something I think everyone would probably want one would hope. Yeah. I know you're not um here to pro to promote anything, but um you caught my attention with this workbook because I think um I and a number of people probably want to think about how to um uh put some of this into action. Um and you've given us a lot of great tools to do that, a lot of different ways to think about things. I I certainly am um taking notes. Uh can you tell me about the notebook? um and and what the notebook is and and what who can make use of it. Yeah, this what by the way folks this wasn't preceded into the conversation. We'll talk about the notebook later. I just want to know for people who want to understand how to how to do good work. It sounds like a a great tool, right? Um, so the workbook came about because um, I wrote this book called Maybe You Should Talk to Someone and it's the stories of it's my story going to therapy and then it's the story of these four other patients that I had and um, when I working with them and um, and people said, "Wow, there was so much that made me think or feel or resonate with, but I need some structured like a sort of a step-by-step guide to how I can make those kinds of changes, too." and maybe they don't have access to therapy or they don't want to go to therapy, they want to work on it in a different way. And I really wanted I feel like therapy is this thing where certain people, you know, it's sort of like one-on-one or if you have a couple, it's like, you know, three people in the room and how do you bring that out so other people can use those tools? So, I created basically a workbook that's a companion to maybe you should talk to someone. And it's it's I really focused on stories because I feel like the narratives that we carry around shape so much of how we think, feel, and act every day. So, it's it's a it's a guide that really it's what I would do with someone in the therapy room if I were helping them to rewrite their story and to look at is this a faulty narrative? What does this look like? What are the true stories? What resonates with me now at this part of my life? Where do these stories come from? Who told me these stories? Um, can I try this out in real life? Here's an exercise to do this week. So, I I think that more of us sometimes need that kind of guidance. It's one thing to theoretically think about something. And as a therapist, I'm just very direct and active anyway. As I said, you know, the insight is the booby prize of therapy that I want people to have more than insight. I want them to have a plan with action and I want them to have small, manageable steps because I feel like if you get overwhelmed and the step is too big, that's really the only reason that people don't succeed at a change they want to make. It's that you need the steps to be manageable. So, I really break it down for people. You know, how can we do this? It's kind of like weekly therapy. It's like, how can we do this this week and work on that? And then you can kind of reflect on it. And there's all these different exercises that take you at the pace that works for you. It's great. I I'm a huge fan of workbooks and online courses. I'm taking an online course right now um just for my own enrichment. I'm going to get your notebook. Um I I think it's a fabulous idea. I think there's so many books about the changes we can make and and in any domain of health, wellness, psychology, fitness, whatever. And we read it. we might incorporate one or two little snippets and then it goes on the shelf and then we're proud to have it on our shelf because it says something about how we view life and it's cool to see those books elsewhere and all that's wonderful. Um but I think workbooks are like a real thing. Um so we'll put a link to that again. Uh this came up spontaneously but I know a number of people will want um to know that. I have one more question. You write this column. Is it a weekly column? Every two weeks I write Ask the Therapist. Yeah. Are there things thematically that are coming up more these days? Like you're getting a thousand letters about blank and then two about something else? I mean, what what where are things batching these days? And there can be more than one uh b uh bin, excuse me, bin to how it's batching. Yeah. Um so I think the same things come up. I've been doing this for so many years. I wrote it for six years at the Atlantic and I'm writing at the New York Times. And it's interesting because people talk about the same issues differently, but it's the same issue. So someone might say, um, you know, a lot comes up around should I cut off this person? Um, whether that's a family member or a friend. Um, you know, should I, you know, this person did this? And boundaries are a big thing. And everyone thinks everyone's a narcissist, which they're not. Everyone thinks everyone is, you know, gaslighting them, which generally they're not. It's all dope. I mean, I'm just I'm just kidding. They're these by But but I mean like the language is different is what I'm saying. But I think that that what they're really struggling with and what we all struggle with are are, you know, relating. It's hard. Humans are unpredictable. Humans are well, in some ways they're very predictable, but I think they're hard for another person to understand in that way. going back to the operating instructions that sometimes you think this is going to be the expected response and you get something completely different. Um they can't understand why a friend or a family member or a co-orker or whatever would um would do or say or think something. Um I think at the end of the day people really know what the answer to the question is but they want permission. Um, so so many times people say like, you know, what do you think about this? Or I really want to do this, but the people in my family think this. And so they're almost asking for permission that it's okay to want something. It's okay. We are so cautious about desire in our culture that sometimes we think that if I have a desire it's indulgent as opposed to you should you know have desires live a big life. I always say to people when you're making a decision choose the bigger life. That's how you make the decision. And I heard that somewhere. It's not mine originally, but I think it's so true that, you know, it's okay to have these desires, but then we get these messages from our culture or our friend group or our families that no, no, no, it's not okay. And so, a lot of people want permission that it's okay that you don't want to go to medical school, you know, like it's okay. Um, you know, it's okay that you don't want to have children. That's okay. um you know so I think sometimes people want permission but I think what they're really I think most of the letters are about um I'm having trouble relating and I don't know if I'm crazy they're crazy what's happening and so they need sort of that person who's going to zoom out and see it from a more objective place and help them to see again going back to narrative both sides of the narrative so I'm not just in my column I don't just say here's what you should do I do do that but I first say I want you have some context around this. So, here's how you're thinking about it and that's understandable. Here's the other side of the story that you're not really paying attention to. Now that you have this wider lens, here's how I think this might be managed. Love it. I love this concept of make the choice that is going to bring the bigger life. Yeah. because it's as you pointed out so easy for people to stay stuck in what is unpleasant but hasn't killed them yet or they're waiting for something like I will buy a house when I will look for a partner when as if there are these prerequisites that need to happen because that's the conventional view of the order in which you should live your life you know like I won't I won't buy a house until I'm married as opposed to Why why can't you buy a house that you like if you have the money to do that, right? Um you know, why do you have to wait for marriage for that? Or I won't look for a partner until I have this kind of job. You know that you have to have all these little pieces in this order. And there are so many different ways to live your life. And sometimes, by the way, you might want to live your life in that conventional order, but it just doesn't work out that way for you. So you might have to switch up the order. And that's okay. I love a vote in favor of people enjoying their life more. and hopefully deriving more self-respect by doing it. You know that this this aestheticism of like we're not we're going to deprive ourselves of things in order to respect ourselves. You know, even though I value discipline and um I think learning to enjoy life is is also important, right? And and I think that you know when we talk about we're not talking about hedenism. We're talking about reflecting on what will make a meaningful purposeful life for you and then being very intentional about going after that goal. So much here. Um Lori, thank you so much uh for the work you do with your patients slashclient slash we don't have a better word for it. Um, and also your willingness to get out and teach and and literally every two weeks, you know, field questions from the general public. It's not easy to do, I imagine. And um, clearly you're you're thinking about things past, present, and future. And um, you know, people really need these tools and not everyone will make it into your office, unfortunately, and have the the uh the experience of working one-on-one with you. But I think that the workbook, I'm so glad that came up so that people have an opportunity to put these things into action and you've given us a a ton to work with here. I listed out many things. I won't I won't um list them out here. We'll timestamp this episode in detail so people can go back and find them. But um yeah, I've learned a ton. I'm going to put put this to action and um hopefully uh you'll come back again and talk with us about what's new because I know this is an evolving field and as the landscape of of society changes, we're going to need new tools. But it sounds like the fundamentals are really in there. It involves self-reflection. I love this thing about a list of the things that make us difficult to be with as opposed to the list of the things we want in other people. Um and that teflon pan is something I'm going to think about a lot. Yeah. Well, thanks so much for this conversation. and I love having these longer conversations and really exploring what it means to be human. Well, thank you. You've certainly enriched my thinking about it and I'm sure everyone listening as well. Thanks so much. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Lorie Gotautib. I hope you found it to be as interesting and as actionable as I did. To learn more about Lori Gotautlib's work and to find links to her excellent book and other resources, please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a fivestar review. And you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and Apple. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. For those of you that haven't heard, I have a new book coming out. It's my very first book. It's entitled Protocols, an operating manual for the human body. This is a book that I've been working on for more than 5 years, and that's based on more than 30 years of research and experience. And it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to stress control protocols related to focus and motivation. And of course, I provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included. The book is now available by pre-sale at protocolsbook.com. There you can find links to various vendors. You can pick the one that you like best. Again, the book is called Protocols: An Operating Manual for the Human Body. And if you're not already following me on social media, I am Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, X, Threads, Facebook, and LinkedIn. And on all those platforms, I discuss science and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the Hubberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the Hubberman Lab podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. And if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter, the neural network newsletter is a zerocost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of 1 to three page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep, how to optimize dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a foundational fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training. All of that is available completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu tab in the top right corner, scroll down to newsletter, and enter your email. And I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Lori Gotautlib. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Music]

========================================

--- Video 16 ---
Video ID: f4cdu-QiKHo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f4cdu-QiKHo
Title: Lose Fat With Science-Based Tools | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-04-03 12:00:58 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I explore how the nervous system impacts fat loss and how certain behaviors and supplements can accelerate fat burning.

I explain how non-exercise movements like fidgeting and shivering trigger adrenaline to boost fat metabolism. I also examine the impact of exercise intensity and fasted workouts on fat burning, and how supplements such as caffeine, GLP-1 and berberine can further support fat loss. These science-based tools go beyond traditional calorie counting to enhance metabolism and improve body composition.

Huberman Lab Essentials are short episodes (approximately 30 minutes) focused on essential science and protocol takeaways from past Huberman Lab episodes. Essentials will be released every Thursday, and our full-length episodes will still be released every Monday.

Episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/7L1cxrW

We want to hear from you. Take our quick survey to help improve Huberman Lab: https://go.hubermanlab.com/podtrac-survey

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Fat Loss
00:01:00 Calories In, Calories Out; Nervous System
00:02:57 Fat Burning, Nervous System & Adrenaline
00:06:21 Increase Adrenaline, Shivering, Tool: Fidgeting 
00:10:10 Shivering & Fat Loss, White & Brown Fat
00:13:27 Tool: Deliberate Cold Exposure Protocol
00:15:28 High, Medium vs Low-Intensity Exercise, Exercise Fasted?
00:21:21 Tool: Exercise for Fat Loss; Adrenaline
00:23:15 Caffeine, Dose, Exercise & Fat Loss
00:25:50 GLP-1, Yerba Mate, Exercise; Semaglutide
00:28:49 Berberine, Metformin, Insulin
00:29:46 Diet, Adherence, Carbohydrates & Insulin
00:31:25 Recap & Key Takeaways

#HubermanLab #Science #FatLoss #BurnFat 

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost-to-consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. Today, we're going to talk about the science of tools for fat loss. Today's episode is mainly going to be focused on how the nervous system, neurons, and some of the cells they collaborate with like glia and macrophages, how those encourage or can encourage accelerated fat loss because it turns out they can. Remember, your nervous system, which includes your brain and your spinal cord and all the connections that they make with the organs of the body, governs everything. The nervous system and the role of the brain and other neurons has been vastly overlooked in the discussion about losing fat. Now, I would be remiss and I'd probably come under a pretty considerable attack if I didn't just acknowledge upfront a core truth of metabolic science and also of neuroscience, frankly, which is that calories in versus calories out, meaning how many calories you ingest versus how many calories you burn, is the fundamental and most important formula in this business of fat loss and weight management in general. There's simply no way around the fact that if you ingest far more calories than you burn, you're likely to gain weight. A good portion of that weight is likely to be adipose tissue, fat. It's also true that if you ingest fewer calories than you burn that you will lose weight and that a significant portion of that will come from body fat. What portion depends on a number of factors, but that simple formula is important. A calorie is a calorie as a unit of energy. We need to accept and acknowledge these calories in, meaning calories-ingested versus calories-burned formula, but the calories-burned portion is strongly influenced by a number of things that you can control that can greatly accelerate or increase the amount of adipose tissue or the proportion of adipose tissue that you burn in response to exercise and food. Today, we're going to talk about the fact that your body fat of various kinds, and there are several kinds of body fat, are actually innervated by neurons. Neurons connect to your body fat and can change the probability that that body fat will be burned or not. Your nervous system is the master controller of this process and it plays a strong role in the calories out, the calories-burned component. Let's talk about fat utilization. Let's talk about how fat is converted into energy, which is sometimes also called fat burning. There's two parts to this process. One is fat mobilization and the second is fat oxidation or utilization. That's a process called lipolysis. Fat cells can be visceral around our viscera, our organs, or they can be subcutaneous under our skin. Stored fat has two parts that are relevant here. It's got the fatty acid part. That's the part that your body can use and that's attached to something called glycerol. They're linked by a backbone. To mobilize fat, you got to break the backbone between glycerol and these fatty acids, okay? That's accomplished by an enzyme called lipase, but you can forget all that if you want. Remember, we're just trying to mobilize fat. The first step is to get those fatty acids moving around in the bloodstream, to get them out of those fat cells, and then they can travel and be used for energy. They're going to go into cells that can use them for energy. Once they are inside those cells, they're still not burned up. You need to oxidize them. They need to be moved into the mitochondria and then they can be converted into ATP, into energy. Just to really zoom out again to make sure I don't lose anybody, you got to mobilize the fat, then you have to oxidize the fat. Many of the things that the nervous system can do is to increase the mobilization of fat but also the oxidation of fat. What are these neurons that connect to fat doing? What are they releasing exactly? How do they actually increase fat mobilization and how do they increase fat oxidation, burning of fat? Well, there are a couple of things that they release that encourage that process. The main one that you need to know about is epinephrine or adrenaline. The conversion of these fatty acids into ATP in the mitochondria of cells is favored by adrenaline, okay? Adrenaline is released from two sources. Adrenaline is released from the adrenal glands, which sit atop our kidneys and our lower back. It's also released from the so-called sympathetic nervous system, although that name is a bit of a misnomer because it has nothing to do with sympathy, has to do with stimulating alertness and promoting action of the body. It was thought for a long time that adrenaline swimming around in your body of when you're fasted, because fasting can increase adrenaline, or when you're engaging in intense exercise or when you're stressed is going to promote fat oxidation. That's actually not the case. The adrenaline that stimulates fat oxidation, the burning of fat, is coming from neurons that actually connect to the fat. It's a local process. This is very important because it means that what you do, the specific patterns of movements and the specific environment you create that can stimulate these particular neurons to activate fat, meaning to release fat, to mobilize it, and then to burn it, is going to be a powerful lever that you can use in order to increase fat loss. Okay, so let's talk about how to activate the nervous system in ways that it promotes more liberation, movement, mobilization of fat, and more oxidation of fat. One of the most powerful ways to stimulate epinephrine, which is also called adrenaline, from these neurons is through movement. The type of movement that I'm referring to is extremely subtle. Shivering is a strong stimulus for the release of adrenaline, epinephrine, into fat and the increase in fat oxidation and mobilization. There are other subtle forms of movement that can greatly increase fat metabolism and fat loss. There was a group in England during the 1960s and '70s that discovered a pathway by which subtle forms of movement can greatly increase fat loss. This is the work of Rothwell and Stock. It's very famous in the thermogenesis literature. I learned about this early on when I was an undergraduate. I asked, "How did they come across this?" Here's how the story goes. They were aware that some people overeat and yet don't put on weight. Other people overeat even just a little bit and they seem to accumulate extra adipose tissue. Now, this is long before all the discussions about microbiome and hormone factors. It was long before many of the hormone factors besides insulin had even been discovered. What they did was they examined people who over-ate and did not gain weight. What they observed was that those people engaged in lots of subtle movement throughout the day. In other words, they were fidgeters. That's what they called them. In 2015 and, again, in 2017, there've been studies that have explored this using some modern metabolic tracking. Indeed, simply moving a lot, being a fidgeter, bouncing your knee, standing up and pacing several times or many times throughout the day led to considerable amounts of fat loss and weight loss when people were ingesting the same amount of food. If they overate, they were able to compensate and burn off that food. For people that are overweight, who are averse to exercise, fidgeting might actually be a good entry point. Now, that's great. You can think about the protocols, but I want to nest that protocol in what I said before, which is that fat is controlled by these neurons and the epinephrine they release. Those subtle movements of our core musculature, not just the core but all our limbs and our musculature, those low-level movements, they trigger epinephrine release from these neurons. They stimulate the mobilization of fat and then that fat is oxidized at higher rates. What's the protocol? Fidget. If you're really interested in burning calories and you already exercise, you want to burn more, or you don't have the opportunity to exercise or you're averse to exercise for whatever reason, fidgeting movements, staccato movements, standing up, walking around, pacing, all the sort of nervous activities that we're so critical of in other people and sometimes in ourselves are actually mobilizing and oxidizing a lot of fat and a lot of energy. While this probably won't compensate for chronic overeating, the caloric burn from this is considerable and very likely can offset a meal that had excessive calories or a steady state of eating too much. Now, it should make sense why shivering is one of the strongest stimuli that one can incorporate to stimulate fat loss. Now, shivering is almost always associated with cold. We think shivering, we think cold because when we get cold, we shiver. There are two ways that shivering can increase fat loss. There are several ways that you can use shivering, you can leverage shivering, and you can leverage cold to accelerate fat loss, but you have to do it correctly. Most of the people that are using cold and frankly suggesting cold as a means to increase metabolism fat loss are suggesting the exact wrong protocol. Most people out there are using cold exposure typically by taking cold showers or by getting into cold water of some other kind, a lake or a river or a cold bath or an ice bath. Since today we're talking about accelerating fat loss through the use of science-based tools, I want to emphasize a study that was published in Nature just a couple of years ago, showing exactly how cold increases metabolism and fat loss. We have several kinds of fat. Three kinds, in fact. We have white fat, white adipose tissue, and we have brown fat or brown adipose tissue. There's a third kind, which is beige adipose tissue. White fat is the type that we traditionally think of as fat, subcutaneous fat. It is not particularly rich in mitochondria. It is there as an energy storage site. We have to mobilize the fat out as we talked about before and burn it up elsewhere. Brown fat largely exists between our shoulder blades and on the back of our neck, between the scapulae. It's rich with mitochondria, which is why it's called brown fat. Brown fat has a particular biochemical cascade whereby it can take food energy and it can take food basically, break it down and convert it into energy within those cells. Unlike fatty acids from white fat, which have to travel elsewhere, get broken down in mitochondria and convert it into ATP, et cetera, used by the mitochondria rather, brown fat is thermogenic. It can actually use energy directly. Cold causes the release of adrenaline from your adrenals and it causes the release of epinephrine from these neurons that connect to fat. The paper published in Nature shows that it is shivering itself that causes the brown fat to increase your burning, your burn rate, and your metabolism. It works like this. When you get into cold and you shiver, the shivering, that low-level movement of the muscle, those small movements triggers the release of a molecule called succinate. S-U-C-C-I-N-A-T-E, succinate. Succinate acts on the brown fat to increase brown fat thermogenesis and fat burning overall. The question then is how long to get into that cold environment and how cold should that environment be. First, let's talk about how long to get into that cold environment. It turns out that if you want to trigger the shiver, what you want to do is to get into the cold and then get out of the cold and typically not dry off and then get back into the cold and out of the cold. That will definitely stimulate more shivering than just getting into the cold itself. How cold should it be? Look, if you get into water that's very, very cold, it can actually shock your heart. It can actually give you a heart attack if it's truly, truly ice cold and you're not adapted to that. Proceed with caution, please. I'm not a physician and I don't want to see anyone get hurt. Just cold enough to be uncomfortable is a good place to start. For some of you, that's going to be 60 degrees. For some of you, that's going to be 55 degrees. For some of you, it's going to be high 30s, right? Depends on how cold-adapted you are. What you need to do is find a temperature that you can get into one to five, probably one to three times a week if you really want this to accelerate fat loss. You want to get in until you just start to shiver and then you want to get out and not dry off. Wait anywhere from one to three minutes and then get back into the cold. Here's a potential sets-reps protocol that you can play with. Find a temperature that induces shiver for you. That's going to vary depending on your cold tolerance and how cold-adapted you are. One to three, maybe five times a week. Get in or get under the shower or whatever it is until you start to shiver, genuinely shiver. Then after about a minute or so, get out. Spend one to three minutes out, but don't dry off. Get back in for anywhere from one to three minutes, but try and access the shiver point again. You might do three repetitions of that. It's three times in and three times out total. Next, I'd like to move to exercise and how particular timing and types of exercise can vastly improve fat loss. The topic of exercise is a controversial one. I think the most simple way, the most fluid way to have this conversation about exercise and fat loss is in terms of three general types of training. Those are high-intensity interval training, so-called HIIT, H-I-I-T. High-intensity interval training, sprint interval training. That's going to be very high-intensity or S-I-T, or moderate-intensity continuous training, M-I-C-T. We've got HIIT, SIT, and MICT. If you'd like to map this to VO2 max, S-I-T, this sprint interval training was defined as all-out greater than 100% of VO2 max bursts of activity that last eight to 30 seconds, interspersed with less intense recovery periods. This would be sprinting downfield for eight to 30 seconds then maybe walking back for about a minute or two and then sprinting again and then continuing. That would be S-I-T. HIIT, H-I-I-T, is defined as submaximal, so 80% to 100% of VO2 max bursts of activity that lasts 60 to 240 seconds, interspersed with less intense recovery periods. M-I-C-T, okay, this moderate-intensity continuous training is steady-state cardio, sometimes called Zone 2 cardio these days on the internet, which is performed continuously for 20 to 60 minutes at moderate intensity of 40% to 60% of VO2 max. If you prefer heart rate, 55% to 70% of max heart rate, okay? We can think about high, medium, and low-intensity exercise, although low intensity usually means that you could carry on a conversation or maybe you have to gasp every few steps or so while trying to talk and run. That's, I think, going to be the most useful way to have this conversation that we're having now because there are so many different forms of exercise that people do and intensity is important. Let's ask the question that I think many people are wondering about, which is, is it better, meaning do you burn more fat if you do your exercise fasted? Fasted in this respect could be that you wake up in the morning, you've been fasting all night, you just hydrate, and you exercise. For short periods of training, it doesn't really seem to matter whether or not you eat before training or you don't if your goal is fat oxidation. At a period of about 90 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise, there's a switch-over point whereby if you ate before the exercise, you will burn far less fat from the 90 minute point onward than you would if you had gone into the training fasted. Now, there are also studies that point to the fact that you don't have to wait to 90 minutes in order to get this enhanced fat-burning effect. If one does high-intensity training or even the very high-intensity forms of training like sprints or squats or deadlifts or any kind of activity that can't be maintained for more than these eight or I would say up to 60 seconds, so a set of lifting weights repeated, repeated. If that's done for anywhere from 20 minutes, so weight training or powerlifting or these kinds of things or kettlebell swings, or up to 60 minutes, well, then the switch-over point in-which you can burn more fat if you go into that fasted comes earlier. This makes sense because there's nothing wholly about the 90 minute point for medium-intensity Zone 2 cardio. That 90 minute point is the point in which the body shifts over from mainly burning glycogen, basically sugar that comes from muscles or the liver, and realizes this is going on for a while. I'm going to shift over to a storage-site fuel that is in reserve like body fat. This is something that has to do with the milieu of various hormones. What has to happen is insulin has to go down far enough. If you ate before the exercise, you'd have an increase in insulin. If you ate carbohydrates, you'd have a bigger increase in insulin. Fat and proteins indeed will have lower amounts of insulin and fasting will give you the lowest amount of insulin. Well, then that switch-over point is going to come earlier in the exercise. If you think about it, if you were to do something high-intensity for 20, 30, 40 minutes, so maybe lift weights and then get into Zone 2 cardio, if you were fasted, the literature says that you're going to burn more body fat per unit time than if you had eaten before or during the exercise. What does this mean? This means if you want to burn more body fat, if it's in your protocols and you have been approved to do this safely, exercise intensely for 20 to 60 minutes. The higher the intensity, obviously, the shorter that bout is going to be, and then move over into Zone 2 cardio. If you do that fasted, then indeed you will burn a higher percentage of body fat. If you can't even get to the exercise, if you're somebody who just can't do the training at all, you're unwilling to or you're incapable of training unless you eat something, then obviously eating something makes the most sense. What you eat prior to exercise, that's a whole other biz that people argue about and fight about whether or not you should go into it with low carbohydrates or high carb or all of that. In general, the theme there is very simple, which is that you want insulin levels to be pretty low if your goal is body-fat reduction. This could be distilled into a simple protocol whereby three or four times a week, you do high-intensity training followed by either nothing or followed by low-intensity training, especially if you're able to do that fasted. I should just mention that none of this stuff about fasted is about performance. If you want to perform really well, this is for reasons of performance and it's for a sport or a competition, it's not for body-fat purposes, well, then all of this falls away and is modified by what's ideal to eat for performance. What we're talking about today is how to optimize body fat loss. I think you get the principle now, but you should all be asking yourselves as scientists of yourselves, why would it be that certain patterns of exercise would lead to more or less fat loss? Again, it has to do with the neurons. It has to do with how we engage the nervous system. While non-exercise activity-induced thermogenesis, NEAT, the fidgeting, and cold can induce thermogenesis by engaging shiver-type movement or low-level movements, big movements that are of very high intensity, meaning they require a lot of effort, deploy a lot of adrenaline, epinephrine from our neurons and signal particular types and amounts of fat thermogenesis, fat oxidation. Whereas low-level intensity exercise, low or moderate-intensity exercise, walking, running, biking, where you can do that easily, there's not very much adrenaline release. Adrenaline, a.k.a., epinephrine, is really the final common path by which movement of any kind, whether or not it's low-level shiver or whether or not it's lifting a barbell, sprinting up a hill, or doing a long bike ride, adrenaline is the effector of fat loss. It's the trigger and it's the effector. Now, I want to turn our attention to compounds that increase epinephrine and adrenaline as well as compounds that work outside the adrenaline-epinephrine pathway to increase the rates of fat loss. I almost always save compounds and supplements and things of that sort to the end because I do believe that people should look first toward behavioral tools and an understanding of the science before they look toward a supplement or a particular thing that they can extract from diet. This is mainly to try and shift people away from the "magic pill" phenomenon or the idea that there is a magic pill because there really isn't and, frankly, there never will be. There are some compounds that can greatly increase fat oxidation and mobilization. Understanding which compounds increase oxidation or mobilization can be very useful if your goal is to accelerate fat loss. There are things that people can ingest that will allow them to oxidize more fat. That occurs mainly by increasing the amount of epinephrine that is released from neurons that innervate fat tissue. One of the more common ones is one that you may already be using, which is caffeine. It's well-established that caffeine can enhance performance if you're caffeine-adapted. Now, caffeine for burning more fat, for oxidizing and mobilizing more fat is an interesting one. It can be effective at dosages up to 400 milligrams. 400 milligrams is roughly a cup and a half of coffee or two cups of coffee. Nowadays, there's a lot more caffeine in coffee. If you go to a typical cafe and you were to get their medium size, that would have close to a gram of caffeine, which is why if you're a regular caffeine consumer and you don't get that gram of caffeine in your coffee each day, you will get a headache. It can cause constriction and dilation of blood vessels in ways that's complicated, but you'll get a headache. Caffeine can enhance the amount of fat that you burn in any duration of exercise. It can shift the percentage of fat that you oxidize compared to glycogen, unless you take that caffeine and it ramps you up so much that you're training really, really intensely. The bottom line is if you like caffeine and you can use it safely, ingesting somewhere between 100 and 400 milligrams of caffeine prior to exercise, somewhere between 30 to 40 minutes before exercise can be beneficial if we're talking about fat oxidation, burning more body fat. If caffeine is the entry point for most people of using compounds to increase the rate or percentage of fat loss in exercise and even at rest, what are some of the other things that are useful and interesting? Well, in terms of tools that are actionable and have reasonable safety margins, I've talked before about something called GLP-1. This is something that can be triggered by the ingestion of yerba maté. Maté increases GLP-1. GLP-1 is in the glucagon pathway. Let's just quickly return to our biochemistry. As you recall, fat is mobilized from body fat stores and then it's burned up. It's oxidized in cells. It actually needs to be converted into ATP. Those fatty acids are essentially converted into ATP in the mitochondria of the cell. High insulin prevents that from happening and glucagon facilitates that process. Glucagon facilitates that process through increases in GLP-1. The short takeaway is maté increases GLP-1 and, yes, increases the percentage of fat that you'll burn. It increases fat burning. That is especially true, it turns out, from the scientific literature if you ingest maté prior to exercise of any kind. If you want to burn more fat, drinking maté before exercise is good. Drinking it at rest when you're not exercising will also help shift your metabolism toward enhanced burning of fat by increasing fat oxidation. Now, there's a whole category of pharmaceuticals that's being developed right now that are in late-stage trials or are in use for the treatment of diabetes, which capitalize on this GLP-1 pathway. They go by various names. There are people on the internet who are selling these things. They are prescription drugs. I want to emphasize that they are prescription drugs. You obviously wouldn't want to use any of these without a prescription and a requirement. It does seem that they are effective for the treatment of certain kinds of diabetes and lead to fairly significant weight loss and reduction in appetite. This is the modern version of GLP-1 is pharmaceuticals of GLP-1 metabolism are drugs such as somatic-- I can never pronounce this. I can't seem to pronounce many things, it seems. Semaglutide is the way I would pronounce it. In any case, this compound increases GLP-1. It's actually a GLP-1 analog in some cases and they go by various types of trade names. Again, semaglutide is the prescription version. It's the heavy artillery GLP-1 stimulant and, again, should be only explored with a prescription. Those are the compounds that really increase fat oxidation directly. There are going to be a number of things that impact insulin and glucagon that are going to shift the body toward more fat-burning. For instance, berberine, which comes from a plant, or metformin are compounds that are now in growing use for reducing blood glucose. They are very potent at reducing blood glucose, which will reduce insulin because the job of the hormone insulin is to essentially manage glucose in the bloodstream. There are a huge gallery of compounds that will reduce insulin and thereby can increase fat oxidation. That's because, as I mentioned before, fat oxidation, this conversion of fatty acids into ATP and the mitochondria, is inhibited by insulin. If you keep insulin low, you're going to increase that process, which brings us full circle back to the issue of diet and nutrition. There is really solid evidence from the Gardner Lab at Stanford and from other labs showing that when you look at different diets, you look at low-fat diets, high-fat diets, keto diets, intermittent fasting, provided people stick to their particular diet, it doesn't really matter which diet you follow. You can still get a caloric deficit and you get weight loss. Adherence, however, is always an issue. What I always say is that you want to use the eating plan that is obviously beneficial to your health but the one that allows you to adhere to whatever it is that the particular nutrition protocol is, right? If you can't stick with something, then it's not very worthwhile. From the purely scientific standpoint, there's also an advantage to keeping insulin low. Now, that doesn't necessarily mean you go to zero carbohydrate. I've talked before about my preferred way of eating is to go low or no carbohydrate throughout the day for alertness, to get that adrenaline release and the focus that goes with it, et cetera, the ability to think and move and do all the things I need to do during the day. Then I eat carbohydrates at night because it facilitates the transition to sleep. That's what works for me. When insulin is low, you do place your system in a position to oxidize more fat. That's why I think a lot of people do see benefit from lower carbohydrate or moderate carbohydrate diets because when insulin is low, you are in a position to oxidize more fat, both from exercise and at rest. Once again, we've covered an enormous amount of material. We've talked about the science of fat loss. In particular, we've explored this topic from the perspective of the nervous system, how neurons and, in particular, the release of things like adrenaline, epinephrine can facilitate fat mobilization and oxidation. We talked about NEAT, fidgeting, this non-exercise-type movement that can greatly increase caloric burn and why that is. We talked about shiver, another form of non-exercise movement that can really increase both caloric expenditure due to the shiver, due to the movement, as well as increase thermogenesis, the heating up of the body through things like brown fat, and even the conversion of white fat to brown fat, which is a good thing if you want to oxidize fat. We talked about cold as a particular stimulus to induce shiver and how to use getting into and out of cold as a way to stimulate shiver and avoid cold adaptation so that you continue to oxidize and burn fat if that's your goal. We talked about exercise, how rather than thinking about cardiovascular or weight training exercise that we should perhaps look through the lens of this adrenaline system and how it interacts with fat stores and think about low, medium, or high-intensity exercise, whether or not we show up to that fasted or not. Turns out showing up to that fasted can be useful if you start with high-intensity movements and then move into lower-intensity-type exercise. If you're going to go long duration, it probably doesn't matter unless you're exercising longer than 90 minutes whether or not you eat or not. We talked about caffeine as a stimulant and a stimulus for epinephrine and adrenaline release as a way to access more fat metabolism. Last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention today. Thank you for your interest in science. [music]

========================================

--- Video 17 ---
Video ID: e7Dxyc5w3hU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e7Dxyc5w3hU
Title: Obesity & Diabetes Increase Autism Risk
Published: 2025-04-02 19:26:58 UTC
Description:


Transcript Language: English
We know that, like, women with obesity, much more likely, twice as likely, to have an autistic child. Is that right? Yeah. Meta-analysis, over 3 million people, women with obesity have double the risk of having an autistic child. Have rates of obesity been skyrocketing in our population? The answer is yes. Are pregnant women also in that camp of obese women? Yes. Well, that accounts for a doubling of autism. Same deal with diabetes. Women who have diabetes, twice as likely to have autistic children as women who don't have diabetes. When you put the two together, obese and diabetic, quadruple the rate of autism in the offspring. What about Dad? You know, there are these theories about the statistically significant increases in rates of autism for offspring of men who are 50 or older. Might read of the data is that it's still a very small increase. It's not like the kind of increases you're describing here for diabetes. It is. So men with obesity, twice as likely to have an autistic child as men who are not obese. Yeah, which is something like 25 times greater than the increase due to age of the male. So this is so important because people hear, oh, you know, "older sperm equals higher probability of autism." But, yes, still a very low probability of autism, compared to "Dad is obese, but in his twenties or thirties."

========================================

--- Video 18 ---
Video ID: hCyvqRq5YmM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hCyvqRq5YmM
Title: Transform Your Mental Health With Diet & Lifestyle | Dr. Chris Palmer
Published: 2025-03-31 12:00:52 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. Chris Palmer, M.D., a board-certified psychiatrist and professor at Harvard Medical School. He explains how specific nutrition, exercise, supplement-based, and other factors can improve mitochondrial health and thereby provide relief from adult and childhood ADHD, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and symptoms of autism. We discuss mitochondrial biology, whether vaccines can impact inflammation and mitochondrial health, and the potential ramifications. We also review creatine, methylene blue, and urolithin A, as well as the role of B vitamins and iron in treating depression. By the end of this episode, you will understand the powerful link between metabolic health and mental health, and the lifestyle, dietary, and other factors you can leverage to help overcome common mental health challenges and disorders.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/HohfgwG

We want to hear from you. Take our quick survey to help improve Huberman Lab: https://go.hubermanlab.com/podtrac-survey

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Our Place: https://fromourplace.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
Function: https://functionhealth.com/huberman

*Dr. Chris Palmer*
Brain Energy (book): https://amzn.to/4j4pus2
Personal website: https://www.chrispalmermd.com
Harvard academic profile: https://cmecatalog.hms.harvard.edu/faculty-staff/christopher-palmer
Brain Energy Fund: https://www.gofundme.com/f/the-brain-energy-fund
Newsletter Signup: https://newsletter.brainenergy.com
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/ChrisPalmerMD
X: https://x.com/ChrisPalmerMD
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/chrispalmermd
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/@ChrisPalmerMD
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@chrispalmermd
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/christopher-palmer-01713032

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Dr. Chris Palmer
00:02:15 Integrating Metabolic, Mental & Physical Health; Childhood Trauma & Risk
00:10:46 Sponsors: Our Place & LMNT
00:13:44 Depression Causes, Molecule Model?, Neuroplasticity?; Metabolism
00:22:20 Mitochondrial Functions, Stress Response, Mental Health
00:31:09 Sponsors: AG1 & Eight Sleep
00:33:59 Mitochondrial Health & 6 Pillars of Lifestyle Medicine 
00:39:38 Stimulants, Mitochondria, Dopamine; Alcohol
00:45:47 Nicotine; Substance Use, Metabolic Health & Disease
00:52:23 Children, Energy & Metabolic Function; Diseases of Aging & Mental Disorders
00:59:18 Sponsor: Function
01:01:06 Diet & Metabolism; Ultra-Processed Foods, Additives, GRAS
01:09:30 Rebellious Spirit, Ultra-Processed Foods & Food Industry Funding
01:19:14 Ketogenic Diet, Epilepsy, Schizophrenia, Bipolar
01:22:52 Ketogenic Diet, Fasting & Mitochondria; Gut Microbiome, Brain Metabolism
01:30:06 Low-Fat Diets; Tool: Occasional Fasts; Ketogenic Diet; Intermittent Fasting
01:38:40 Nutrition Research, Food Industry Lobbyists; Ultra-Processed Foods, Addiction
01:46:55 Creatine & Mitochondrial Health
01:52:34 Methylene Blue & Mitochondria; Serotonin Syndrome
02:02:58 Urolithin A, Mitochondria Function; Supplements & Appropriate Use
02:11:14 Vitamin Deficiencies, Iron Deficiency
02:16:06 Vitamin B12 & Folate Deficiency, Autoimmune Disorders
02:24:48 Mental Illness & Root Causes
02:29:02 Vaccines, Inflammation, Mitochondria, Autism
02:39:17 Neurodevelopmental Disorder Onset & Follow-Up
02:45:31 Vaccines, Autism, Future Research; Mother Obesity & Diabetes
02:51:23 Father Obesity & Autism; Poor Metabolic Health, Blood Biomarkers
02:56:44 Assessing Metabolic Health & Biomarkers; National Institutes of Health (NIH)
03:02:59 Future Directions, Bridging Mental & Physical Health
03:09:27 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Follow & Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Protocols Book, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science #Health #MentalHealth #Nutrition

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Dr Chris Palmer Dr Chris Palmer is a psychiatrist and researcher at Harvard University he focuses on how metabolic health and mitochondrial Health in particular can be leveraged to treat and in some cases cure psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia autism depression bipolar and ADHD today we discuss how metabolic Health something we hear a lot about nowadays is really about mitochondrial health and the specific lifestyle and other factors that you can use to improve mitochondrial number and function we talk about things like exercise sleep sunlight which you've heard about before but we talk about those from a different perspective and we discuss some things that have never been discussed before on this podcast at least in light of mitochondrial health things such as creatine methylene blue nicotine and we talk about the key role of specific B vitamins and iron in brain function we also have a very direct discussion about vaccines and whether or not inflammation caused by vaccines can potentially damage mitochondria which then leads to mental health challenges and of course in that context we discuss the vaccine autism debate we also discuss public health and what is needed to truly change the way people exercise and eat and the rapidly changing landscape of the National Institutes of Health and the CDC as you'll soon hear Dr Palmer gives us a master class on mitochondrial function and how to improve this vital aspect of our health if you've heard about metabolic Health you've heard about the Obesity crisis that's important but looking at all of that and approaching it through the lens of mitochondrial Health you'll soon learn is absolutely the way to go it's a New Perspective that will change the way that you think about mental and physical health and that no doubt will impact your health practices in very positive ways before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme this episode does include sponsors and now for my discussion with Dr Chris Palmer Dr Chris Palmer welcome back thank you so much for having me back I credit you with leading the Call to Arms the public awareness and the implementation of what some people call medic olic Psychiatry but what we could easily just call the relationship between mental and physical health and the use of nutrition supplementation and where appropriate prescription drugs for the treatment of mental health but what do you call this field that you've basically founded and that you're pioneering there are others right but uh that you're pioneering and how should the general public think about the relationship between mitochondria and their Mental Health for for those that are not aware educate us I could talk for hours on this um so first of all thank you for um I I think you're actually giving me way too much credit though um I don't know about that I uh I'm I'm talking a lot about it and I think I will accept that maybe I'm able to talk about it in a way that helps people understand it that other scientists haven't been able to but you know one of the more important reasons I want to say this is because unbeknownst to a lot of people this field has actually been around for about a century and a half researchers in the 1800s around the turn of the century well up into the 1960s were hyperfocused on the role of metabolism in severe mental illness schizophrenia bipolar disorder they were actually measuring levels of lactate and glucose and um and other kind of metabol biomarkers in people with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder documenting differences really kind of H honi in on the these metabolic disruptions is potentially the cause of mental illness and then our field lost its way we we became focused on neurotransmitters and assumed that they were the primary cause of mental illness while other fields were focused on psychological and social social factors you know we got cognitive behavioral therapy we still had psychodynamic Psychotherapy um but people were doing research on adverse childhood experiences that was really taking off documenting that that's related and so you know the field kind of splintered into these biological psychological social camps um and people really hyperfocused in all of these ways to me this field of integrating metabolism with mental health with physical health is about unifying that whole story it's about unifying and building on what these researchers a hundred years ago were pursuing it's about integrating the biological psychological and social camps it's about putting it all together and stop being so reductive C istic and simplistic to suggest that it's all biological or it's all psychological or it's all social and that if one if it's one it can't be the other it can be all of them um and it's different combinations for different people so in many ways I'm just standing on the shoulders of giants who have done groundbreaking work to create the science that allows us to put this all together um with that said I do firmly believe that we are on the cusp of a revolutionary change in the Paradigm of the mental health field of how we think about mental illness you know there are Myriad biological things the psychological and social things are all obvious and true yes stress trauma loneliness adverse childhood experiences all of those things come together our field is long known that all of those things play a role in mental illness which exactly which mental illnesses it's essentially all of them every one of the labels in dsm5 can be impacted by biological psychological and social factors so trauma in childhood increases risk for posttraumatic stress disorder duh everybody knows that trauma in childhood also increases risk for neurodevelopmental disorders if it occurs early enough it increases risk for substance use disorders personality disorders psychotic disorders mood disorders anxiety disorders dementia later in life and everything else every label what else do adverse childhood experiences increase risk for all of the metabolic disorders obesity type 2 diabetes cardiovascular disease autoimmune disorders premature mortality you know we have statistics that just sticking with that theme adverse childhood experiences if you have six or more adverse childhood experiences compared to somebody who has no adverse childhood experiences now that's a rare group granted but for the people who have six or more on average they live 20 years shorter they lose 20 years of life because of those adverse childhood experiences and so is that a mental health issue I would say it's a physical health issue it's both it's both a mental health issue and a physical health issue and so how can we understand that how can we understand that trauma in childhood increases risk for heart disease and obesity and diabetes and dementia and PTSD and ADHD and sub use disorders and the only way to connect it is through metabolism and ultimately through mitochondria unfortunately people like simple answers and they're like so diet will fix everything I'm like no I never said diet will fix everything but it can help it can help and it can be lifechanging and life saving I I don't want to I don't want to minimize or step back from my work with dietary intervention there is no doubt in my mind it can dramatically change people's lives but it's not just diet it's lots of other things and um and so it's putting it together and trying to make sense of the science for what does cardiovascular disease have to do with depression or PTSD on the surface a lot of people scratch their heads and they really don't know they they assume that well one's a brain disorder and one a heart disorder and it's like no we need to integrate that because all of the risk factors this this essentially the same bioc psychosocial risk factors that increase risk for heart disease also increase risk for brain disease and we just we need to start putting it together we need to be more sophisticated we have computers we have ai it's 2025 we can do better yes well first of all uh I and I'm sure the listeners really appreciate your human regarding who's responsible for the uh big surge in uh the interest in this field um so thanks for crediting your predecessors and um the others in the field uh at the same time I credit you um with really popularizing a lot of these terms being willing to go public facing and and share about metabolic Psychiatry for lack of a better uh way to put it U metabolic Psychiatry and and and really championing these ideas and uh being open into being part of a medical and Science and public discourse community so I'd be remiss if I didn't say that so hopefully you'll take that in and if you won't then I I very much appreciate it it's true thank you very much it's true and and I'm not alone in in that sentiment I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor our place our place makes my favorite pots pans and other cookware surprisingly toxic compounds such as pases or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans as well as utensils appliances and countless other Kitchen products as I've discussed on this podcast these pases or forever chemicals like Teflon have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption gut microbiome disruption fertility issues and many other health concerns so it's really important to avoid them this is why I'm a huge fan of ourplace ourplace products are made with the highest quality materials and are all past and toxin-free I particularly love their titanium always pan Pro it's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating instead it's pure titanium this means it has no harmful forever chemical and that it doesn't degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time it's also beautiful to look at I cook eggs in my titanium always pan Pro almost every morning the design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly and without sticking to the pan I also cook burgers and steaks in it and it puts a really nice sear on the meat but again nothing sticks to it so it's really easy to clean and even dishwasher safe I love it and I use it constantly our place now has a full line of Titanium Pro cookware that uses this firstof its- kind titanium non-stick technology so if you're looking for non-toxic long-lasting pots and pans go to fromourplace docomo and use the code huberman for 10% off your order with a 100 day risk-free trial free shipping and free returns you can experience this fantastic cookware with zero risk again that's fromourplace tocom huberman to get 10% off today's episode is also brought To Us by element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need but nothing you don't that means the electrolytes sodium magnesium and potassium all in the correct ratios but no sugar proper hydration is critical for optimal brain and body function even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance it's also important that you get adequate electrolytes the electrolytes sodium magnesium and potassium are vital for the functioning of all the cells in your body especially your neurons or your nerve cells drinking element dissolved in water makes it extremely easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes to make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes I dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up in the morning and I drink that basically first thing in the morning I also drink element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and therefore losing a lot of water and electrolytes they have a bunch of different great tasting flavors of element they have watermelon citrus Etc frankly I love them all if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element.com huberman to claim a free element sample pack with the purchase of any element drink mix again that's drink element.com huberman to claim a free sample pack if I think about a mental health condition like depression let's take depression um uh to start off I can just broadly create two you know Columns of of things or approaches that one might take uh one is this U mental model of sort of a molecule deficiency like I'm not saying this but there are many who at one point thought uh depression is related to a deficiency in serotonin or depression is related to a deficiency in dopamine either levels regulation enzymatic control whatever the the the level of control just this idea that these molecules are somehow lacking if you put them back you can relieve some symptoms of depression the other column that comes to mind for me having looked at the data on cognitive behavioral therapy on the data on uh psychedelics in the clinical setting for the treatment of depression ssris and other um so-called anti-depressants is this notion of neuroplasticity the idea that neural circuits can change and that neural circuits control our sense of well-being our perception of self perception of others feelings of agency Etc and it's now very clear that if you change levels of neuromodulators like dopamine like serotonin you don't necessarily cure depression but you open a window for plasticity and then perhaps the therapy that you're doing can modify brain circuits more robustly so I think in terms of molecule deficiency maybe it's a vitamin deficiency a neuromodulator deficiency and then I also think about plasticity that these treatments are just allowing for more brain change more rapidly what other columns would you add to that picture um and perhaps first do you think that picture is um woefully inadequate or just partially inadequate because I think this is the way most people think about the treatment of mental health they think oh there's something missing you take a drug and you get that thing back and then like ADHD you don't have enough dopamine or what you put it in and then all of a sudden attentional circuits work better this kind of thing versus plastic which is the modification of those circuits and the two things are not mutually exclusive but I I think until now they really hasn't been a a clear understanding that there are other columns for um for mechanistic change in in mental health I would say the concept of metabolism metabolic regulation mitochondrial function mitochondrial Health actually is an umbrella concept for everything you've just said it's an umbrella concept for well how do we create neurotransmitters where do these neurotransmitters come from what regulates their production release from cells and then even to go further what impact do those neurotransmitters have on other cells they are largely regulating brain metabolism and the way we usually think about it is they are regulating brain activity but if you ask the question well what is brain activity brain activity is either is fueled by metabolism that a a neuron cannot be active unless it has the capacity to increase its ATP kind of production and then when you suppress a neuron when you when you inhibit its function the TP production goes down so whether you want to think of metabolism as just a consequence of neural activity I actually think about it as an integral part of neural activity it's kind of like your car can't go without the engine a cell can't go without mitochondria um a cell can't do what it's supposed to do without mitochondria the other concept that you mentioned neuroplasticity neuroplasticity is all about energy and met metabolic resources to create new connections new neural connections between axons dendrites Somas other other aspects of neurons and cells and other types of cells asites oligodendrocytes um but in order to get neuroplasticity neuroplasticity implies growth and modulation and even pruning but it involves change and in order for an living organism to change that requires this foundational concept of metabolism now on the surface to a lot of people that sounds too abstract and it sounds like well that's ridiculous then if you're you're saying that metabolism is everything in biology and I kind of am of course it is you you can't talk about biology without talking about metabolism but when you talk about metabolic Health it becomes much more concrete pragmatic and real with real tools that you talk about all of the time on this podcast exercise promotes metabolic Health exercise promotes neuroplasticity they are inseparable you can't improve your metabolic Health without also at least opening up the opportunity for neuroplasticity improving your diet does the same thing sleep or lack thereof can impact this substance use can impact this and so you know in a way it it basically says let's connect all of the dots let's not hyperfocus on serotonin and a serotonin imbalance or deficiency as the singular cause of depression because for those of you who don't know that is ridiculously reductionistic and it is absolutely not true we know that we know that with certainty now you know the the whole serotonin hypothesis of depression came about not because researchers identified serotonin deficits in the brain that entire concept came from the observation that medications that modulate serotonin activity or inhibit its reuptake into neurons those medications ssris other types of anti-depressants those medications can reduce the symptoms of depression in some people that was just a purely serendipitous finding it was Serendipity the first anti-depressant was actually a tuberculosis treatment they were giving it to patients on a tuberculosis Ward and an astute infectious disease doctor noticed some of these patients are really depressed but when I give them this tuberculosis treatment they perk up like within a few weeks they start looking a lot less depressed and I don't think it's a coincidence I think it's the medication I'm giving them do you recall what the drug was aoide it's the first MAO inhibitor and um I could be saying the name wrong but uh it's first MAO inhibitor and uh that became the first anti-depressant which makes sense uh MAO inhibitors inhib of the enzymes that break down or let's just speak about these enzymes broadly either I think most anti-depressant drugs or treatments for ADHD typical prescription treatments uh either reduce the breakdown of neuromodulators like serotonin dopamine acetylcholine depending on which one we're talking about or they um they reduce the reuptake so that there's just more neurom modulator around for longer yes tell us about mitochondria in the framework of mental health so most people know mitochondria as the PowerHouse of the cell if if if they know that it at all so these tiny little organel and the PowerHouse of the cell reference means that mitochondria take the breakdown products of the food that we're eating they are the primary thing using the oxygen that we're breathing in they are creating the carbon dioxide that we're breathing out and that they are turning food into ATP which is the energy currency of the cell so they're taking food and oxygen and lots of other things but let's just simplify food and oxygen converting it into ATP and that is what the PowerHouse of the cell kind of refers to there is no doubt they do that there is no doubt that when that process stops humans have about six minutes or so and then we're dead that process is critical to life there is no other process in the body that you can disrupt that will kill the organism faster it is Central to living organisms this production of ATP so I don't at all mean to take away or minimize that function but research over the last 25 years has completely upended that simplistic notion of what mitochondria are doing they are actually doing so much more some people have created the reference that MIT are like the workers inside a cell that in order for a cell to work you need a Workforce because there's so much that needs to be done signals need to be sent thing like all this work all of these different things need to be functioning and mitochondria are absolutely providing the energy for those things to happen but they're also orchestrating a lot of it so for example they play a direct role in in converting food into some of the substrates for the production of neurotransmitters um but they also go further they store like some neurotransmitters like Gaba within themselves and that plays a role in gaba's release from a neuron they actually go to the cell membrane and move along the membrane dispensing vesicles of neuro transmitters and when you take the mitochondria away from the synapse but provide that synapse with ATP vesicles don't get released neurotransmitters aren't getting released the mitochondria are doing more we don't exactly know what but they're doing more than just providing the energy they they play a role in turning inflammation and immune cell both on and off they help start the process but they also help coordinate the cessation of that process they play an instrumental role in both the first and the last step in the synthesis of cortisol and they play a role in the first step in the synthesis of all of the steroid hormones which include estrogen testosterone progesterone so that if you have disregulation of cortisol or if you have disregulation of testosterone or estrogen or progesterone you must understand the role of mitochondria in that disregulation because they are critical in the production and release of these hormones they are the primary regulator of epigenetics so epigenetics are the expression of genes from the cell nucleus and researchers have long known that that's related to levels of reactive oxygen species it's related to levels of calcium it's related to other cell signals those cell signals are mostly originating within mitochondria during the development of any cell mitochondria they are like a universe unto themselves and there's so much we don't know about them but what what researchers have found is that mondria actually line up literally line up in an organized fashion around the cell nucleus and take on different confirmations and that is somehow sending signals to the Gen to result in the expression or the suppression of different genes from the nucleus and that when researchers take these mitochondria and like mess them up or something the cell does develop normally you know they've been implicated in all of the phases of the human stress response to psychological stress so that includes cortisol release noradrenaline release it includes inflammation and it includes epigenetic changes so those are kind of the four buckets of the human stress response cortisol adrenaline inflammation and epigenetic changes and researchers actually manipulated mitochondrial genes two genes in the cell nucleus that control for mitochondrial proteins and two genes in mitochondria themselves and by manipulating these four different genes one at a time in mice they could impact all of the four aspects of the stress response and so what that means is that mitochondria are somehow involved in regulating the human stress response and so the way that I think about it is that and the way that many researchers actually think about it now is that mitochondria you know there are hundreds sometimes thousands of them in our cells in each of our cells most neurons have thousands of mitochondria the mitochondria are actually moving around they use the cytoskeleton to move around the cell they fuse with each other they it's called mitochondrial Dynamics they like change shape they do all sorts of things and again that impacts all of these signaling processes but that's just within one little cell so you can think of one cell is like almost a village of mitochondria that they're all just doing different things things and working together to help that cell function but in fact when you think about hormones like cortisol you can think about it as a way for mitochondria in one cell to produce cortisol that they can get sent to mitochondria in another cell to to make that other cell do something to either increase its activity or decrease its activity some people actually think about human cells as just a network of mitoch all kind of the mitochondria throughout the body and brain are just doing all sorts of things and at the end of the day we come back to just common sense at the end of the day it's about helping the organism adapt and survive ultimately organisms rule number one they need to survive rule number two they need to reproduce and rule number three they need to adapt and mitochondria are playing a foundational role in all of those basic aspects of organismal survival and again to some people that well that's so high level that's like well you're saying it's everything I'm like yeah it kind of is and mental health falls under it how could we think about mental health without thinking about the big picture like let's start with the big picture and then let's put Health into it and let's put the lack of adaptation or the lack of survival or the um these other things I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor ag1 ag1 is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink with adaptogens I've been taking ag1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring this podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still take ag1 is because it is the highest quality and most post complete foundational nutritional supplement what that means is that ag1 ensures that you're getting all the necessary vitamins minerals and other micronutrients to form a strong foundation for your daily Health ag1 also has probiotics and prebiotics that support a healthy gut microbiome your gut microbiome consists of trillions of microorganisms that line your digestive tract and impact things such as your immune system status your metabolic Health your hormone health and much more so I've consistently found that when I take ag1 daily my digestion is improved my immune system is more robust and my mood and mental focus are at their best in fact if I could take Just One supplement that supplement would be ag1 if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 with your order of ag1 again go to drink a1.com huberman to claim this special offer today's episode is also brought To Us by eight sleep eight sleep Mak smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity now I've spoken before on this podcast about the critical need for us to get adequate amounts of quality sleep each and every night now one of the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct and that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep your body temperature actually has to drop about 1 to 3° and in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3° eight sleep automatically regul regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs now I find that extremely useful because I like to make the bed really cool at the beginning of the night even colder in the middle of the night and warm as I wake up that's what gives me the most slow wave sleep and rapid eye movement sleep and I know that because eight sleep has a great sleep tracker that tells me how well I've slept and the types of sleep that I'm getting throughout the night I've been sleeping on an eights Sleep mattress cover for 4 years now and it has completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep their latest model the Pod 4 ultra also has snoring detection that will automatically lift your head a few degrees in order to improve your air flow and stop you from snoring if you decide to try eight sleep you have 30 days to try it at home and you can return it if you don't like it no questions asked but I'm sure that you'll love it go to 8sleep.com huberman to save up to $350 off your pod 4 ultra eight sleep ships to many countries worldwide including Mexico and the UAE again that's 8sleep.com huberman to save up to $350 off your pod 4 ultra what are some of the things that we know can improve mitochondrial health either number function or otherwise and maybe we can talk about the basics first and get a little bit granular if you could about you know what are the prescriptions for keeping your mitochondrial healthy or improving your mitochondrial number and improving their function and then uh we can transition from there to the more let's just say um uh the more advanced ways of doing doing that um is there a role for supplementation is there a role for drugs is there uh you know these days well I hear about urethan a I um because I'm a little bit of an adventure these days I um and I'm turning 50 later this year I decide to experiment with a peptide that is uh sr31 which is specifically to improve mitochondrial function I'm doing this with the full understanding it may do nothing or it may kill me I don't know but we'll find out but um someone had to do it and and I'm a one variable at a time kind of guy um so it was important for me to stay with my current regimen and only change that do blood work etc because a lot of people some people out there are more um in the mode of trying to do a bunch of things and and I don't think that's as helpful to me it's also just not not it's not in keeping with my S scientist one scientist that is great that's right I'm monogamous with respect to variables right so what can we do at a basic level to keep and improve our mitochondrial number and function and if we have to hit on some of the usual suspects fine but if you could tell us how how we can do this so I'm really going to start with the basics and they're going to sound cliche and they're going to sound too basic to most people and I just want to set the stage for even for severe mental illness we can talk about strategies that will work and these strategies that I'm going to describe are not really appropriate like when when somebody becomes severely ill these strategies May may not be sufficient but the basics are what we call the field of Lifestyle medicine so there are six pillars of Lifestyle medicine they include diet nutrition exercise or movement sleep managing substance use ideally reducing it or minimizing it or eliminating it stress reduction practices mindfulness meditation yoga and the last one is relationships I throw in the word purpose into relationships because I think even if you don't have a lot of friends or family you can still have a very full thriving life if you have a purpose so those are the six pillars unfortunately this is where the cliches and the worthless advice begin especially in the diet nutrition camp because people will say eat more plants eat some broccoli have some good blueberries blueberries have antioxidants have some blueberries on whatever else you're eating and everything will be fine if you just add a couple of servings of blueberries a week you'll improve your health brain food and that it is such worthless advice it is not at all that simple and so so I think diet nutrition gets complicated fast the other things are actually pretty straightforward should you move your body yes should you stress your body intermittently allowing for full recovery yes that's what most people call exercise and what are you doing when you exercise you're actually if we look at like the muscles for example muscle tissue what exactly does exercise do whether it's isometric exercise to increase the size of the muscle or whether it's endurance capacity which actually does not change the size of the muscle at all um but allows for somebody to run longer faster harder so marathon runners for example can be quite thin you can look at a marathon runner and think you're not even an athlete they don't look all that different yet they can run sometimes 100 miles and what makes their muscles different than my muscles cuz I can't run 100 miles me either what makes their muscles different than mine even if the size isn't different there is one and only one thing that makes their muscles different and it's called mitochondria the number the number of mitochondria and and almost certainly the health of mitochondria you can actually take a biopsy of their muscle and you will see a much higher density of mitochondria in their muscle tissue than you will in mine if you actually then did a a a more thorough assessment of ATP capacity they their muscles or their mitochondria would be much healthier than mine they their mitochondria would have greater capacity for ATP production than my mitochondria would um so that's exercise there are lots of things you can do with exercise for people who don't exercise at all yes get out and just walk just do something maybe get some sunlight in morning while you're while you're at it um that sounds like a good idea uh the substance use um it's obvious it's the thing you've been talking about it I've been talking about substances deplete mitochondria I've been very interested in this um I'm a big lover of certain genres of music and um whenever topic of music comes up the name Rick Rubin comes up because he's been on this podcast twice the the famous Rick Rubin amazing producer and I'm blessed to have as a close friend and I often ask Rick I'm like why are so many of these folks in the in music dead there seems to be a history of people who did um stimulants it took a lot of stimulants cocaine and amphetamine in particular um musicians that did that in the 70s and 80s and 90s seemed to drop dead of heart attacks later when they were not currently using as far as we know those stimulants is it is it the case that stimulants like cocaine and amphetamine deplete cells of mitochondria do we do we know that to be true we do know and it's slightly more complex story so it's all about the dose um so stimulants are used to treat ADHD and we know that people we've known for decades people who have ADHD who have symptoms of ADHD have glucose hypom metabolism in their brains so their brains are not producing enough ATP from glucose what is one way to increase that dopamine dopamine will increase that so you can give people stimulants to improve their brain metabolism enough so that they now no longer have symptoms or at least have a reduction in their symptoms that story is unequivocally true we have lots of animal data human neuroimaging data clinical research studies documenting that appropriate doses of stimulants so that's usually loish doses can improve brain metabolism and what that means is that it's they're actually stimulating mitochondria to produce more ATP however metabolism is all about balance you can underdo it and you can overdo it and when you overdo it what happens is that if you hypers stimulate mitochondria with high doses of stimulants the mitochondria are essentially running on all cylinders and electrons start leaking out of the electron transport chain and what happens is that that creates reactive oxygen species which then damage the mitochondria themselves and damage other aspects of the cell and it can lead to Chronic mitochondrial disfunction chronic metabolic dysfunction it's challenging with stimulants because people are looking for a yes or no answer so Dr Palmer do you think stimulant are good or bad I don't have an answer to that it depends on the person it depends on the dose of stimulants it depends on the type of stimulant it depends on what impact it's having on that person um but we need to open our minds to the possibility that yes maybe some people do benefit from stimulants and maybe at the same time other people are harmed in catastrophic Ways by stimulants um and it it can all be linked through mitochondrial mechanisms it can certainly be linked through dopamine but again we have to ask well what is that dopamine doing to to the target cells that when dopamine gets released and connects with the dopamine receptor what happens to that Target cell it changes the metabolism of that Target cell it increases the activity of that Target cell so stimulants are one back to this bigger kind of Lifestyle medicine picture stimulants are definitely one hyos stimulants very harmful to human health what are some others alcohol we've known since the 1960s in the 1960s researchers were trying to figure out how the hell does alcohol cause therosis we knew that we've known that we've known that for a long time alcoholics develop liver failure they develop therosis of the liver and they can die from it how exactly does that happen in the 1960s researchers figured out it's mitochondial tox toxicity interesting in the liver cells that is what's making the liver cells die that alcohol gets converted into this molecule called acid alahh which is very toxic to lots of cell parts but in particular to mitochondria mitochondria are processing this Alcohol and Other enzymes and kind of other things are trying to detoxify the alcohol but at the end of the day mitochondrial toxicity seems to be a clear route so when you know when I was doing research on mitochondria for the book it I there was an over there were over 10,000 published research articles of alcohol and mitochondria and I was initially shocked by that and I wondered like what's that about like how that's that's how I know this 1960s story and everything else is because researchers been looking at how how is it that alcohol can be so toxic and the two organs that are most effective are the liver because that's the primary organ trying to detoxify it and then the brain and why the brain because the brain is highly sensitive to metabolic disruption other substances of abuse tobacco the carcinogens in tobacco so not nicotine per se do we know if nicotine is depleting mitochondria nicotine is a stimulant for mitochondria so again similar story low doses can be great high doses May in fact be toxic oh good you've got to get you gotta you got to find the right balance not a big nicotine guy but lately I've started uh chewing half of a piece of nicotine gum a few times a week um so 2 milligrams to four milligrams which is very low dose um couple couple of I would say maybe three four days a week I'll do that and um I'm doing it specifically for brain health reasons and I have no relationship to any nicotine pouch or gum or anything like that so I want to be really like company um so I'm doing a little experiment and uh you know it's it's interesting stimulant because it relaxes you a little bit too but I wouldn't want kids to start doing this or people in their 20s or 30s like I said I'm approaching the fifth floor I'm going to be 50 in September and um I want to do everything I can to hold on the neurons I've got so I think low-level stimulation of perhaps the mitochondria and other um certainly the stoline system with nicotine it's a good idea but what I see is a lot of people who are taking these pouches that range from anywhere from 3 milligrams On The Low End uh Dose side all the way up to eight milligrams and it is very habit forming people start with one pouch or two pouches a day and pretty soon they're doing a canister every day or two so even the cost starts to be a big deal but it's it's pretty incredible was on the Berkeley campus and I went to a little convenience store near the Berkeley campus recently this kid came in and we started chatting a podcast fan we were chatting and he was there to buy uh nicotine pouches I said how many of those do you go through a week he's like seven or eight I was like really was engineering student but in my years in college it was always just you know some coffee or something yeah some coffee we didn't really have stick with coffee for the young for Young Folks yeah for the young little a little bit of coffee it's about it's about dose and it's about look so most things that enhance metabolism quickly can be addictive and I think that's the challenge for a lot of people is that you get that energy right away at some point you acclimate to that substance somewhat and then you want more you want that same increase that you got before um so it's just important to kind of be mindful that you can overstimulate metabolism mitochondrial function and then you start depleting mitochondria and and and then yeah and then you actually the mitochondria begin producing more more reactive oxygen species which ends up being detrimental so it's like driving your car again if you think about mitochondria like an engine it's like an engine of the of your car when you're driving your car on the highway you don't want to go too slow and you don't want to go too fast acceleration is costly and acceleration is costly right I mean that transmission systems you know create this incredible efficiency of being able to travel at speed uh with more efficiency you know but accelerating is is is is a different thing altogether I mean that's the way that I think about it and so somebody who's addicted to drugs and alcohol for example they're on a roller coaster ride of hyper stimulating their metabolic rate and then trying to suppress that hypers stimulation with sedatives so that they can sleep or calm down and then they're just but they're destroying their metabolic health and does that really play out like and is that you know some will say well Chris that's just one of myriad things that they're doing to their cells sure but does it play out in diseases that we think of as metabolic diseases absolutely type two diabetes yes cardiovascular disease 100% like premature mortality yeah um like it there's it's kind of like the elephant in the room that we have just failed to look at because we've been so splintered with no it's biological no it's psychological no it's social it's like it's all of them let's look at the elephant that comprises all of them one of the beautiful things about science is that you isolate variables you can get very reductionist we know that there are these things called mitochondria that they move around I mean these discoveries are are truly incredible that have been made in the last 100 years or so but there's been this um kind of obsession I I think in in the the public discussion around Health that you know around things that are obviously related to the thing that you're trying to cure so serotonin and brain health it's like oh okay makes sense you know the listening to proac what came out you increase serotonin some people are feeling better maybe it's through neuroplasticity maybe it's through effects of Serotonin and but it makes sense serotonin brain right you know it um but if we zoom out from that and we accept because it's true that essentially all cells are dependent on mitochondria for their function why wouldn't we go to this fundamental layer uh first in order to try and improve mental and physical health simultaneously right it's a very different way of approaching medicine in general normally we go okay well the issue is right here that's where the tumor is that's where the circuit deficit is this is where the the lesion is or the growth and we're going to go there right but um to avoid that the pathologic state in the first place uh these six pillars are wonderful by the way a diet exercise sleep substance overuse or abuse stress mitigation and relationship SLP purpose um so we're going to keep returning to this theme of of mitochondria's foundational um throughout today's discussion because I think people need to to frame their health in that context I I really do also um years ago my postto adviser the late Ben Baris he died unfortunately pancreatic cancer but just seeing incredible scientist um MD and uh scientist who really popularized the the study of glea prior to that they were seeing this kind of like backw science no one everyone thought it was just glue for the brain he used to uh stop us in the hallways late at night and he used to we called it getting bend because you'd want to leave and he would like he was a night owl it was awful and you get stuck there but I'll never forget he stopped me he called me Andy and he said he did this numerous times but he said Andy why no one calls me that by the way anymore um he said Andy why is it that as we get older we have less energy and I'm like I don't know Ben he's like someone needs to he's like why don't you work on that why are you working on these retinal cells like you you should work on that and he said why is it that we that our brain is less plastic like well I don't know I think it's the Gia right and there is some evidence that it has something to do with the Gia um among other things but there's a fundamentally interesting question you look at kids and they're just full of energy and we there's the NAD hypothesis and there's these other but it always seems to Circle back to mitochondria yes over and over so I think the answer is very clear it's it's we have a ton of mitochondria early in life and over time it gets depleted is it that simple I mean there are other things too there are other things but I I actually do think that's a it's not just the the number and density of mitochondria but it's the health of mitochondria because unfortunately you know our cells have a process for getting rid of defective mitochondria um it's part of autophagy there's a sub kind of category called mitophagy in which defective mitochondria should be shuttled to lomes or shuttled out of cells recent paper actually found that microa in the brain again send out these nanot tunnels to asites and collect defective mitochondria from the neuron amazing and then take care of the disposal process for that neuron we are so cool and that when you inhibit that it appears to increase and accelerate neurod degeneration and when you enhance that it appears to improve um or reduce neurod degeneration but I think it is I think children have more energy because they have healthier metabolism healthier mitochondrial function and when we look at like again like is there evidence for that there's overwhelming evidence for that there are thousands of peer-reviewed published articles in leading journals nature cell all sorts of journals over the last several decades just to again try to bring this back to just common sense so we have these things called diseases of Aging what are are the diseases of Aging the diseases of Aging are obesity type 2 diabetes cardiovascular disease cancer neurodegenerative disorders those are universally thought of as diseases of Aging interestingly what often gets left off of that category are the mental disorders especially today a lot of people think mental disorders as primarily a youth problem but in fact mental disorders depression anxiety psychosis are actually diseases of Aging so the Center for Disease Control has put out kind of charts of any age group we what is the probability if you are you know a youth in America today that you will be prescribed an anti-depressant an SSRI anti-depressant if you're between 20 and 40 what's the probability among the remaining people who are still 20 to 40 among all the people that age as people get older the risk for anti-depressant prescription goes up the highest Cate category of people prescribed anti-depressants are 65 and older really well I guess uh some sound that make sense although I would have thought it would be the younger population most people do and that's why I'm saying this because it's shocking to most people it was actually surprising to me but I'm I was thinking wait if my theory is correct then mental disorder should be a disease of aging and in fact they are antis psychotic prescriptions what age group is the most like to be prescribed an Antico over AG 80 really oh it goes through the roof because dementia is associated with 40 to 50% of the people with dementia will have psychotic symptoms hallucinations and delusions um they'll have agitation the benzo diazines the prescription rate goes up now with them with benzos there there is a dip start at age 65 and that is really because Physicians are explicitly told do not prescribe benzos to people over 65 so the rate starts going down but with anti-depressants it's almost linear the older you are the more likely you are to be receiving a prescription for an anti-depressant anticho discs there are some waves and shifts women for example around the time of menopause get a peak so you get a peak around the age of 20 which is new onset schizophrenia and then it kind of comes down a little and then women round time menopause higher Peak and then it kind of comes down a little and then lateen life goes through the roof goes through the roof again because of what we call dementia so the diseases of Aging anyway are all of the metabolic disorders and oh by the way the mental disorders and in my mind we need to tie that together that is not a serotonin problem right we need to tie that science together and the only way to tie that science together is to look at the bigger picture that we call metabolism and ultimately you have to look at mitochondria and mitochondrial biology to understand it I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors function last year I became a function member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing function provides over 100 Advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily Health this snapshot offers you with insights on your heart health Hormone Health immune functioning nutrient levels and much more they've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful Plastics and tests for P fases or forever chemicals function not only provides testing of over a 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from Top Doctors who are expert in the relevant areas for example in one of my first tests with function I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood function not only helped me detect that but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels which included limiting my tuna consumption I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with Knack and acetylcysteine both of which can support glutathione production and detoxification and I should say by taking a second function test that approach works comprehensive blood testing is vitally important there's so many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be detected in a blood test the problem is blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated in contrast I've been super impressed by function Simplicity and at the level of cost it is very affordable as a consequence I decided to join their scientific Advisory Board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast if you'd like to try function you can go to function health.com huberman function currently has a weight list of over 50,000 people but they're offering Early Access to huberman podcast listeners again that's function health.com huberman to get early access to function let's talk about diet and nutrition for a moment um in recent years you've talked a lot about the clinical use of the ketogenic diet for various mental health disorders and cited some spectacular results um and this has had a huge impact on everybody's thinking about what ketogenic diets originally were for it was developed as a medical treatment for epilepsy is my understanding only later did it become uh popular as a potential Avenue for losing body fat Etc but what are some of the ways that people can use diet and nutrition to improve metabolic Health generally but let's be more specific mitochondrial Health number turnover all the good stuff that happens in mitochondria um how can nutrition be used um to improve that and why would it be that the ketogenic diet would improve mitochondrial function or is it that the ketogenic diet bypasses the need for standard cellular metabolism by um pulling on some other cellular metab metabolism um uh mechanisms I'm I'm just trying to draw the link here between uh ketogenic diet and mitochondria because we've you've well established that mitochondria are Central to this whole picture of mental and physical health I'll throw in a plug before before I go deep into the um ketogenic diet story but you you also threw a question in there about other dietary interventions or how can diet impact there is no question diet plays a profound profound and Central role to human metabolism and all of the consequences of human metabolism and you very eloquently laid out the case for early life a woman who's breastfeeding her infant that breast milk has a profound impact on whether that baby's brain develops normally or not that has dire consequences potentially for the outcome in the health of that child and it's all about nutrition we've known that for decades that if women are malnourished during pregnancy it impacts that infant the the the fetus's lifespan really it increases risk for mental disorders and metabolic disorders increases risk if if your mother is starving while she's pregnant or has to fast or has to go without nutrients it increases that child's risk for metabolic disorders obesity diabetes cardiovascular disease um we've known that and that is um you know there are lots of theories about obesity around that it also surprisingly increases risk for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and antisocial personality disorder and all sorts of other mental disorders in terms of other dietary patterns I I just want to and we can do a deep dive into any of these you want and then I'll go on to ketogenic diets but Ultra processed foods really bad for your physical health and your mental health we have just growing body of evidence for that is that because of The increased calorie consumption there's this really nice paper that was published a few years ago showing that people who um eat above a certain threshold of processed foods tend to consume on average about 500 calories more than they require per day which might not seem like much um but over time that compounds and they gain a lot of adapost tissue and and then the adapost tissue is secreting a lot of things into the bloodstream that make the whole situation even worse both brain and bodily um but aside from the caloric load I mean is there any evidence that these food dyes and other things that are included in these foods are are detrimental to mitochondrial Health this is a somewhat controversial thing these days because some of these dies were banned recently which I saw as a good thing but then some of the die hards in the scientific Community like oh those dosages are represent like 6,000 fold what you'd have to what most people eat you know the dosages used in mice but but the FDA still pulled the dies and the FDA is a pretty conservative body um so I don't know it I not every chemical is bad of course um but are these additives really that bad so to try to answer your question are the chemicals and additives harmful the real answer is we don't actually have adequate scientific evidence one way or another and why don't we have adequate scientific evidence because we're not spending money to research it so right now the the rules to this day are that um you know there's this concept called grass General regarded as safe that food companies can develop new molecules that will preserve a food make a food hyper palatable make it tastier make it more shelf stable whatever whatever they want to claim it does that they can develop molecules they can put these molecules into our food and they can get away with just saying well this is just general regarded as safe without any adequate safety testing whatsoever and the FDA allows that now the new new Administration RFK Jr just ly said he's going to try to change that rule and I welcome that change I think that will be a phenomenal change but the re so the reality is that testing hasn't been done on all of these molecules there are tens of thousands of molecules and like new chemicals new additives things that sometimes aren't even on the label that are added to food and we really don't know for sure for each and every one of them whether this one is safe or not safe what we do know overall and this unfortunately comes down to epidemiological studies where they just look at hundreds of thousands if not millions of people and they assess like how much Ultra processed food is this person eating and is that Associated if we look at large populations of people and we stratify them by the these these people are eating Mo mostly Ultra processed foods and these people are hardly eating any are there differences in their health outcomes and the answer to that is unequivocal and it is perfectly clear the more Ultra processed foods you eat the worse your physical and mental health both its cardiovascular disease its obesity its diabetes its mortality it's cancer it's also a broad range of mental disorders and so we know that we we've got more granular data that's hyper focuses on the mental health story you know one study over 300,000 people the more Ultra processed foods you eat a direct linear relationship it was shocking how linear it was the more Ultra processed foods you eat the worse your mental health and it was so striking it was not a subtle difference it wasn't like you know oh it was a 3% difference between the lowest it was a threefold difference wow the people who consumed Ultra processed foods every day multiple times a day 58% of them had poor mental health compared to only 18% of the people who rarely or never consumed Ultra processed foods wow so this would be even just like somebody has like a bag of chips and some um you know just pour in water type pre-made soup or something like that uh those are ultr processed um this would be somebody orders a sandwich at the deli for lunch which can be done in a relatively healthy way depending on what's in that sandwich um and then does soda and bag of chips on the side like I mean you're that's a lot of in my opinion highly processed food but people I think sometimes people don't think of it that way yes one of I was um surprised and somewhat delighted to learn that one of the ways that um the you know the public health uh folks uh got kids to smoke fewer cigarettes because when I was growing up like smoking was cool like you smoke cigarette it was cool people thought it was cool definitely is reinforcing because of the nicotine the dopamine increases um and it was considered cool um you had your like maror man image from the preceding decades but then it was really the the uh the 9s kind of um it was the actors and models and stuff that made it cool like people smoked and it was supposed to be cool and one of the ways that um we ended up with people smoking far less was not just to ban it on campuses because that just makes teens want to do it more right in college you want to do it more um was to have these commercials of these um it was all to be direct it was just like these um rich white guys in a room that was portraying like the boardroom of a tobacco company and they were like cackling and talking about like haahha they think we're going to they don't think it causes cancer and this kind of thing basically pitting youth against adults so that the youth felt like their money was being taken by the by The Establishment so is there a world where you know kids are going to be like like you know forgive me but you know like f that I'm not eating Doritos you know like I'm not going to be manipulated by highly processed foods or I'm going to hold on to my mental health by making healthy choices in terms of food It's Tricky but it has a lot of the same parallels to cigarette use or alcohol use but I feel like the only way to really get Americans to change their behavior besides scaring them fundamentally but even if you do that is to incentivize it and one of the best incentives historically for public health change has been to pit the make the public feel like they're pitted against the people that are trying to take their money unfairly and make them unhealthy at the same time you got to activate that kind of rebellious Spirit uh-uh not going to do it just telling people is bad for you doesn't work right we know that how do we incentivize people yeah I'm not going to give a cliche answer because this is the trillion dollar question that everybody's asking and and it it really you know the the health of our country really kind of depends on it with billions of dollars that this industry has in Revenue annually they can spend a lot of that money on really impactful marketing campaigns getting people to believe that it's not it's not as unhealthy as Chris Palmer and Andrew huberman are saying it's fine everybody deserves a treat within the last couple of weeks the American Heart Association was actively lobbying against a Texas bill that was trying to restrict spending food stamp money on junk food I saw that clip it's so disturbing to see someone from the American Heart Association actively lobbying to keep tax dollars directed towards including sugary soda not even diet soda but sugary soda in uh lunches and and food for people who are uh low income and he went on record as [Music] saying this junk food this Ultra processed food is not the root cause of obesity or diabetes or any of these health conditions which is an absolute abject lie and when you have supposedly respected organizations being bought by industry promoting misinformation I it's really hard you know everybody's all upset that like oh people don't trust the science they're not respecting the respected organizations well the respected organizations need to step up and start behaving in a respectable manner they need to stop the American Heart Association should not be taking a dime from any industry that plays a role in heart disease like they it would be like it would be like the American Heart Association taking money from tobacco companies and then coming out and say smoking doesn't really cause heart disease people everybody calm down there there there's still a lot that we don't know we need more research we need more research smoking doesn't cause heart disease people this is just scare mongering this is just paranoid conspiracy theories that is exactly what's happening now they're taking money from food companies that have no vested interest in the human in the health of the population that they are feeding they know perfectly well that these foods are highly palatable um and what does that mean it means addictive and again if I was selling food I would want people to be addicted to the food I was selling why because you sell more higher margins if you sell food that people aren't addicted to they'll just move on to the other food that is addictive and and then you'll be out of business so it's not an easy problem to solve I don't mean to imply it's easy because if if one or two companies steps up and does the right thing they'll just go out of business well I feel like the the smoking parallel is is critical and maybe the trans fat um the history of of entire cities Banning the use of trans fats for instance or the use of a styrofoam containers right it's very different very different issue it doesn't directly get to human health of the styrofoams not good but it's about it's about waste and and um environment but I feel like there has to be a top- down ban and Americans also don't like bans right we don't we don't like things we like choice but we don't like the consequences of those of choice and then we want people to fix the consequences of those choices um with treatments that don't have side effects and then this is like kind of the cycle that that I've observed in my lifetime over and over again you know I think it's the Rebellion piece it's when people realize they're being manipulated once people realize they're being manipulated I feel like that's when they're willing to intervene uh and stop otherwise reinforcing activity reinforced addictive activity save money and like take a different direction like that's that's inherent to the American Spirit as much as we love freedom we also we have this like no you're not going to you're not going to do this to me kind of Spirit we see it everywhere this is my belief but then again I was kind of a rebellious team but but if it's in service to health I'm I'm hopeful I mean my my understanding by no means am I an expert but my understanding of what really drove the reduction and tobacco use was the taxes and the ban on Advertising the ban on television advertisements interesting that that when you get rid of the advertisements you're no longer tempting people with it um you're no longer able to spread misinformation um and when you make the product so expensive people just even if they want to try it even if they're already addicted to try already addicted to it now they are highly motivated to get off of it why because it's costing them an arm and a leg Yeah money hurts and and they and they realize that I I just don't want this we could do similar things with ultra processed foods if Rebellion education whatever I I don't care what works but all of the above we're we're we're really fighting an uphill battle so Ultra process food that's just one story vitamin nutrient deficiencies do you want to go to ketogenic diet you asked me about that and I got sidetracked yeah we went into a public health discourse we're weaving back and forth that's what we do here I think it's I look it's very timely right I don't care if you're the staunchest Democrat or the staunchest Republican or somewhere in between like these issues affect everybody and um anyone who just wants to view Maha as a republican thing it's fine that I'm I'm not affiliated with Maha I I am in favor of improved Public Health from whatever angles that can meaningfully be done um so tell us about ketogenic diet and then I'd like to ask about things that we can do to improve mitochondrial function in these other bins but does ketogenic diet improve mitochondrial function and if so H how does that work The quick summary story for people who don't know ketogenic so ketogenic diet is a 100-year-old evidence-based treatment for epilepsy it can stop seizures even when medications fail to we have um over a dozen controlled Trials of ketogenic diets in children in particular with treatment resistant epilepsy we have two Cochran reviews that came out positive so Cochran reviews are the gold standard in the medical field for metaanalyses um very rigorous and they analyzed the data that exists and came to the conclusion that ketogenic diet if somebody has treatment resistant epilepsy compared to treatment as usual which is try another anti-epileptic medication the ketogenic diet is six times more likely to result in seizure Freedom wow than just trying yet another epilepsy pill so the ketogenic diet is a powerful anti-convulsant treatment we use anti-convulsant treatments in Psychiatry every day in tens of millions of people lots of these medications are used so um so at this point we now have over 50 published pilot trials case series case reports other lines of evidence of the ketogenic diet for psychiatric disorders um schizophrenia bipolar disorder depression anxiety anorexia or neosa surprisingly um these 50 reports represent over 1,900 people and on balance the ketogenic diet appears to be an effective treatment sometimes an extraordinarily effective treatment like in able to induce remission of schizophrenia or bipolar um in people who otherwise had treatment resistant disorders and they're going off medication simultaneously some of them are um so there are you know I have heard probably from thousands of people around the world since my work has become more public and actually our first podcast together hands down the most cited reason people know who I am as they should well I know about you but it's huberman hu that huberman Lab podcast I'm just I'm just a a a uh a runway for people to uh incredible messages to take off thank you again for the opportunity to disseminate this word and because at the end of the day I'm hearing from thousands of people who simply listened to that podcast made changes started a ketogenic diet for their schizophrenia or other treatment resistant mental disorder reach out to me you saved my life I can't tell you how many times I've gotten handwritten notes emails messages from people who use those words you saved my life I never met this person all I did was share this knowledge and then they saved their own lives with knowledge coming back to your question now in a roundabout way does ketogenic diet impact mitochondrial Health we we have strong evidence that it does and um so it appears so the ketogenic diet is mimicking the fasting State and I just want to say that again the ketogenic diet mimics the fasting State what does that mean it means the ketogenic diet is mimicking no food consumption so is the ketogenic diet the healthiest diet that everybody should follow no that's not the way I think about it the ketogenic diet is an intervention it is Shifting metabolism it is Shifting countless kind of systems signaling Pathways other things gene expression in the human body and brain and that results in effect facts and the good news is these effects appear to be lifechanging and life-saving sometime so they're highly beneficial effects um again dose and the way you do it matter because fasting the the extreme version of fasting is starvation and that results in death so that is not at all a good thing so let's make sure that if you're going to do a ketogenic diet or a fasting regimen that you're not depriving yourself of essential nutrition that um you're getting enough calories you're getting enough nutrients that you're doing it in a a medically sound way so that you're optimizing your health and not hurting your health um but we have you know it's it's hard to measure this in humans in v in vitro because we can't like do an intervention to a human and then dissect their brain and like biopsy it and look at the mitochondria under the microscope so we mostly have animal data that supports this but animal data strongly supports that ketogenic interventions improve mitophagy so getting rid of these old and defective mitochondria so you're kind of cleaning house you're getting rid of the bad and then you're replacing them with new fresh ones mitochondrial biogenesis so that at the end of the day the cell will have more healthy mitochondria now some researchers have really hyperfocused on the ketogenic diet might be working through the gut microbiome this gut brain connection and we have some evidence that that is true so researchers actually took feces from human children with epilepsy before starting a ketogenic diet and then afterward while they were stable on a ketogenic diet and then they transferred these FAL samples to mice who were predisposed to epilepsy or predisposed to seizures when they took the feces from the children while the children still had were seizing the mice were more likely to seize when they took the feces from the children doing the ketogenic diet and transferred it to the mice the mice were less likely to have seizures interesting even though the mice were not on ketogenic diets so there's something in the feces of children with epilepsy doing ketogenic diets that result that has an anti-seizure effect what could that something be it could be the gut microbiome but it could be molecules neurotransmitters neuropep other things that those microbes are producing or it could be neuropeptides and other factors that the gut cells are producing so we really don't know for sure what exactly is it so on the surface there's something in the feces there's a gut microbiome a gut brain connection thing what does that have to do with mitochondria so another research group did that same model got mice to have an anti-seizure effect from a ketogenic diet and then dissected their brains looking for what changed in the brain how exactly is a ketogenic diet having an anti-seizure effect in the brain because it that's the pathology the pathological finding seizure is occurring in the brain and when they analyze genetic changes up regulation down regulation it all centered on mitochondria that the changes in the gut were resulting in mitochondrial changes in the brain which means brain energy metabolism in the brain and um so again it's an umbrella Theory doesn't replace what we know it's not gut microbiome or s serotonin it's not gut microbiome or mitochondria it's both both of them are true and it's all interconnected um so I I do think we've got more than enough data that ketogenic therapies impact brain metabolism which then impacts neurotransmitters a really what I hope will become one of many really important Stu studies um published by Ian Campbell and colleagues in the UK that uh they just did a pilot trial 20 patients with bipolar disorder put on ketogenic diets and they found in wide- ranging improvements in metabolic Health biomarkers like weight blood pressure other things but they also found a reduction in brain um glutamate activity which is often associ iated with bipolar disorder and Hyper excitability and seizures um and so that helps us understand again it's not it's not metabolic or glutamate a neurotransmitter it's both it it it it's putting it together yeah the Campbell study is really interesting we we'll link to that in the show note captions and incidentally we will also link to this um American Heart Association appalling uh quote unquote testimony sorry AJ I'm not I'm not sorry I'm not uh not sorry um but then again I'm not a physician so I don't have to worry about that well maybe I do anyway I'm not a cardiologist is there any uh rationale for people who don't have epilepsy or don't suffer from bipolar schizophrenia um but like myself would like to keep our mitochondrial function as as strong as possible and for doing a brief ketogenic intervention yes the answer is yes can intermittent and I'm so I'm going to lump ketogenic with other fasting mimicking diets and fasting itself so can intermittent fasting or can cycles of fasting have health improving qualities or health improving effects absolutely so interestingly before I talk about even some of the science on this and there it's not super robust why because again we don't fund diet studies there's no money to be made from dietary interventions really there's no patent on it nobody cares about dietary interventions but there are a lot of studies on exercise interventions but even those are they're not huge randomized controlled trials with 10,000 participants they're not you know like even the federal government will fund large scale medication trials Statin studies and others but they often don't I mean there have been a few the Women's Health Initiative funded a massive dietary intervention study and unfortunately that was a huge disappointment to the field because it was negative they randomized women to just keep doing the diet you're eating or go on a lowfat diet and the lowfat diet didn't do anything for their heart health or other objective kind of outcome measures and put another way just to just to really close this for people it means a lowfat diet is no better than the standard American diet a lowfat diet is equivalent you get equivalent health effects from a lowfat diet to a standard American diet that's really bad so lowfat diets need to go away and people who promote lowfat diets need to stop promoting they need to get come up to speed with the science and just like move on like at least acknowledge there are healthy fats even though fat has more calories don't worry about those calories worry about the health effects the long-term health effects yeah you got to get those monounsaturated fats and you got to eat your Omega-3s and you have to you know and I'm a Believer in eating some butter here and there you were asking me about intermittent ketogenic or inter intermittent fasting so I'll just say that we have a long history in multiple cultures on Earth for thousands of years fasting has been part of healing rituals um India China Christian like fasting has been a part of rituals and you know most people just assume it's religious folklore or just silliness or whatever but I actually think Millennia of humans we're not all stupid idiots and that some people along the way actually noticed this seems to do something useful and that's probably why it found its way in every culture and persisted for thousands of years because there was actually something meaningful happening so what we have now in terms of more controlled trials I'm going to site wter Longo who um he doesn't call his diet a ketogenic diet although it is a ketogenic diet he calls his diet a fasting mimicking diet and it's primarily a plant-based 600 calorie a day diet some people are going to hear that and just gas it's it is proprietary to him I have no relationship with him I'm not promoting his product but he has a proprietary product called prolon you can get the benefits by just not eating anything or by eating 600 calories a day I mean you can you don't need to buy that proprietary product but because he is selling this product I believe he's using most or all of the funds that from the most are all of the proceeds from the sale of that to fund research on it they've done a series of studies that uh 5day Cycles several times a year seem to be fine and improve a wide range of Health biomarkers interesting and there's reason to believe that it may help improve metabolic Health and Longevity so he's primarily a longevity aging researcher he is promoting that could ketogenic diets also produce Sim effects I believe they can again it gets really controversial fast because ketogenic diets can sometimes include red meat and then we got the American Heart Association telling us that red meat's bad for you and don't eat that red meat nonsense and uh well that we so then we get these splintering groups and we've got the vegan groups saying that's awful for you and unfortunately it just leaves people confused about like what what are we supposed to do do we eat red meat do we not eat red meat do we like in moderation healthy sources I feel like but in moderation from healthy sources not the processed stuff but you know I I get it people have animal reasons or environmental reasons they don't do it um you know the debate goes on and on I've observed some people who are vegan who seem very healthy very robust um aesthetically they they present well if I'm just going to be direct about it and then I've seen some people who go vegan and and it's the exact opposite and then I've seen um I think the strict carnivore thing seems to work for very few people but the ones who love it really love it but even the folks like Paul saladino who were the so-called you know carnivore diet are now then it became animal- based and it now includes fruits and cucumbers and tomatoes and um some Dairy and you know and so hone you know and honey and um and I like Paul I get along well with Paul I also get along with Lane Norton and the they don't get along um but you know I I think it's it's to each their own within the context of um the correct number of calories for a given person and their activity levels but this idea of doing a per of periodically doing a perhaps a fast along the lines of the longo um uh prolong thing or um or or total fast or water fast I guess it's called or um perhaps intermittent fasting on a on a more um reasonable schedule are there any data on that like eating only between the hours of say 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. which is I which is what I happen to do reflexively unless I wake up very hungry which is really rare I don't know why maybe it's function of getting older but is there any evidence that intermittent fasting that doesn't involve entire day and night fasts but more of the you know Tim restricted feeding to eight hours or 6 hours that it can be beneficial for mitochondrial function if it's done for short bouts of two to four weeks my understanding of the literature is that it's a mixed bag when it comes to time restrict eating and intermittent fasting um because more often than not they don't control what people are eating when they're eating oh well that's no good so they just those studies mostly are designed to just say Don't eat only eat between 11:00 a.m. and 7 p.m. and eat whatever you want but it doesn't M like and as though it doesn't matter what they're eating and some people are binging on Ultra processed foods and others are eating like an adult and uh and then you've got everything in between as though that doesn't play a role and and so you get these studies to say it doesn't do anything useful you get other studies that say maybe it does something useful um so I think I mean at the end of the day I will say this you know I'm you know I've been talking a while with a a really seasoned established um EXP ERT in the nutritional space in the conservative nutritional space he's held several government positions he's helped presidents and um others with campaigns and he has made a very strong case to me that you know less than 5% of the research budget from the NIH is spent on nutritional research the NIH has an office called the office of nutritional research focused on or organizing collaborations among different NIH institutes and centers and their annual budget for a major government organization their annual budget is 1.3 million with an M dollars my goodness that's that's which is a joke it is a laugh joke can't do much with that and without trying to make this political there have been people who have tried to increase the funding for nutrition research recently was proposed to increase that funding to $13 million and it was cut that idea was killed by the lobbyists of the food companies I'm going to get really vocal about this lobbying through the American Heart Association thing because I was just shocked right for all the obvious reasons American Heart Association you assume that they are all about healthy hearts and we know metabolism is and um healthy weight and activity and all that is healthy for hearts and it it was so clear that they were on the take from these food companies and that's why they send even just the timing and the delivery again I'll post to the link because it's just like jaw-dropping like I can't believe this it's like it's like the old commercials of the people from the cigarette industry saying yeah the cigarettes don't cause cancer and you they know it does and and we're just this is happening now in real time and um this conversation will certainly assist in and drawing attention to this I'll probably do a social media post on it as well but there's this this thing that happens in medicine and public health where the thing that's so obviously the problem is like it's not even staring Us in the face it's like slapping Us in the face and we take 20 to 30 years relying largely on um messaging through Hollywood kind What actors are doing what athletes are doing then people are like oh yeah maybe this is a thing and then think the battleship just SL like eventually just pivots but there's been Decades of horrible Misfortune and loss in mental health and physical health people thinking that there's something wrong with them or you know um etc etc I mean it's it's it's asinine it's crazy and so I'm excited about Maha even though I don't have any affiliation to it because it it's it's the first time time in my lifetime that anyone said like hey let's actually just talk about and think about how to really get healthy what do we know right now and so I'm I'm not a political person but I think it's really important um that we get focused on what's literally slapping us right in the face with like this is absurd for forgive me for editorializing here but we keep coming back to this we know what what we need to do we know what we need to do but yeah we have not had the political will to do it I think the hope is that one hopefully of many good things that could come out of Maha is separating industry interests from the Health and Welfare of the American population I think if we can do that and we can begin doing unbiased research to really determine what is it about Ultra processed foods that results in harm we know they result in harm is it just that they're so delicious that people consume extra calories and it's still just as simple as calories or is it that there's something in those chemicals that makes the foods addictive or is it that there's something in those chemicals that actually impairs mitochondrial function I think we have evidence to support all three of those hypotheses do people consume extra calories yes you cited one of now many studies documenting that are they addictive yes unequivocally they are um I mean the most common eating disorder diagnosed today in the United States is called binge eating disorder what what are the criteria for binge eating disorder it's basically addiction to Ultra Foods is is really if you look at the criteria and if you look at the behaviors when people engage in binges they're not binging on steak and broccoli ever like never never are they binging on steak and broccoli they're binging almost exclusively on Ultra processed foods and then they go through these Cycles where they binge on them and then they beat themselves up and they feel disgusting and they're they're ashamed and they're humiliated and and then they try their they White Knuckle it to avoid those foods and then something bad happens in their life they get stressed somebody cuts them off in traffic they've had a hard day at work their boss came down on them whatever and and then they go home and they're like you know screw it I hate my life I hate myself I don't Health doesn't even matter for me addic cycle and I may as well just enjoy myself and just like an alcoholic would just like a cocaine addict would um it's not that people are using every single day you know they go through cycles and um it's really tragic Harvard Medical School just literally two days ago came out with an article is sugar addictive and their conclusion no no because sugar's found in fruit so it can't be addictive I'm like really is that and they they actually they went out of their way to say well you know like it's not like addictive like alcohol and nicotine because people sometimes have trouble stopping those completely and I'm thinking and what do you think is different about sugar unbelievable do you really don't understand that some people can't stop consuming Ultra processed high sugar foods you really don't understand that like are you living in an ivory Tower yes and I'm not but no I'm I'm certainly not not any longer and it's also I think important that the highly processed foods and the palatability and the accessibility and the low cost right we're not talking about eliminating pie and pastries I think sometimes people think oh like I'll never have a muffin again I'll never have a chocolate croissant that's not really what we're talking about we're not talking about a homemade cake we're not talking about cupcakes we're talking about things that are easily purchased at low cost unpackaged eaten in transit what we're doing I I realize is painting this picture of a little bit of the past the recent past but what you do so beautifully is you you're really orienting us where we are now and that the fact that we need more science but we we know an awful lot and there's so much that we can do and these six pillars of you know diet exercise sleep avoiding excessive substance abuse or use or abuse excuse me stress mitigation relationships and purpose um which Center back on mitochondrial Health could we talk about some of the um other things that we can do for mitochondrial health things we can take these days we're hearing a lot about creatine what are the data on Creatine and mitochondrial function or brain function I'm not familiar with these data I should be so creatine is a molecule that is foundational to energy transformation in cells so creat goes into the mitochondria and um there it gets combined with ATP to become phosphocreatine and and then it leaves the mitochondrian and goes to places in the cell where energy is needed like a synapse or a ribosome that's trying to make some new proteins or something else it goes to places in the cell where energy is needed and it can be it can combine with ADP to be converted back into ATP so it's basically a phosphate shuttle creatine is a phosphate shuttle that is foundational to energy metabolism it is foundational to mitochondrial function our bodies can produce creatine on their on its own as long we have the essential vitamins and nutrients that make it up and and there are several of those or we can consume Creatine creatine is found only in animal based products animal sourced Foods um it is not found in plant sourced Foods so um what we know is that from because creatine is found in large quantities in the brain so we can actually measure it using mass speec kind of scans and we know that there's a range some people have low levels of creatine and some people have higher levels of creatine people who consume less animal sourced foods like vegans and vegetarians on average tend to have lower levels of creatine in their brain and muscles and other tissues um people with neuros psychiatric disorders schizophrenia Alzheimer's disease depression have been found to have lower levels of creatine than people who do not have those disorders so we have reason to believe that creatine from studies like that that there is an associ ation meaning a correlation between low levels of creatine and brain disorders that we call neurological or psychiatric disorders so the next question logical question from a scientist should be well if we supplement with creatine can that improve symptoms of Neuropsychiatric disorders and we do have evidence to support that not huge randomized controlled trials in tens of thousands of people because again that would require Government funding because creatine is off patent nobody's going to make a lot of money from doing a creatine study because anybody can sell creatine anybody can make it and and Market it it's it's off patent so um but we do have randomized controlled trial data with creatine showing that it can improve symptoms of made major depression it can augment anti-depressants it can improve symptoms of bipolar disorder it can improve symptoms of neurodegenerative disorders like cognition in Alzheimer's disease or mild cognitive impairment but again the studies are on the smaller side they're not super robust quality but unless the government steps up unless the NIH steps up and funds a large well done well controlled randomized controlled trial of creatine versus placebo for any of these conditions the Skeptics and the hardcore scientists are always going to say well we don't have good quality data well we're never going to have good quality data because there's no product that's where we're at as a field do you recommend it to your patients not right away uh you know there's more research coming out um and there's more reason to believe that maybe I should be right recommending it to patients um more often than I currently do uh it certainly lines up with a metabolic kind of mitochondrial improve metabolic Health improve brain health simultaneously It lines up perfectly with that and I just want to remind people before you focus on what to take focus on what you should be doing with your lifestyle what is your diet nutrition are you getting adequate sleep are you getting some bright light in the morning are you do you have relationships and purpose in life um uh are you overusing harmful substances because I want to be the first to say if you're not doing those things creatine doesn't stand a chance in hell of helping your health it just does not stand a chance to improve your health there is no supp that you can take that will undo the damage that a a harmful lifestyle will have on you and your health and um and the reality is the statistics are abysmal I mean onethird of American adults are not getting adequate sleep 60% of the foods that Americans are consuming are ultr processed foods you know the real money is not in the question what should I take the real money is in what should I do how can I change my life and my lifestyle to improve my health and um so I just yeah I just want to drill that home for people for better or worse I first learned about methylene Blue from owning fish tanks you clean fish tanks with them or it's a thing you use um now there's a lot of interest in methylene blue ever since a video of Robert Kennedy putting methylene blue in his water on a plane kind of went viral methylene blue has been around a very long time what are your thoughts on it what does it do is it going to help my a condrea is it for everybody I don't take it I don't take it either and I've not used it in any patients so far but I'm very interested in possibly starting to use it um in controlled ways and patients who clearly need something more we're doing all of the right things we're doing the lifestyle thing we doing ketogenic interventions or other things and they still are not well um there's still room for improvement uh so methylene blue as you said has been around for a long time it's relatively cheap um as a as a fish tank cleaner methylene blue fascinatingly is primarily exclusively a mitochondrial agent so it is an electron acceptor and donor so that is what methylene blue does it can accept electrons and it can donate electrons so it's an electron shuttle if you will and how does that relate to mitochondria mitochondria as they are producing ATP electrons are flowing down the electron transport chain and that is what results in the production of ATP if it gets shuttled through the uncoupling protein it results in heat production um and when electrons flow out of that system when they leak out of that system it creates reactive oxygen species which again are very harmful to both mitochondria and cells so if you have dysfunctional mitochondria that don't seem to be able to contain the elect R appropriately electrons are leaking out so these would be mitochondria that are producing more reactive oxygen species than they should does that ever happen in biology 100% we've got Decades of evidence that aging neurod degeneration even obesity type 2 diabetes and a wide range of neuros psychiatric disorders are associated with that process the in increased levels of reactive oxygen species often referred to as oxidative stress so we got Decades of evidence strongly supporting that um Can methylene blue play a role in that absolutely because methylene blue can come in and take some of these Wayward electrons and prevent them from creating reactive oxygen species which might help calm things down one of the challenges with methylene blue as we discussed before you can have too little and too much same with methylene blue you can have too little and too much you don't want to accept too many electrons these electrons need to be flowing to the places they should be flowing as opposed to oxidative stress the polar opposite of that is called reductive stress and that too has been found in people with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and some other disorders so it's really about disregulated kind of balance between oxidative and reductive stress and methylene blue if you take it in overdose could become a reductive stressor um so you don't want too much but uh so we do have pilot trials again small not super well done pilot trials and a wide range of neuros psychiatric disorders depression bipolar disorder schizophrenia Alzheimer's disease others many of them suggesting a benefit do you know what the doses range I don't I I don't the top of my head yeah because I because methylene blue as I understand has some Mao activity the um can adjust some of the enzymes that in turn adjust levels of Serotonin um which is why I haven't taken it I've just been cautious about I don't really want to boost my serotonin there's this recent study out of a Lab at Stanford showing that the rewarding properties of various things as we know increase dopamine in anticipation of a reward but also important it seems these are Mouse studies but serotonin drops as dopamine goes up and that drop in serotonin is at least as important as the increase in dopamine for the reinforcing properties of certain behaviors and substances and um I I'm very reluctant to tamper with anything that would raise serotonin because in these studies um or these experiments I or in these experiments I should say increasing serotonin uh offset some of the rewarding aspects of otherwise rewarding things so I want things that are rewarding to feel rewarding and so this this difference between dopamine and serotonin seems pretty vital I mean that's not to say I'm like terrified of anything that increases serotonin but to do it pharmacologically just seems a little little sketchy given I don't have a clinical need that I'm at least not that aware of no well and that's actually one of the warnings with um methylene blue is that if you if taken in to have a dose you can actually get serotonin syndrome could you explain what ser serotonin syndrome is so serotonin syndrome is just like really excessive Deluge of serotonin in the system more often than not it's completely unrecognized really it it gets mistaken for psychiatric symptoms so people can have anxiety they can have panic in extreme cases you can get nausea you can get fevers you can get um I mean in extreme cases it can be fatal so it's a serious thing but more often than not it gets dismissed because serotonin syndrome is most commonly experienced by people taking ssris and by definition they are psychiatric patients or they have a mental health condition and so when they come in and say I'm feeling nauseous I feel anxious I feel jittery I feel I don't feel right they get written off more often than not or giv more medication perhaps yeah let's increase your dose let's increase your dose or whatever so it's actually really tragic I mean one woman actually reached out to me who after learning about my work reading my book she talked to her psychiatrist tapered off all her meds and it became clear that she probably had serotonin syndrome for a long time wow to both her and her psychiatrist so the meds were causing the problem and the meds were causing the problem problem and nobody really recognized it goodness gra again so it's uh so anyway methylene blue can cause serotonin syndrome so I think if people are going to if people want to consider using it I would number one make sure you get a very reputable source of it make sure you're consuming it in a way that makes sense I mean it can stain your teeth blue and all sorts of stuff so your urine blue your tongue blue but um people will do IV infusions of methylene blue so yeah no that's I've seen people kind of hooked up to IVs with a meth a bag of methylene blue do they turn blue and they I hope not Smurf Smurf but it is a medically approved treatment um and I think it can be done in safe ways again it's off patent nobody's going to stand make any money off of doing large welld designed Trials of methylene blue um but I'm really interested in it as uh this as it has these properties in addition to just being this electron acceptor and donor um there's some evidence that it may improve mitochondial biogenesis that it has anti-inflammatory effects and and that it can do other things that that may be beneficial interesting very interesting in fact before moving on to some more clinical questions we've been going deep into the science and some Public Health uh thoughts and Reflections and um ideas there's a supplement called uthan a that people seem really excited about for improving mitochondrial function um I'm not super familiar with the literature um but co-enzyme q12 uthan a we're starting to hear more about these these sorts of things sold over the counter do you have any thoughts on those there's a company timeline that puts out this product and to their credit they have actually done some pretty well-designed robust randomized controlled Trials of urethan a they've primarily focused on muscle health and aging and so actually have reasonably good data published in reasonably good journals um documenting that EUR aithan a when given to elderly people people you know people over 55 65 um that it can improve muscle mass and performance within I think like eight weeks um uh and and that that has overarching metabolic benefits that have you know in terms of biomarkers that have been associated with um slowing of the aging process so um so urethan a I think is definitely a supplement if among all of the supplements that should be considered if people are looking for something to take I'm going to repeat my myself before you take urethan a I've said this to the chief scientific officer of the company um when I was talking with him about this and I said but you know that diet and exercise are much more he said yeah yeah yeah of course like harder to sell people have to do the diet and exercise and everything else but then this could give them an advantage um and I don't deny that at all I think it it may very well give people an advantage um and again the way that I think about it it's not that diet and exercise are going to cure everybody because they won't cure everybody some people are really ill and the way that I think about that is that their mitochondria their metabolic processes are really disrupted they are severely disregulated and that quote unquote healthy diet and good exercise and good sleep and good relationships are phenomenal prevention strategy for some people they can be a phenomenal treatment strategy but I think on average that applies to people with mild to moderate mental health or metabolic health conditions that once once people get into the severe category severe heart failure severe you know mental health condition like schizophrenia bipolar disorder crippling depression um my sense is just a clean diet and good sleep and good exercise is not going to be sufficient and then we do need to start thinking about can we use this supplement or this methylene blue infusion or even neuros stimulation which is can stimulate mitochondria and stimulate neuroplasticity things like transcranial magnetic stimulation yes which is done non-invasively right it is noninvasive and so can we use those types of strategies to try to improve someone's mental health and we've got plenty of evidence that you know especially with TMS that uh it can be very helpful for some people but again is not a Panacea none of these things are a Panacea and although I just said that none of these things are a Panacea so if you're you know people one of the biggest criticis I get is Dr Palmer you have not given me the recipe to cure my crippling ex disorder um and it's like well I I'm trying to teach you the strategies and the science so that you can put together your own treatment plan I am not here to sell any one thing as this is the Panacea to cure all mental illness the ketogenic diet can be lifechanging life-saving it can be nothing short of miraculous for some people but it is not a Panacea I've seen people do ketogenic diets and not get cured not get remission and so I'm always looking for what else what else can we do how else can we use this model to further enhance mitochondrial function metabolic health and the reason I think the reason I'm getting traction is because when you come back to it the we just keep coming back to these like pillars of common sense like for the most part yeah like Diet might actually make a difference to your brain health I don't think it's just Americans I think our species needs to run up against the guard rails at the edge of the cliff six times and sadly see a good number of people go over to their demise before we go wait a second we need to think about how fast we're taking these turns we need to pull back I mean there's something weird about our species that we love to develop technology and then uh and then find the destructive aspects of those technology then pull back and a lot of our you know it's like two steps forward one step back type Evolution it seems inherent to Homo sapiens I'm forgive me for getting so macroscopic here but when you look through I I there's a wonderful book The Prince of men medicine or history of medicine Galen and like it starts there and all the way forward and you read like The what is it the Emperor of all maladies about cancer and you just realize like we're we're stumbling forward and making miraculous progress and at the same time we are seemingly deliberately overlooking a lot of the stuff that's just obvious it's like the the old advice as we exit this conversation about supplements the the the old advice that if you just eat a balanced diet you're good doesn't work anymore I noticed that because quote unquote balanced diet first of all no one can agree on that uh and people get caught up in the vegetarian versus carnivore debates which are really like or vegan versus car which are really at the extremes so we we've lost our our bearings we're kind of like like True North is so clear what true north is it's mostly nonprocessed minimally processed foods getting adequate quality protein you could do that vegetarian you could do that with some animal- based products if you if you choose it's doing that for 90% or 80% of one's nutrition it's exercise we know what forms like all the information's there as you're pointing out but somehow we're just going to have to keep putting it back in our faces um or see enough unfortunate stuff that we we away a second like that this is it's time for a course correction but hey that's what we're trying to do here right absolutely and we have um we have uh colleagues to do it as well and I'll just throw in as long as we're editorializing a lot today I think in The Last 5 Years the discourse around Public Health from the mental health side from the Cardiology side from the cancer side from the long has really transformed in no small part thanks to social media and podcasts so um things are evolving thank you Dr Huber oh well and thank you and thank you vitamin deficiencies and mental health it almost sounds like we're headed deeper into supplements we might touch on that but a few years ago I went to a mcnight meeting and somebody presented some proteomics data where they were sequencing uh spinal fluid from depressed patients and finding that certain depressed patients had deficiencies in certain vitamins that could easily be replaced through supplementation and lo and behold their depressions were in these particular patients were being cured literally reversed going into remission by virtue of taking the appropriate vitamins but the issue was they had to use final tap so it was not in order to know what these patients needed but it was really striking I thought goodness we're talking about B vitamins and depression so um could you tell us about B12 and other B vitamins and uh methylation and folate there's a little cluster of of topics here that I think is super interesting and that people really should know about Visa depression and other CNS challenges before I get into the complex part of the story let me just start with Basics so and this relates to nutrition that a lot of these basic vitamins and minerals um like vitamin B12 folate and iron let I'll just stop there B12 folate and iron these are all essential to mitochondrial function they play a role in numerous enzymes and other cellular reactions outside of mitochondria but they are all Central to mitochondrial function and so if you are deficient in these vitamins your mitochondria will not function properly so it's at least it doesn't prove the mitochondrial theory of Neuropsychiatric disorders but it's consistent with the mitochondrial Theory um and uh and the reality is a lot of Americans are you know a lot of different populations within America and then certainly in other countries can be highly deficient in some of these so um Iron uh you know there's a study in jamama just last year 40% of females aged 12 to 21 in the United States are iron deficient wow it really depends on the definition of iron deficient but their overarching conclusion based on what they thought was a reasonable definition that the journal jamama went ahead and published was 40% of young of girls and young women 12 so this is menstration obviously it's menstruation they are losing blood they are losing blood and they are not consuming enough iron or there's something wrong with the way they're processing iron so let me just stick with that what does that have to do with Neuropsychiatric disorders well boys and girls prepuberty have the same rates of mental illness if anything boys are maybe a little more because they're more likely to have autism and they're more likely to be diagnosed with ADHD so but for for the most part we'll say like depression and anxiety exact same rates puberty hits and girls just Skyrocket the rates of mental illness Skyrocket in girls now are there psychological and social causes of that yes we can talk about your be becoming an attractive sexual mate and maybe people are you know being mean to you or people are you know um making you uncomfortable or you are becoming a victim of sexual trauma do those things happen of course those things are happening could that contribute to depression and anxiety of course that could contribute to depression and anxiety again it's not either or so yes let's stay with the psych ological and social causes but let's also go into the biological causes if these girls and women are now iron deficient that affects their brain function it affects their whole body Health most people don't think of that is a metabolic problem but I do these girls and women can be thin they can be absolutely beautiful and thin and iron deficient and that means they've got a metabolic mitochondrial problem that could be affecting their brain and that could be playing a role in their depression anxiety their you know eating disorder or whatever else they've got vitamin B12 fully we know that low levels of those vitamins are associated with all sorts of Neuropsychiatric disorders B12 deficiency for example um is very common among vegetarians and vegans in India for example where most people are vegetarian or vegan 50% % of their population is B12 deficient whoa what are some food sources of B12 is it is animal Source R red red meat basic animal Source Foods again eggs red meat other types of meat yep be it it you need animal Source foods for the most part or if you're going to be a vegan or vegetarian please take appropriate supplement you can get this in a vitamin but please make sure you're doing it correctly and maybe get your levels measured every now and then at least once a year your annual physical make sure that your doctor knows I'm vegan please do a full assessment of vitamin and nutrient levels for me um because I am at a high risk so B12 is impacted by other medications B12 absorption and interestingly oral contraceptives can reduce absorption of or impair absorption of vitamin B12 interesting met foran can impair absorption of vitamin B12 so just picture a woman who's overweight who's following a vegetarian or vegan diet who's also on Metformin for her diabetes who's also on birth control just because she's at very high risk of being B12 deficient and what does B12 deficiency do in terms of Neuropsychiatric disorders everything it has been associated with higher rates of depression anxiety psychosis bipolar symptoms but people can be hallucinating and delusional from B12 deficiency and the challenge with B12 deficiency is that the neurological damage can become permanent so if this is not recognized and identified early enough people can be permanently injured so that's the simple story some people just aren't consuming enough or they're taking metformin or they're taking oral contraceptives or whatever they're menstruating and they haven't really figured out an appropriate diet to to compensate for the loss of blood um so all of those things can interfere in with vitamin absorption or whatever and can result in neuros psychiatric symptoms unfortunately the story gets a lot more complicated so we've long known that there's an autoimmune form of vitamin B12 deficiency called pernicious anemia in which antibodies to something called intrinsic factor um prevent vitamin B12 from being absorbed in the digestive truck so you could be eating all the meat in the world you're you can't absorb it and you can become B12 deficient that autoimmune disorder increases with age so you could have been living living a happy healthy life and then at age 65 you develop pernicious anemia you can no longer absorb B12 and this is actually one of the treatable forms of dementia that we know of the Cardinal symptoms are look like dementia um and the only way to help these people is if some astute Healthcare clinician measures a B12 level identifies and recognizes the problem and then does further testing for pernicious anemia this autoimmune form of B12 deficiency and then you correct it and the treatment is vitamin B12 injections taking a pill won't work because you can't absorb it so you've just got to inject people with vitamin B12 and it can restore everything for most people will a B12 or supplement work like a methyl a B12 capsule as long as they don't have this autoimmune form yes okay it'll be fine um and again if you're eating lots of meat you may not need any supplement at all so over the last year um there have been a couple of Publications that have just come out that have now recognized a brand new form of autoimmune B12 deficiency and it targets a protein called cd320 which transports vitamin B12 across the bloodb brain barrier the researchers essentially identified this and PE in people who are having pretty severe neuros psychiatric symptom so symptoms of either neurological disorders or other kinds of disorders but mostly focusing on neurology because theur it's neurologists who have been doing all this work when they first identified this antibody they they took blood from these people's veins just like you would if you were going into a doctor for blood draw the B12 levels are normal everything's normal in the periphery because the person may be consuming enough B12 and it may be getting absorbed fine so they're not anemic they show no signs of B12 deficiency but when the researchers tested their cerebr gr spinal fluid they had almost no B12 in their central nervous system so that requires a spinal tap right this is not in order to diagnose it it required a spinal tap and um they ended up treating some of these people with immunosuppressive agents to reduce this autoimmune condition and high does vitamin B12 and some of the people had reversal of symptoms meaning their neuros psychiatric symptoms went away the research is still in preliminary stages but the researchers have looked at how common is this because at first glance it sounds like well that's just a really rare condition that can't be relevant to human health they sampled just a general healthy control and about 6% of those people have this antibody wow it's really high they then sampled people with neuros psychiatric lupus so these are people who have an autoimmune disorder already lupus and they have neuros psychiatric symptoms 20% of them had this antibody and then they just recently this is unpublished data but they have looked at people who have a demyelinating condition of unknown iology and about 50% of them had this anti 5% so this is like an MS like condition had this antibody and what's the solution B12 the reason this is of interest to me and we're hoping to do some research on this in patients with psychiatric disorders is because there is a treatment immune supressive kind of treatments to either reduce this autoimmune condition and or high does vitamin B12 injections so you want to flood their system with vitamin B12 so that some of it can get across the bloodb brain barrier and again oral B12 won't work in this case right oral B12 may very well work in that case um but I would actually I mean in these situations what we know is that these people's brains are being damaged from severe B12 deficiency so I would probably just go for the definitive massive injection and try to try to rescue those brain cells this is very interesting I think um people should get their B12 levels measured um a standard blood test right um it is unfortunately for this new autoimmune Central B12 deficiency they're they're working on a commercial test but you can't get this blood test right now okay um so uh perhaps to come stay tuned but I the point of it is this that I think for the majority of people 60 to 80% of people who are suffering from neuros Psychiatric disorders I actually think using interventions that are easily available today will help them heal and recover I really believe that I I stand nothing I don't get any money from lifestyle interventions I don't get a commission for everybody who does a ketogenic diet in theory you'd have few to treat in theory you lose money because you have lose money by by getting people better and then they move on and don't need me anymore um I honestly believe that but I also believe there will be 20% maybe up to 40% who have severe disorders for whom those strategies just won't work and so I'm really interested in well what else could it be and this is just one of many examples of what else it could be they could have an autoimmune form of central B12 deficiency and why does that matter because we can test for that and if if they have that we can treat it there's a clear unequivocal treatment and you know at the end of the day I think one of the biggest themes of my work is that right now in the mental health field we assign these diagnostic labels to people and for many of them they become life sentences you have schizophrenia that's a lifetime sentence it's probably never going to get better you certainly always have to take medicines for the rest of your life you have bipolar disorder it's for life you have chronic depression sorry we just don't know how to treat it depression should go away but it's not going away for you we don't know what to do sorry so sorry I know that you know on the surface it may sound like well those are just rare people Chris they're not rare people hundreds of millions of people on our planet are given these life sentences and we assume that we now know the cause the cause is you have schizophrenia that's the cause and in fact schizophrenia is only a label of symptoms schizophrenia means a person who has chronic psychotic symptoms of unknown ideology of unknown ideology because if we know the ideology you don't call them schizophrenic anymore you say they have vitamin B12 deficiency and psychosis or you say they have an autoimmune disorder like lupus and psychosis and why is why is that so important because there's a treatment for these other things other than just antis psychotic medicin and what I really hope and implore our field will do is we will come into the 21st century and begin to recognize that there is a cause of schizophrenia there is a cause of bipolar symptoms there is a cause for chronic depression and that we will will begin to look for those causes and we will begin to treat those causes as opposed to just putting people on anticho or anti-depressants or mood stabilizers and telling them well we're really sorry we know these medicines don't cure your illness we know these are not disease modifying treatments we're really sorry we can't do better you're just going to have to suffer for life like we can do better and I applaud your efforts to bring about that change I mean I think people realizing that often not always but often mitochondrial dysfunction is at the heart of of these things um is critical um speaking of which I have to ask and feel free to pass on this question if if you like but um I become very interested in vaccine biology and the debate about vaccines about the adant that are used to deliver the vaccines there a um obviously there's a very contentious topic I just want to know without being I'm not trying to be Pro provocative here um is there any evidence that vaccines or the adant um for vaccines or anything about vaccines and their delivery can disrupt mitochondrial function you know so often we think that it's like the vaccine having a specific effect on what the vaccine was designed to Target that could potentially cause side effects or something like that that's what many of the theories hold but given um the key role of mitochondria in all aspects of brain functioning and given that some people are convinced I'm not saying I believe this but are convinced that vaccines are tied to these mental health challenges or to autism let's be direct about this is there is there any evidence that vaccines can of any kind can disrupt mitochondrial function or support mitochondrial function for that matter it is a contentious maybe it's a different episode no no no definitely I'm I'm definitely going to answer it but I'm going to give a long-winded answer if that's okay because I because I want I want to give credible information that's the only information we're interested in and I don't want to come down on one side that vaccines are 100% safe there's no question about it or yes vaccines cause autism and that's why we've got Sky recing Ras of autism because I don't think either of those extreme positions is true so I want to First back up and just ask a slightly different question is there any evidence that high levels of inflammation impair mitochondrial function the answer to that is unequivocally yes high levels of inflammation inflammatory cyto kindes like tnf Alpha inner Lucan six and others impair mitochondrial function we know that it is clear and unequivocal um and there are physiological reasons for it the the organism has to adapt so when you have the flu do you have Neuropsychiatric symptoms yes you do you're going to feel exhausted you're going to be less risk-taking you are not going to want to reproduce more than likely you're going to completely lose your libido completely lose it like zero interest and what are you going to want to do you're going to want to hide in bed and pull the covers over you and just retreat from the world for safety those are all effects on your mood your motivation rewarding behaviors all sorts of things the inflammation the infection is doing that to you and we know that it's inflammation because this happens with cancer it happens with treatments that cause inflammation if we give treatments that cause high levels of inflamation people experience these symptoms acutely if we give interfer on for example which can be a treatment for some disorders people will acutely develop all of these symptoms so we know that interferon itself will produce all of these Neuropsychiatric symptoms we also know from basic cell biology interferon interferes with mitochondrial function we know that it is unequivocal we now let's go to autism is there any evidence that inflammation can lead to autism we have Decades of evidence for this we know that over the course of the last century as there were kind of outbreaks of bacterial or viral infections in the population we saw higher rates of neuros psychiatric neurodevelopment mental disorders in The Offspring of the pregnant women so we've long known that and that evidence is pretty well established for instance uh forgive me but the one that I'm aware of is that flu in pregnant mothers at the first to second trimester transition is correlated with statistically higher incidents of schizophrenia in The Offspring do I have that right that's correct okay but then there there was a rubella outbreak that resulted in much higher rates of autism in The Offspring um that I think that was in the 1960s um and now we have really Decades of animal models so they take mice and they inject them with lipopolysaccharide which causes an inflammatory reaction and when they do this to pregnant mice the the the mice that are born to those women those those female mice are at much higher risk for showing signs or symptoms of what looks like a neurodevelopmental disorder um it's it's different diagnosing or whatever a neurodevelopmental condition in a mouse is it 100% no it's just we increase the risk so if you inject a pregnant Mouse with lipopolysaccharide can she can that Mouse still have a normal appearing Mouse yes but can't but the probability that The Offspring will have a neurodevelopmental symptoms of a neurodevelopmental condition increase that is where so much of the autism research has been focused is trying to understand this trying to understand what is happening with inflammation how does that impact neurodevelopment we know that so now back to the question that you posed is there any possibility that vaccines could contribute to that process do vaccines increase inflamation I think the answer to that is yes is is there variation in the inflammatory response between different people I think the answer to that is yes can some people have a hyper exaggerated inflammatory response in response to a vaccine I think the answer to that is yes in that condition so in that rare less common condition where somebody is having a hyper exaggerated inflammatory response to a vaccination could that impact neurodevelopment the science right now says yes we have no reason to think it wouldn't there's one case of a young child who already had an existing mitochondrial disorder it was already known she got vaccines and I think within days or weeks of getting the vaccinations she developed profound neurodevelopmental symptoms that case won a lawsuit that went to court it was tried in court and she won and the Court ruled that the vaccine did in fact contribute to this girl's neurodevelopmental condition now they assumed it was because she had a pre-existing mitochondrial disorder um and I would support that it lines up perfectly with what I've been talking about all along um that people who have vulnerabilities with mitochondria or metabolism you can only absorb so many hits and when you get that final hit that tips kind of the balance um to impact neurod development you can get that when now coming back to the bigger question so should people get vaccinated or not we do have reasonably good evidence that unvaccinated people are more likely to develop autism than vaccinated people is that right the problem with that study is that it's an it's a retrospective cohort epidemiological study and the biggest critique that I have of that type of research is that the researchers decide what they control for and what they don't control for but the existing research right now as published and as designed suggests that if you don't get a vaccine you're more likely to develop autism than if you do get a vaccine and how would I understand that I just talked about infections themselves can cause neurodevelopmental disorders so if a child gets measles they're not only at risk of dying of measles they're also at risk of impacting their mitochondrial function and developing a neurodevelopmental disorder as a result of getting a severe infection assuming there's choice there's a risk benefit in analysis do you do you want the the uh the potential inflammation from the vaccine or lack of infl you run the gamble it's hard to predict who's going to have a big inflammatory response and who's not although I'm thinking in the back of my mind about these lifestyle factors even though it's a young child or a or um an adolescent in some cases but but young children typically there are things that you can do to bolster the the uh the health of that kid going into a vaccine if you're choosing to vaccinate your kids right like proper sleep proper nutrition proper proper everything you wouldn't want them even slightly sleep deprived because that would uh increase the risk of inflammation right I mean these things compound as I understand it um so you know I think what most all parents really want is a sense of control over what are inevitably a mixture of controllable and uncontrollable factors and this is what I hear when I really listen to this debate about vaccines I hear my science colleagues inevitably saying okay the Wake field data or BS Etc like no no no there's no possibility and then I hear parents who are having kids whose kids are due for vaccines and they're like I don't know what to do they're they're terrified and these are smart people and they don't know what to believe anymore that's the challenge I mean the science that I just laid out is true it's clear um and again we've got Decades of research to support most of what I've just said all of what I've just said I think um if you understand the biology when a child begins to show symptoms of a neurodevelopmental disorder instead of assigning a label this is autism it's a life sentence good luck we should be intervening and what could we do to intervene what you just said in terms of prevention strategies absolutely let's make sure that even before you're going to the doctor even before you're exposing yourself to any of these vaccines that you're healthy why because we want you to be healthy why wouldn't you want to be healthy so let's just be healthy but I would actually go much further and say as soon as a child begins to show signs or symptoms especially when it's an Abrupt change when they were developing in a neurotypical way and then all of a sudden they got an infection or they got a vaccine or something happened and now they are falling off the trajectory and that's what we hear from these parents who are saying No this is real this is that's why they believe vaccines cause it do I think it was just the vaccine on its own I suspect a lot of them have had other hits they probably had other vulnerabilities going into that vaccination and that the vaccination if we even entertain the possibility that That vaccine did contribute to their autism I'm doubtful that it was the sole only cause I'm doubtful it was the sole cause but regardless once the kid starts showing signs or symptoms we should be doing a full workup we should be looking for vitamin and nutrient deficiencies we should be looking for this Central B12 deficiency did the vaccine somehow cause an autoimmune reaction to cd320 so that now this kid has Central B12 deficiency and that is why this kid is falling off the chart um should we entertain a ketogen diet for this child I would say yes we should that should be on the table of options um we might want to put this child on a ketogenic diet does that ever happen it happens all the time in kids with epilepsy so why not do it for neurodevelopmental conditions but again it's not just keto diet is going to save the day and we don't have to think about Central B12 deficiency or any of these other things like let's put it all together and especially with AI now now we can do this this is a solvable puzzle it is a complex puzzle no doubt but it is a solvable puzzle and we should start to solve it but right now the state of the field is that we assign a label autism and we tell the parents to just prepare for a disabled child just prepare yourself to take care of a disabled child for life we're really sorry we don't have anything more to offer we can do some ABA training we can do some basic you know we'll try to teach them some social skills the the the real outcome data on that is pretty bad if if your brain's not working right it's hard to teach people how to have how to do the skills that the brain is designed to do and that's the challenge is that um it's all well and good to recognize a problem but now we need to come up with effective treatments and we know that a lot of the you know people talk about early intervention with autism as though early intervention is going to save the day I don't mean to bash the people doing that work let's do anything we can it might help a little but when you look at the outcome data it's not helping much and when you look at the statistics of the prevalence of autism it's going through the roof so those strategies are just not working they're not working for prevention they're not working to improve long-term outcomes they're not I mean we have a lot of work to do so I appreciate the thoroughness of your answer I can um promise you that uh anything we put out about that will include the full context we're not we're not people will take the sound bite and well if they do I'm going to get I'm going to um get rabid um by posting the Preamble because it's very important people hear the full context it's um and I I really appreciate you uh embracing that topic with the the depth and rigor and uh sensitivity also that that you do uh because I don't think we can um duck this vaccine question anymore um I never thought in my lifetime that vaccines would be a thing it's like when I was a kid everyone got the polio vaccine the measles vaccine and he kind of went about our way I do understand the number of vaccines that kids are getting now like the vaccine schedule has expanded um uh yeah I've been um kind of thrown into the middle of this as different guests have come on this podcast who've said they do get the flu vaccine others who say they don't and you know gosh if ever there was a separator besides Democrat versus Republican it's this vaccine thing um it's really like the separator uh is it's it's so closely tied to um believes in science doesn't believe in science like that's those are the stereotypes right or um suspicious of science NIH and CDC or believes in science NIH and the CDC wholeheartedly like the The Divide is very Stark and this needs to stop like the Divide needs to stop we we need to start filling in with answers um and I think there's soon to be a exploration uh a scientific exploration of the relationship between vaccines and autism I read this someplace on X which means but I think that's the idea and I think some people kind of upset that this that resources were going to be devoted to this because they felt like it was it was a done deal and then others are very excited because they feel like Hey listen if if you don't think there's a a link then there here's an opportunity to to establish that with with real rigor and I think everyone's just really interested in the the stud being done properly I look I think more data is always great I don't disagree i' and I've I've actually talked to some former nmh directors about this and some other leading people in this field and there's no doubt that this topic has been brought up multiple times at the NIH so there's this inter agency um Coordinating Committee um on autism uh within among all of the NIH kind of centers and institutes that's existed for decades they have looked into this issue um I've talked to some autism Advocates who've said like I was hoping that vaccines might be the cause like I was really hoping to see that vaccines are the cause because that would then give us a cause and it would lead us to interventions um to make vaccine safer or whatever um and she said but it's just not there it's just not there and this former NIMH director that I spoke with it's just not there Chris it's not there um we looked we looked high and low um again I'm not sure that everybody looked with the same degree of scrutiny again the study that I saw looked at people who are unvaccinated by choice so these are rebellious people who are defying state laws who are risking not getting their children into school because they're not getting vaccinations that's the cohort of unvaccinated people um and then they're comparing them to the cohort of vaccinated people and they only controlled for like a like two or three variables they did not control for obesity they didn't control for diabetes and we know that obesity and diabetes play a role in risk for autism and we know know that people who have existing health conditions might actually be more likely to be worried about vaccines and then not get vaccines perfectly happy healthy thriving people usually just go along with status quo they usually don't refuse vaccines so people who are refusing vaccines probably had some pre-existing health condition they didn't control for that did that pre-existing health condition increase risk for or Autism probably well if there's an inflammation link then yes like like probably I mean you look at any pre-existing health condition and does it increase risk for other health conditions usually the answer is yes so we know that like women with obesity much more likely twice as likely to have an autistic child is that right yeah meta analysis over three million people women with obesity have doubled the risk of having an autistic child have rates of obesity been skyrocketing in our population the answer is yes are pregnant women also in that camp of obese women yes well that accounts for a doubling of autism same deal with um diabetes women who have diabetes twice as likely to have autistic children is women who don't have diabetes when you put the two together obese and diabetic quadruple the rate of autism in The Offspring what about dad you know there are these theories about the statistically significant increases in rates of autism for offspring of um men who are 50 or older my read of the data uh is that it's still a very small increase it's not like the kind of increases you're describing here for diabetes it is so men with obesity twice as likely to have an autistic child as men who are not obese yeah which is which is um something like 25 times greater than the increase due to age of the male so this is so important because people hear oh you know uh older sperm equals higher probability of autism but yes still a very low probability of autism compared to Dad is obese but in his 20s or 30s yes and so you know a lot of people are hyperfocused on vaccines cause autism and they come back to rates of autism are skyrocketing there has to be a reason well I agree rates of autism are skyrocketing I agree there does have to be a reason maybe we're missing the elephant in the room rates of metabolic poor health are skyrocketing in our population rates of obesity and diabetes are skyrocketing but rates of poor metabolic health so metabolic syndrome has five biomarkers you know abdominal obesity blood pressure um uh glucose high levels of glucose and then high triglycerides and low HDL cholesterol those are the five biomarkers of metabolic syndrome only 7% of Americans are healthy in all five biomarkers yikes only 7% po or metabolic Health influences neurodevelopment and Offspring we know that so we've we see skyrocketing rates of autism it's not just autism we see skyrocketing rates of ADHD as well simultaneously and everybody's scratching their heads trying to figure out where's all this autism coming from where's all this ADHD coming from well look around people as the metabolic health of the United States population declin we are going to see more neurodevelopmental disorders such it's a critical message but also reassuring in the sense that we can do something about it we can because what you're talking about is metabolic dysfunction mitochondrial dysfunction of the parents right um so you know trying to control the uh the behavior of still unborn um or yet to be see children is pretty tough to do and um and yet anyone thinking of conceiving um should really pay close attention to their metabolic health is clearly the message I think obesity becomes a little bit of a um of a of a critical Factor yet a distractor that wasn't meant to rhyme uh for when we hear metabolic health I think a number of people hearing this will say well I'm not overweight so my mitochondria are probably healthy but what you listed off included high high triglycerides um you said blood pressure which you know there are some thin people or you know non apparently obese people it's I say apparently obese because a lot of people are carrying higher body fat percentage than they realize even though they're they're not you know taking up a lot of space um so I think you know uh it's not always and low HDL so sometimes um you know we're shocked to see like oh this person is like apparently healthy but has you know low HDL and is got their apob is through the roof and they're they're not well but just because they're not obese doesn't mean they're metabolically healthy correct that is absolutely correct and I go back to some of our prior conversation so a 14-year-old girl who is severely iron deficient is metabolically unhealthy why because our mitochondria can't function properly without iron she can be [Music] thin she can otherwise look like a healthy attractive girl but she can be metabolically unhealthy because she doesn't have all of the essential vitamins and nutrients that she needs to have properly functioning mitochondria and metabolism and why would that matter it matters because she might develop an anxiety disorder or she might develop depression or she might develop symptoms of an eating disorder and then we're all scratching our heads giving those labels oh you've got depression you've got anxiety you need Prozac and maybe she really needs iron right I mean what I realized and and this was really where I wanted to bring us to um is a question for you I have an idea but a let also posed the question as an idea and feel free to bat it down I'm beginning to think that in order to get out of this health rut that we're in that clearly relates to mitochondrial dysfunction and at the same time there are tools the lifestyle tools that you described there are yes there are supplements and maybe methylene blue will be advantageous and methyl B12 perhaps but certainly the lifestyle factors most people again when they hear metabolic Health they just think okay metabolism obesity thinness or fatness and and they it sort of becomes a a gravitational pull towards that do you think it's possible to create a metric I don't want to say BMI as an example because that's controversial for some people but is it possible to create a metric of allaround metabolic Health um that would be incentivized so that people can live better lives their offspring can be healthier as well and we can unburden the Health Care system and and potentially avoid Millions and millions of people having these so-called incurable mental health disorders in air quotes you know what you're describing is kind of in my mind um a really important next step and the great news is that there are several research groups that I know of that are working on exactly that one is a commercial company I'm not going to name any names but one is a commercial company that has a a a product of a series of biomarkers blood biomarkers that they believe represent ultimately mitochondrial dysfunction all of the different cellular Pathways that can result in mitochondrial dysfunction and or can reflect mitochondrial dysfunction and um and they believe that their test might be able to predict the development of autism that every child at age one should get this blood biomarker and it will tell us who's at high risk of developing a neurodevelopmental disorder the test itself doesn't tell us what's wrong it just tells us something's wrong and then the clinicians need to go to work and try to figure out what is going on what is causing this metabolic mitochondrial disregulation so that we could potentially intervene I've talked with one of the leading mitochondrial researchers really in the world he's got a set of 20 biomarkers that he believes represent mitochondrial dysfunction broadly and then there's another research group um that is is actually narrowed it down to just five different biomarkers in men and five slightly different there's some overlap but slight differences in women and those five biomarkers alone were able to distinguish people with chronic severe suicidal depression from healthy controls with over 90% sensitivity in specificity wow so I think that is one of the directions we need to go is we need to establish tests with all of these groups I want to just state state clearly and plainly because one of the common questions I get is what's the blood test I can get for my mitochondrial Health there isn't one um that's the answer there is not one there are lots of different biomarkers that can suggest disregulation of metabolism and mitochondrial function um and again these three research groups are all working on it you know in order to get those five biomarkers for men and women they I think they measured 400 different biomarkers um so we need to make sure that that gets replicated that it's you know prospectively it can identify people um I'm I'm less concerned about kind of the incentivizing and let's give insurance discounts and other things I actually think the majority of human beings that I know authentically want to be healthy and they authentically they really want to have healthy children they will do anything to have healthy children so I don't think we need necessarily need to come up with some incentives right now I I think if we develop evidence-based tools that prospective parents can use to assess their own metabolic MIT andrial health and more and maybe maybe more importantly assess their prospective Children's Health and then we pair that with evidence-based strategies to help them improve their metabolic health so that it will improve the outcomes for those children I mean that's the Holy Grail what I just said probably represents Decades of research the sooner we get started the better and some of it's already underway as I've mentioned so it's not like we start from Ground Zero people have been on this Trail for a while um so but it is going to require a concerted effort it's going to require massive NIH funding to support that type of research we have a new Administration that is talking about massive disruption and the way things are done they're talking about massive changes at the NIH I am really hoping and praying that we're going to see that type of research as opposed to the current model of research which focuses on well here's your diagnosis schizophrenia or hypertension and what what new pills can we develop to treat this condition or how can we understand this condition it like I I think we have enough evidence to be able to really start with more effective to be able to really aggressively pursue more effective treatment and prevention strategies fantastic what role do you see yourself in going forward I mean clearly public education about these issues related to metabolic and mitochondrial Health um is a wonderful home for you in addition to all your clinical work and and everything else you're doing this uh you're clearly very passionate about it um if I may ask you do you have plans to get involved in helping the new NIH new uh Health and Human Services folks you know Steer in the right direction I am more than happy to serve as a consultant if asked and I have I have had some conversations with a wide range of people um so I'm more than happy to do my part I think for the iMed imediate future honestly I am I'm focused on some of these lines of research through mlan hospital and Harvard Medical School I'm really aggressively working on setting up a Health Care System practice to start where we will treat people with these severe chronic mental health conditions that I started a weight list about a year ago and I have over 5,300 people on my waiting list wow I can't treat 5,300 people but I have the privilege of a lot of brilliant clinicians are reaching out wanting to work with me what I'm hoping to do is to put into practice into real world practice everything that we've talked about and more with real human beings to demonstrate this really does work it really does work and I've been doing this work as a solo clinician for 30 years now um and I welcome the opportunity to begin to develop protocols and processes and use artificial intelligence to really try to create algorithms if we can do that um then yeah we hold the potential to help Millions if not billions of people and uh and I you know the theory is great and I'm really a big fan of the theory I it continues to line up new evidence since I've published the book new evidence has come out just completely supporting it and if anything bolstering it putting it into actual clinical practice is really where the rubber Meats rolled Road and um and as we've just talked about there are so many things we can do for people who are suffering today and uh I'm I'm probably it's not even probably I'm most excited about that I'm most excited about training other clinicians and demonstrating for the world that this really works that people can get better from severe treatment resistant mental illnesses fantastic well I and everyone else are super grateful for your real enthusiasm and like clear Devotion to that last statement and um you know I'll finish today's discussion with where we started which is to say thank you for being such a Pioneer for this clearly New Direction for mental health and for Bridging the Gap between mental health and physical health and clarifying for all of us today what you mean what people mean when they say metabolic Health we really have to think about mitochondria what they do the many many roles they play in cells and are everywhere in the body and the paths to improving mitochondrial Health lifestyle supplement in some cases drug- based you know um and the preventative care that we can take especially for people that are thinking of conceiving children to get their metabolic Health right but also of children regardless of age and also for your public health work I mean you really put yourself out there you were willing to embrace this uh vaccine question and did it with with an Inc with Incredible um care to to all sides um and at the same time staying really close to the data in hand and offering new questions so that just is uh emblematic of of everything you do Chris and um it's such a pleasure and an honor to have you back again and uh if people um want to reach you uh we will provide portals for that I know there's a lot of Outreach towards you I really also appreciate seeing you on social media on X and on Instagram it is really important that people hear from you and then what's lovely also is that uh as new studies come out that agree or disagree with with some of the things that have been said today you're always one to uh to put those out there and and and address considerations and get people excited but appropriately excited or cautious but appropriately cautious so thanks for everything you're doing far too much to list again right now um hope to have you back again because the progress is is happening so rapidly um in the meantime thanks for this incredible voyage and uh education for me and everyone listening you're doing God's work thank you thank you Andrew and thank you for doing everything you're doing you're also doing God's work and uh and I know that uh yeah what you do is not always easy and trying to give actual practical protocols so to speak uh is really important and you're probably doing more for the mental health field I don't know I'm struggling to think of who's doing more for the mental health field and the mental health of millions of people around the world than you right now I'm I'm hardpressed to think of someone it's a collective effort folks like you and and the people that come on here you know so I consider you a colleague and a and a and a um comrade for lack of a better word we had a Russian on here recently so comrade um in that uh effort yeah thanks I you know think I know how much you care and I care too so thanks for those words thank you thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Chris Palmer to learn more about Dr Palmer's work including his research and his clinical practice and his absolutely spectacular book Brain energy please see the show note captions if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc costway to support us in addition please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a fstar review and you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and apple please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments for those of you that haven't heard I have a new book coming out it's my very first first book it's entitled protocols an operating manual for the human body this is a book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and experience and it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to Stress Control protocols related to focus and motivation and of course I provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included the book is now available by pre-sale at protocols book.com there you can find links to various ERS you can pick the one that you like best again the book is called protocols an operating manual for the human body and if you're not already following me on social media I am huberman lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram X threads Facebook and Linkedin and on all those platforms I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the information on the huberman Lab podcast again it's huberman lab on all social media platforms and if you haven't already subscribed subribe to our neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a zero cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to three page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep how to optimize dopamine deliberate cold exposure we have a foundational Fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training all of that is available completely zero cost you simply go to huberman lab.com go to the menu tab in the top right corner scroll down to newsletter and enter your email and I should emphasize that that we do not share your email with anybody thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Chris Palmer and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 19 ---
Video ID: VnEy78RL2YY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VnEy78RL2YY
Title: How to Learn Skills Faster | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-03-27 12:00:46 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I explore how to improve motor skill learning and proficiency—whether for athletic performance, learning an instrument or refining any physical skill.

I explain practical tools to build skills, including how to structure learning sessions to focus on repetitions, use internal feedback systems and learn from errors—key elements for accelerating progress. I also discuss strategies such as visualization, metronoming, idle time and the impact of supplements like alpha-GPC and caffeine on performance. This episode provides valuable insights for anyone looking to accelerate and optimize their motor skill development.

Huberman Lab Essentials are short episodes (approximately 30 minutes) focused on essential science and protocol takeaways from past Huberman Lab episodes. Essentials will be released every Thursday, and our full-length episodes will still be released every Monday.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/RTVzwhG

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Learning Motor Skills
00:01:10 Building New Skills, Tools: Open vs Closed Loop; Focus
00:03:58 Skills & Realistic Expectations, Super Mario Effect
00:08:17 Tube Test & Brain, Tool: Increase Repetitions
00:11:01 Importance of Errors, Framing Effect, Neuroplasticity
00:13:23 Learning Session Protocol, Tool: Idle Time Post-Learning
00:17:23 Movement Speed, Ultra-Slow Movements
00:19:28 Skill Proficiency & Errors, Tool: Metronoming
00:21:56 Mental Rehearsal & Limits, Tool: Visualization
00:24:38 Skill Learning & Supplements, Alpha-GPC, Caffeine
00:28:26 Recap & Key Takeaways

#HubermanLab #Science #SkillDevelopment

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to hubman Labb Essentials where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health physical health and performance I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public today we're going to talk about and focus on skill learning we are going to focus on how to learn skills more quickly in particular motor skills so if you're interested in how to perform better whether or not it's dance or yoga or even something that's just very repetitive like running or swimming this podcast episode is for you we're going to go deep into the science of skill learning and we are going to talk about very specific protocols that the science points to and has verified allow you to learn more quickly to embed that learning so that you remember it and to be able to build up skills more quickly than you would otherwise let's talk about the acquisition of new skills these could be skills such as a golf swing or a tennis swing or you're shooting free throws or you're learning to dance or you're learning an instrument I'm mainly going to focus on athletic performance there are basically two types of skills open loop and closed loop open loop skills are skills where you perform some sort of motor action and then you wait and you get immediate feedback as to whether or not it was done correctly or not a good example would be throwing darts at a dart board so if you throw the dart you get feedback about whether or not you hit the bullseye that's open loop closed loop would be something that's more continuous so let's say you're a runner and you're starting to do some speed work and some Sprints and you're running and you can kind of feel whether or not you're running correctly or maybe you even have a coach and they're correcting your stride that's closed loop because as you go you can adjust your behavior and you can adjust the distance of your steps or you can uh adjust your speed or you can adjust your posture you're getting feedback on a momentto moment basis there are essentially three components of any skill that involves motor movement and those are sensory perception actually perceiving what you are doing and what's happening around you then there are the actual movements and then there's something called proprioception and proprioception is often discussed as kind of a sixth sense of knowing where your limbs are in relation to your body now skill learning has a lot of other dimensions too but those are the main ones that we're going to focus on so anytime we learn something we have to decide is it open loop or closed loop the second question should be what should I focus my attention on auditory attention visual attention or propri reception should I focus on where my limbs are relative to my body or should I focus on the outcome okay this is a critical distinction you can decide to learn how to do a golf swing or dance tango and decide that you are going to focus on the movements of your partner or the positions of your feet or maybe you're going to sense the position and posture of your body which is more propri receptive okay so you have to allocate your attention and I'm going to tell you how to allocate your attention best in order to learn faster so these are the sorts of decisions that you have to make so we can really simplify things now I've given you a lot of information but we can simplify it basically open loop or closed loop that's one question and what am I going to focus on and then your neurology will take care of the rest so now I want to talk about realistic expectations somewhere in Hollywood presumably it got embedded in somebody's mind that instant skill acquisition was possible that you could take a particular pill and you would suddenly have a skill and I love movies but it simply doesn't exist then the self-help literature created another rule called the 10,000 hours Rule and frankly that doesn't really match the literature at least the scientific literature either I like it because it implies that learning takes time but the 10,000 hours rule overlooks something crucial which is that it's not about hours it's about repetitions now of course there's a relationship between time and repetitions but there are some beautiful experiments that point to the fact that by simp Le adjustment of what you are focused on as you attempt to learn a new skill you can adjust the number of repetitions that you do you adjust your motivation for Learning and you can vastly accelerate learning some of you may recognize this by its internet name which is not a scientific term which is the Super Mario effect the Super Mario effect relates to the game Super Mario Brothers but you'll see why at the end but basically what they did was they had 50,000 subjects which is a enormous number of subjects learn a program essentially taking words from a computer program or the commands for a computer program that were kind of clustered in a column on the right and those commands are essentially they essentially translate to things like you know go forward and then if it's a right-hand turn in the Maze then go right and uh continue until you hit a choice voice Point Etc so it's a bunch of instructions but the job of the subjects in these experiments were to organize those instructions in a particular way that would allow a little cursor to move through the maze successfully it takes some skill you have to know what commands to give in what particular order and they made that very easy you could just assemble them in a list over on to the right now there were two groups and some one half of the subjects if they got it wrong meaning they entered a command and the cursor would move and it was the wrong command for this little cursor to move through the maze they saw a signal jump up on their screen that said that did not work please try again the subjects would reorganize the instructions and then the little cursor would continue and if they got it wrong again they would say that did not work please try again okay the other half of the subjects if they got something wrong we're told you just lost Five Points please continue so that's the only difference in the feedback that they got now I have to confess I would have predicted based on my knowledge of dopamine circuitry and reward contingency people will work much harder to prevent losing something than they will to gain something and it turns out that that's not at all what happened if they looked at the success rate of of the subjects what they found was that the subjects that were told that did not work please try again had a 68% success rate 68% of them went on to successfully program this cursor moving through the maze whereas the ones that were told you lost five points had a 52% success rate which is a significant difference but the source of the success or the lack of success is really interesting the subjects that were told that did not work please try again tried many many more times per unit time in other words they made more attempts at programming this thing to allow this cursor to move through the maze whereas the people that were told you lost five points gave up earlier or gave up entirely to me this was very surprising it violates a lot of things that I had heard in the kind of popular culture or the self-help literature that people will work much harder to avoid losing something than they will to gain something something but it did fit well with another set of experiments that I'm very familiar with from the Neuroscience literature so the experiment that I want to tell you about is called the tube test here's the experiment you take two rats you put them in a tube or two mice you put them in a tube and mice and rats they don't like to share the same tube so what they'll do is they'll start pushing each other back and forth back and forth sooner or later one of the rats or mice pushes the other one out now you take the winner you give it a new competitor and what you find is that the mouse or rat that won previously has a much higher than chance probability of winning the second time in other words winning before leads to winning again three years ago there was a paper published that examined the brain area that's involved in this turns out it's a particular area of the frontal cortex for those of you that want to know and they did a simple experiment where they The experimenters increased or decreased the activity of this brain area in the prefrontal cortex little sub region of the prefrontal cortex and what they found is if they stimulated this brain area a mouse or rat regardless of whether or not it had been a winner or loser before became a winner every single time so what is this magic brain area what is it doing well the reason I'm bringing this up today and the reason I'm bringing it up on the heels of the Super Mario effect is that stimulation of this brain area had a very simple and very important effect which was it led to more forward steps more repetitions more effort but not in terms of sheer might and will not digging deeper just more repetitions per unit time and the losers had fewer repetitions per unit time so the Super Mario effect this online experiment and the tube test which has been done by various labs and repeated again and again point to a a simple but very important rule which is neither the 10,000 hours rule nor the magic wand Hollywood version of learning but rather the neurobiological explanation for learning a skill is you want to perform as many repetitions per unit time as you possibly can at least when you're first trying to learn a skill the winners are always generating more repetitions per unit time it's just a repeat of performance repeat of per performance even if there are errors and that points to something vitally important which is reps are important but making error reps is also important in fact it might be the most important factor so let's talk about errors and why those solve the problem of what to focus on because as I said earlier if you want to learn something you need to know if it's open loop or closed loop and you need to know what to focus on where to place your perception and that seems like a tough task but errors will tell you exactly what to focus on and the reason is that the errors actually cue your nervous system to two things one to error correction and the other is it opens the door or the window for neuroplasticity errors tell your nervous system that something needs to change so if you are performing a task or a skill like you're learning how to dance and you're stepping on the other person's Toes or you're fum uming or you're not getting it right those errors are opening the possibility for plasticity if you walk away at that point you've made the exact wrong choice without errors the brain is not in a position to change itself errors actually cue the frontal cortex networks what we call top down processing and the neuromodulators things like dopamine and acetycholine and epinephrine that will allow for plasticity so these errors cue the brain that something was wrong and they open up the possibility for plasticity it's what's sometimes called the framing effect it frames what's important right this isn't about motivation to learn this is about how you actually learn so the key is designate a particular block of time that you are going to perform repetitions work for time and then try and perform the maximum number of repetitions that you can do safely that's going to be the best way to approach learning for most sessions I will talk about other things that one can do but making errors is key and this isn't a motivational speech I'm not saying oh go make errors errors are good for you you have to fail in order to win no you have to fail in order to open up the possibility of plasticity but you have to fail many times within the same session and those failures will cue your attention to the appropriate sensory events so science points to the fact that there's a particular sequencing of learning sessions that will allow you to learn faster and to retain the skill learning and it involves doing exactly as I just described which is getting as many repetitions as you can in the learning session paying attention to the errors that you make and then the rewards that will be generated again these are neurochemical rewards from the successful performance of a movement and then after the session you need to do something very specific which is nothing that's right after a skill learning session there's a replay of the motor sequence that you performed correctly and there's an elimination of the motor sequences that you performed incorrectly okay so to be very clear about this after I finish the training session if I do nothing if I just sit there and close my eyes for 5 to 10 minutes even one minute the brain starts to re play the motor sequence in a way that appears important for the more rapid consolidation of the motor sequence of the pattern and to accelerated learning so you have this basic learning session and then a period of time afterwards in which the brain can rehearse what it just did at the beginning of Learning any skill and as we approach from uncertain to Skilled to Mastery we want to reduce uncertainty and that's really what the nervous system is doing it's trying to eliminate errors and hone in on the correct trajectories if you perform a lot of repetitions and then you use a period immediately after we don't really have a name for this postlearning kind of idle time for the brain the brain isn't idle at all it's actually scripting all these things in reverse that allow for deeper learning and more quick uh more quick learning but if we fill that time with other things if we are focused on our phones or we're focused on learning something else we're focusing on our performance that's not going to serve us well it's at least it's not going to serve the skill learning well so please if you're interested in more rapid skill learning try introducing these sessions they can be quite powerful but once you're familiar with something and you're performing it well every once in a while you're accomplishing it better every once in a while then you can start to cue your attention in very deliberate ways and so we hear a lot about chunking about breaking things down into their component parts but one of the biggest challenges for skill learning is knowing where to place your attention so to dial out again we're bu buing a protocol across this episode early sessions maybe it's the first one maybe it's the first 10 but during those initial sessions the key is to make many errors to let the reward process govern the plasticity let the errors open the plasticity and then after the learning sessions to let the brain go idle at least for a short period of time and of course to maximize sleep as you start incorporating more sessions you start to gain some skill level learning to harness and focus your attention on particular features of the movement independent of the rewards and the feedback right so the reward is no longer whether or not you struck the target correctly but simply the motor movement focusing your uh for instance in a dart throw on the action of your arm that is embedding the plasticity in the motor pattern most deeply that's what's been shown by the scientific literature so we're breaking the learning process down into its component parts as we get more and more skilled meaning as we make fewer and fewer errors per a given session per unit time that's when attention can start to migrate from one feature such as the motor sequence to another feature which is perhaps um one's stance and another sequence uh component of the sequence which would be the result that's one getting on a trial to trial basis some of you may be wondering about speed of movement there are some data meaning some decent papers out there showing that Ultra slow movements performing a movement essentially in slow motion can be beneficial for enhancing the rate of skill learning however at least from my read of the literature it appears that ultr slow movements should be performed after some degree of proficiency has already been gained in that particular movement now that's not the way I would have thought about it I would have thought well you know if you're learning how to do a proper kick or a punch in martial arts or something that Ultra slow movements at first are going to be the way that one can uh you know best learn how to perform a movement and then you just gradually increase the speed and it turns out that's not the case and I probably should have known that and you should probably know that because it turns out that when you do ultra slow movements two things aren't available to you one is the propri receptive feedback is not accurate because fast movements of limbs are very different than slow movements of Limbs so you don't get the opportunity to build in the propri receptive feedback but the other reason why it doesn't work is that it's too accurate you don't generate errors and so the data that I was able to find showed that very slow movements can be beneficial if one is already proficient in a practice when should you start to introduce slow learning well it appears that once you're hitting success rates of about 20 2 or 30% that's where the super slow movements can start to be beneficial but if you're still performing things at a rate of you know 5 or 10% correct and the rest are errors then the super slow movements are probably not going to benefit you that much also super slow movements are not really applicable to a lot of things um for instance uh you could imagine throwing a dart super slow motion but if you actually try and throw an actual Dart the dart's just going to fall to the floor obviously some of you already have a fair degree of proficiency of skill in a given practice or sport or instrument and if you're in the sort of advanced intermediate or Advanced levels of proficiency for something there is a practice that you can find uh interesting data for in the literature which involves metronom so this you'll realize relates to generating repetitions you can use a metronome to set the Cadence of your repetitions and if you do that what athletes find is they can perform more repetitions they can generate more output you can increase speed a number of really interesting things that are being done with auditory metronom there actually some wild experiments out there you know there's a world championship of cup stacking there's a a young lady who um I saw could take all these cups spread out on a table and basically just stack them into the perfect pyramid and the least amount of times all the kids go wild this is something I've never thought to pursue and and frankly never will pursue um unless my life depends on it for some reason but it's really impressive and if you look at the sequence cuz these have been recorded you can look this up on on YouTube uh what you'll find is that these expert cup stackers it's just all about error elimination but there too metronom and auditory cues can actually cue them to pick up the cups faster than they would ordinarily and to learn to do that now what's interesting about this and is cool is that your attention is now harnessed to the tone to the metronome not necessarily to what you're doing in terms of the motor movement and so really you need a bit of proficiency again this is for people who are intermediate or Advanced intermediate or Advanced but what you're essentially doing is you're creating an outside pressure a contingency so that you generate again more errors so it's all about the errors that you get and if you harness your attention to this outside contingency this metronome that's firing off and saying now go now go now go not only can you increase the number of repetitions errors and successes but for some reason and we don't know why the regular Cadence of the tone of the metronome and the fact that you are anchoring your movements to some external Force to some external pressure or Q seems to accelerate the plasticity and the changes and the acquisition of skills beyond what it would be if you just did the same number of repetitions without that outside pressure let's talk about visualization and mental rehearsal I've been asked about this a lot and I think it relates back to that kind of uh Matrix Hollywood idea that we can just be embedded with a skill but the question we're going to deal with today is does it help does it let you learn things faster and indeed the answer appears to be yes it can however despite what you've heard it is not as good it is not a total replacement for physical per performance itself okay so I'm going to be really concrete about this I hear all the time that just imagining Contracting a muscle can lead to the same gains as actually Contracting that muscle just imagining a skill can lead to the same increases in performance as actually executing that skill and that's simply not the case however it can supplement or support physical training and skill learning in ways that are quite powerful mental rehearsal closing one's eyes typically and thinking about a particular sequence of movement and visualizing it in one's quote unquote mind Mind's Eye creates activation of the upper motor neurons that's very similar if not the same as the actual movement and that makes sense because the upper motor neurons are all about the command for movement they are not the ones that actually execute the movement okay remember upper motor neurons are the ones that generate the command for movement not the actual movement the ones that generate the actual movement are the lower motor neurons and the central pattern generators so the point is if you want to use visualization training great but forget the idea that visualization training is as good as the actual Behavior you hear this all the time people say do you know that if you imagine an experience to your brain and to your body it's exactly the same as the actual experience absolutely not that's just not the way the nervous system works I'm sorry I don't mean to burst anybody's bubble but um your bubble is made of myths and the fact of the matter is that the brain when it executes movement is generating propri receptive feedback and that propri receptive feedback is critically involved in generating our sense of the experience and in things like learning so I don't say this um because I don't like the idea that visualization couldn't work in fact visualization does work but it doesn't work as well it doesn't create the same the same chemical millu the same environment as actual physically engaging in the behavior the skill the resistance training Etc many of you are probably asking what can I take in order to accelerate skill learning well the conditions are going to vary but motivation is key you have to show up to the training session motivated enough to focus your attention and to perform a lot of repetitions in the training sequence that's just a prerequisite all right there's no pill that's going to allow you to do fewer repetitions and extract more learning out of fewer repetitions it's actually more a question of what are the conditions that you can create for yourself such that you can generate more repetitions per unit time I think that's the right way to think about it what are the conditions that you can create for yourself in your mind and in your body that are going to allow you to focus there are a few compounds that I think worth are worth mentioning because of their ability to improve the actual physical performance the actual execution of certain types of movements and some of these have also been shown to improve cognitive function especially in older population so I'd be remiss if I didn't at least mention them I'm only going to mention one today in fact the one that's particularly interesting and for which there really are a lot of data is Alpha GPC and I'm going to attempt to uh pronounce what Alpha GPC actually is it's Alpha glycero phospholine right Alpha GPC Alpha glycero phospholine see if I keep doing it over and over repetitions Alpha glycero phospholine um there I made an error okay so the point is that Alpha GPC which is at least in the United States is sold over the counter typically is taken in dosages of about 300 to 600 milligrams um that's a single dose or uh have been shown to do a number of things that for some of you might be beneficial um one is to enhance power output so if you're engaging in something like resistance training or sprinting or something where you have to generate a lot of power well then in theory Alpha GPC could be beneficial to you a study noted a 14% increase in power output that's pretty substantial you know 14% if you think about it but it wasn't like a doubling or something of that sort so as you can see things like Alpha GPC in particular when they are combined with low levels of caffeine can have these effects of improving power output can improve growth hor hormone release can improve fat oxidation all these things in theory can support skill learning but what they're really doing is they're adjusting the foundation upon which you are going to execute these many many repetitions okay the same thing would be said for caffeine itself if that's something that motivates you and gets you out of a chair to actually do the physical training then that's something that can perhaps improve or enhance the rate of skill learning and how well you retain those skills now on a previous episode I talked about and this was the episode on epinephrine on adrenaline I talked about how for mental for cognitive learning it makes sense to spike epinephrine to bump epinephrine levels up adrenaline levels up after cognitive learning for physical learning it appears to be the opposite that if you are if caffeine is in your practice or if you decide to try Alpha GPC that you would want to do that before the training take it before the training use it its effect should extend into the training presumably throughout um a lot of the questions I get are about how different protocols and things that I describe start to collide with one another so let's say for instance you go to bed at 10:30 and you're going to do your uh skill training at 9:30 well taking a lot of caffeine then is not going to be a good idea because it's going to compromise your sleep so I'm not um here to design the perfect schedule for you because everyone's situations vary so the things to optimize are repetitions failures more repetitions more failures at the offset of training having some idle time that could be straight into sleep or it could be simply letting the brain just go idle for 5 to 10 minutes mean not focusing on anything not scrolling social media not emailing not ideally not even talking to somebody just lying down or sitting quietly with your eyes closed letting those motor sequences replay use things like metronom where you're queuing your attention to some external CU some stimulus in this case an auditory stimulus most likely and trying to generate more repetitions per unit time so you now are armed with a lot of information about how you generate movement and I like to think that you're also armed with a lot of information about how to design protocols that are optimized for you or if you're a coach for your uh for your trainees in order to optimize their learning of skills of various kinds and I should say that for those of you that are short on time or have limited amounts of time 10 minutes of Maximum repetitions maximum Focus skill learning work is going to be very beneficial it's really about the density of training inside of a session so I think you should let the you know work toward maximal or near maximal density of repetitions and failures provided their failures you can perform safely in order to accelerate skill learning and don't let some arbitrary or in this case the ultradian constraint um prevent you from engaging in that practice in other words get the work in get as much work done as you can per unit time and based on the science based on things that I've seen based on things that I'm now involved in with various communities you will see the skill improve vastly at various stages sometimes it's a little bit stutter start it's not always a linear uh Improvement but you will see incredible Improvement in skill today we talked all about skill learning I hope that you'll consider the information you might even decide to try of these tools if you do please let us know your results with them give us feedback in the comments and as always thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 20 ---
Video ID: _oOEKKiwdDE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_oOEKKiwdDE
Title: How to Improve Your Teeth & Oral Microbiome for Brain & Body Health | Dr. Staci Whitman
Published: 2025-03-24 12:01:01 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. Staci Whitman, DMD, a board-certified dentist for kids and adults. We discuss the critical importance of oral care and the oral microbiome for brain and bodily health. We examine the negative effects of common oral care product ingredients such as alcohol, astringents, and bleaches. We also explore the history and real impact of fluoridated drinking water on oral, bone, and systemic health.

Then we discuss healthy, lesser-known solutions for bad breath, canker sores, cavities, and teeth whitening. We cover how teeth can be made to repair their own cavities and the connection between oral health and cardiovascular health, male and female fertility, dementia, and cancer.

This episode goes far beyond the best approaches to brushing and flossing and will be a valuable resource for anyone seeking to improve their oral health and appearance at any age.

Read the episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/9ra7yGU

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
BetterHelp: https://betterhelp.com/huberman
Joovv: https://joovv.com/huberman
Function: https://functionhealth.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman

*Dr. Staci Whitman*
Website: https://doctorstaci.com 
Feed Your Good Guys (Fygg): https://fygg.com
Happi Floss: https://www.happifloss.com 
Newsletter: https://manage.kmail-lists.com/subscriptions/subscribe?a=Y8kzJt&g=XRTN6i 
Blog: https://doctorstaci.com/blog
NoPo Kids Dentistry: https://nopokids.com 
Online consultations: https://doctorstaci.com/functional-pediatric-dentistry-consultations-with-doctor-staci
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/@doctor_staci
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/doctor_staci 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/doctorstaci 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@doctor_staci 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/staci-whitman-dmd-ifmcp-nmd-iabd-b5845a9 
X: https://x.com/doctorstaci

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Dr. Staci Whitman
00:02:04 Oral Health & Oral Microbiome
00:05:01 Oral Healthcare Ingredients, Sodium Lauryl Sulfate (SLS); Canker Sores
00:08:45 Sponsors: Eight Sleep & BetterHelp
00:11:38 Cavities & Teeth De-/Remineralization, Fluoride
00:19:14 Cavities, Tool: Meal Frequency, Fasting
00:21:51 Sugar, “Dissolvable” Carbs & Cavities, Tools: Feed the Rainbow, Clean Diet
00:27:41 White Teeth, Bleaching, Hydroxyapatite, Mouth Breathing
00:34:34 Antibiotics, Gut & Oral Microbiome, Tool: Probiotics
00:36:20 Mouthwash, Alcohol, Astringents, Cardiovascular Risk, Bad Breath
00:39:54 Sponsors: AG1 & Joovv
00:42:21 Saliva, Dry Mouth, Salivary Analysis, Tools: Hydration; Nasal Breathing
00:47:23 Mouth vs. Nasal Breathing, Hard & Soft Tissue Issues
00:54:19 Deviated Septum, Therapies, Kids & Adults, Mouth Breathing & Sleep Disorders
01:00:42 Gum Health, Flossing; Sexual Health
01:01:50 Shifting to Nasal Breathing, Mouth Taping, Tools: 3-Minute Test, Kiss The Sky
01:05:53 Chewing Gum, Mastic Gum, Tool: Xylitol; Chewing Food, Breastfeeding
01:11:28 Sponsor: Function
01:13:15 Gum Disease, “Leaky Gums”, Cardiovascular Disease, Dementia, Cancer
01:20:05 Antibiotics, Ozone Therapy, Oil Pulling, Mold, Tool: Coconut Oil; Facial Trauma
01:28:07 Nicotine Gum & Pouches, Oral Health; Coffee, Teeth Whitening
01:34:16 Whole Foods, Hydroxyapatite Toothpaste; Tool: Testing Oral Microbiome
01:39:39 Water Fluoridation, History, Other Fluoride Sources, Neurocognitive Issues
01:54:57 Drinking Water & Fluoride, Toothpaste, Cavities
01:59:51 Sponsor: LMNT
02:01:07 Water Fluoridation & Levels
02:04:52 Oral Health & Fertility
02:07:03 Toothbrushing, Flossing, Waterpik, Tool: Toothbrushing & Meals
02:13:23 Teeth Spots & Markings, Fluorosis, Hypoplastic Enamel 
02:19:10 Oral Health, Women, Pregnancy, Menopause & Burning Mouth
02:23:16 Geographic Tongue; Lip Balm; Mouth Breathing, Symmetrical Chewing
02:27:09 Tongue Tie, Chewing & Speech Function, Intervention
02:32:27 Red Light Therapy, Peptides & Exosomes
02:34:40 Mercury Fillings, Ceramic Composites, Retainers, Sealants 
02:39:08 Dentists, Depression, Anxiety, Suicide; Insurance
02:45:05 Recap, Top Behavioral Tools for Oral Health, Tongue Scrapping
02:52:10 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Follow & Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Protocols Book, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Health #OralHealth #Dentistry 

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Dr Stacy Whitman Dr Stacy whitmann is a functional dentist with expertise treating both adult and pediatric patients she focuses on oral health as a key feature of overall gut health and a powerful modulator of brain longevity heart Health hormones and fertility in both men and in women today we discuss many of the common myths about tooth and gum care and how to use specific nutrition breathing and cleaning methods to repair cavities whiten teeth and freshen breath while at the same time improving the oral microbiome this is very important because as Dr whitmann explains most of the things that people do in pursuit of better tooth health and appearance and fresh breath actually damage their oral microbiome and indeed can lead to Serious cardiovascular issues so today we discuss how to brush how to floss I know we've all heard that we need to brush and floss but Dr Whitman explains exactly how to do those so that they are of the maximum benefit for our tooth Health gum health and oral health generally we also discuss the signs and benefits of things like tongue scraping and oil pulling and we discuss fluoride which of course is a very controversial And Timely topic nowadays it's a very interesting conversation that I believe everyone young old parents and kids need to be aware of we also discussed treating things like tongue ties deviated septums canker sores and more by the end of today's episode you'll have the most upto-date knowledge about how to take care of your oral health both for aesthetic reasons and of course to reduce cavities and gum disease and in doing so how to support your brain and heart longevity before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme this episode does include sponsors and now for my discussion with Dr Stacy Whitman Dr Stacy Whitman welcome thank you Andrew I'm super excited to talk about oral health from all perspectives your public facing content especially on Instagram has completely transformed the way I think about this thing that I call my mouth that people think of as their teeth and their mouth and their breath and their tongue and all this stuff as a key site for evaluating and maintaining health of my brain my body and today you'll make it clear as to why that's the case I'd like to just start by looking at this oral health thing through the lens of what I think most people think of when they hear the words oral health which is people want it seems whitish or very white teeth depending on their Preference they want fresh breath or at least to not have bad smelling breath and they want their mouth to sort of feel good right the question I have is what are some of the things that many many people do in trying to have white teeth fresh breath that actually are very destructive for our teeth and our oral microbiome and if we go through uh that entry point into this conversation then we can get into some of the specifics of why that is so what's something that you see many people doing in terms of trying to have bright white teeth that actually is harming their teeth sure great question great way to start off so I first want to commend you and thank you for including the oral microbiome and oral health is one of the pillars of Health uh that means a great deal and it has a lot to do with this answer so unfortunately we have been taught that we need to carpet bomb the mouth we need to add astringents and alcohols and foaming agents and really strong essential oils to clean disinfect and to freshen the breath but we're really what we're doing with these products is damaging our delicate microbiome which can make things far worse so much of oral health is a less is more approach and it's not so product heavy it should be more focused on diet and lifestyle like anything with health uh unfortunately Dentistry has been separated in compartmental specialized out of the body like much of medicine you know we we we're so specialized and subspecialized um in dentistry is included in that and we need to remember it's all interconnected and what we're doing to the mouth whether it be strong toothpaste mouthwashes um certain gums and even what we're eating um and how we're breathing can can really do a number on our oral health and so it's taking a different perspective and it's a bit of a mindset shift to really get us back to optimizing so do you think that most of the common over-the-counter toothpastes um while they smell Min minty or pepperminty and taste minty and pepperminty um are they effectively cleaning teeth and are they causing any damage to teeth by virtue of what they have in them it really depends on the ingredients so I'd like people to start looking at their oral Healthcare products like they're starting to look at food labels we should be reading the ingredients and understanding why they're there and what they're doing where are they sourced from but certainly that I think so many of us feel it has to burn in foam to be effective um what is what is toothbrushing what it what is it really doing you're disrupting the biofilm which is really the plaque or the bacteria that are adhered to your teeth and so all these extra bells and whistles it's it's sort of extra credit but if you're perfectly IM balanc we shouldn't need all these stripping agents and strong mints and things so um for example sodium Laural sulfate is a foaming agent but it also can be really disruptive to the oral mucosa and can lead to oral ulceration so that's a common ingredient that causes foaming that I would argue we do not need your toothpaste shouldn't foam nor should it burn uh essential oils we think oh that those are natural they're they're healthy right well they're many are very antimicrobial and so they could be damaging the healthy bacteria in your mouth so that's where that that strong burn after many toothpaste you really don't need that and if your breath uh is so bad or you have hosis that you feel the need for that then I would argue well let's dig deeper why is your breath so imbalance there's probably something else going on so I really encourage people to start learning about their products um I think we just give dentistry and teeth just we push it to the side it's kind of an afterthought many times and just like we're prioritizing Skin Care shampoo things what we're putting on our bodies we need to be focused on the ingredients in our oral Healthcare products too especially since we're literally putting it into our body not just on the surface of our body what was the foaming agent again sodium Laural sulfate and the problem is there's derivative so some cleaner versions might have coconut derived um SLS derivatives and many people will do okay with those but a common complaint I see in my office um are oral ulcerations and the first first thing I think of is what's in your toothpaste does it have SLS or a derivative because some we're all different and some people have more sensitivities and and we'll react more to those are oral ulcerations canker Source yeah or canor or yes so if one gets a canker sore what does that reflect typically um is it let's assume the toothpaste doesn't have anything to do with it is that a disruption in the microbiome is it from a a physical injury like a bite to the gum could be all okay so it could be um secondary to trauma certainly it can be viral related so the herpes virus often will result in uh oral ulcerations h v one yes um but also and this is off not on many people's Radars you know the the mouth is the Gateway into the body and the mouth is the gut I want people to start thinking of it that way so what happens in the mouth can be a reflection of what's happening in the gut and so a lot of times when I have patients that come in with recurrent apus ulcers or ulcerations that can be a sign of Crohn's or Celiac um IBS like something going on deeper within that we need to be evaluating food sensitivities Etc I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity now I've spoken before on this podcast about the critical need for us to get adequate amounts of quality sleep each and every night now one of the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct and that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep your body temperature actually has to drop about 1 to 3° and in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3° eight sleep automatically regulates the temperature of your bed throughout the night according to your unique needs now I find that extremely useful because I like to make the bed really cool at the beginning of the night even colder in the middle of the night and warm as I wake up that's what gives me the most slow wave sleep and rapid eye movement sleep and I know that because eight sleep has a great sleep tracker that tells me how well I've slept and the types of sleep that I'm getting throughout the night I've been sleeping on an eight- Sleep mattress cover for 4 years now and it has completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep their latest model the Pod 4 ultra also has snoring detection that will automatically lift your head a few degrees in order to improve your air flow and stop you from snoring if you decide to try eight sleep you have 30 days to try it at home and you can return it if you don't like it no questions asked but I'm sure that you'll love it go to eights sleep.com huberman to save up to $350 off your pod 4 ultra eight sleep ships to many countries worldwide including Mexico and the UAE again that's 8sleep.com huberman to save up to $350 off your pod 4 ultra today's episode is also brought To Us by better help better help offers Professional Therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online I've been doing weekly therapy for over 30 years initially I didn't have a choice it was a condition of being allowed to stay in school but pretty soon I realized that therapy is an extremely important component to overall health in fact I consider doing regular therapy just as important as getting regular exercise which of course I also do every week there are essentially three things that great therapy provides first of all it provides a good rapport with somebody that you can trust and talk to about any and all issues second of all it can provide support in the form of emotional support or directed guidance and third expert therapy can provide useful insights with better help they make it easy to find an expert therapist who you resonate with and can help you provide these benefits that come through effective therapy also because better help therapy is done entirely online it's very time efficient and easy to fit into a busy schedule with no commuting to a therapist's office or sitting in a waiting room if you'd like to try better help go to betterhelp.com huberman for this month only March 2025 betterhelp is giving you the big discount offered on this show with 90% off your first week of therapy again that's betterhelp.com huberman to get 90% off your first week this would probably be a good time to talk about the whole concept that teeth can essentially build themselves and Destroy themselves independent of sugar intake and um other factors so if if you would could you just just briefly walk us through you know this whole business of mineralizing a um and demineralization of teeth I find this so interesting and later I'll share a little bit um full disclosure uh I have a very complicated um oral health history um and had I known what you're about to tell us I think I would have spared myself a ton of pain potentially um I'm sorry to hear that but we'll we'll unpack that you weren't my dentist unfortunately no I have I have stories to share too we'll get we'll get to as well I think many people do and that's the problem um so I wasn't taught this in dental school interestingly enough so this is something I learned later um out in practice and um it's the concept that your teeth can naturally remineralize if you have a small cavity but let's let's start further back so your teeth are constantly going through demineralization and remineralization and this is very natural and anytime we put anything into our mouth besides arguably neutral water and this has to do with ph um so anytime we eat our mouth is the beginning of the digestive system so we release amase which is an enzyme that helps break down our food and in doing that the pH drops this is how we start digestion when that happens we lose minerals in our teeth the acid will leech out calcium phosphorus and minerals from our teeth um but the the concern is we don't want it to stay in that acidic state for for too long in that demineralized state for too long um because if we allow our body to do its thing our saliva will naturally remineralize our teeth this is all part of a healthy balance system so our saliva is this golden elixir of our body and it contains immune cells and enzymes but also the minerals that we should need if balanced to create that remineralization so there's something called the Stefon curve and um essentially it's showing us how our mouth will become acidic and neutral and acidic and neutral throughout the day as we eat the problem is in modern society we tend to be snacking and grazing and sipping all of the time so we're not giving our mouths enough of a break enough of an opportunity to remineralize so many of us are staying in the state of constant acidity and demineralization um but what's interesting is so if you have a small cavity or or lesion that hasn't yet truly cavitated that a cavity means a hole so if you look on an X-ray and I see a shadow on your tooth it's called an incipient lesion those if they're still in the enamel those can quote unquote heal or remineralize and this is where you would need to work with let's say a functional or biological dentist to understand how deep your cavity is once it becomes a whole generally you do need some sort of treatment um but our body is meant to for stability you know it knows what to do but how you eat um how frequently you're eating and then we can get into this with how you're breathing and certainly the products you're using and your hygiene practices all factor in as well so my understanding is that the minerals that make up teeth uh are not the same materials that are put into a lot of common tooth care products so uh without getting into a discussion right now about fluoride and water water we will get to that conversation a little bit later but in order to frame that properly When we arrive there could you explain why it is that fluoride is in most toothpastes when basically we don't have fluoride in our teeth at Birth but there are other minerals in our teeth that certain toothpastes have and you know so why would we give an artificial substance to our teeth maybe could explain demineralization remineralization in the cont TT of fluoride and these other minerals so we have hydroxy appetite which is essentially calcium and phosphorus in our teeth uh our enamel is about 90% hydroxyapatite the Dentin which is the layer below the enamel through the enaml is about 60 and our bone has hydroxy appetite too about 60% our our limb bones M all bone 60% hydroxy appetite yes which is calcium and phosphorus our saliva will also have calcium and phosphorus floating around too so what fluoride does is it it throws off the hydroxy group in the in hydroxy appetite and and so it changes it from hydroxy appetite to flor appetite so it restructures it a bit when it does this the bonds generally are considered stronger um and the dental crystallin structure is more densely packed so it's known to be more acid resistant and so we can get into the history of how they discovered this but essentially fluoride was put into toothpaste in about the 1960s it became very popularized so that is why many dentists love fluoride is that you're using it and it makes your teeth more acid resistant and also it has some antimicrobial effects too the issue I have and we can unpack this more later is that it's not super selective so it's not only selecting Anor robes or pathogenic bacteria but it potentially could be damaging beneficial bacteria too um so that's why tooth toothpaste has fluoride in it it also will lower the critical pH so the critical pH is the pH of which your enamel will start to demineralize or degrade and for enamel it's 5.5 and then for Denon it's closer to 6.5 so what fluoride does is it raises the the pH resistance I see so for people that aren't familiar with uh pH this a a measure of how alkaline or acidic a given environment or something is um and so what you're telling me is that fluoride makes teeth Ultra strong MH it's not a mineral that teeth normally see like if a child never used FL fluoridated toothpaste or drank fluoridated water they basically unless they happen to drink from a stream with fluoride in it um their teeth would rely on hydroxy appetite to remineralize but we put fluoride in into toothpaste and into water and that allows teeth to become even stronger and even more acid resistant yes some out there argue the enamel structure actually is weaker this is very nuanced but generally the dental Community believes it's a stronger version of enamel some will argue when you look under scanning electron microscopy um the crystallin structure can be more wav like and potentially the bonds could break more easily but generally you know topical flid does work work however it is no match for a poor diet you know so all of this really comes back to what you're eating so it will make you less at risk for cavities but it's it's not a shoe in like it's not for sure going to prevent Decay what are the times in each 24-hour cycle when our teeth are repairing themselves so like in the middle of the night provided somebody's asleep they're not eating they're not drinking unless they get up for a moment and have a sip of water or something um in between me meals they're not eating if I just sort of naturally intermittent fast I generally eat my first bite of food somewhere around 11:00 a.m. sometimes a little earlier but um but that's just habit it sort of falls under this intermittent fasting kind of thing so I and many people have stretches of time of anywhere from 3 to 14 hours when we're not ingesting any food or caloric beverages is that when REM mineral remineralization occurs tricky word remineralization to do it remineralization right oh that's right you have put the accent remineralization thank you that helps um you said that before um thank you uh is that when our teeth repair themselves yeah that's this is great this is important so generally after you eat you know as I mentioned your your mouth will become more acidic um after about 20 to 30 minutes your saliva will naturally start to buffer so it will start to rise and raise the ph up I like to see us eating more on a schedule so generally every 2 hours or so is when we'll get full optimal remineralization the issue is we are a society on the go and we're grabbing crackers and chips and granola bars and we're eating and nibbling and sipping on Frappuccinos so we never allow that remineralization to take its full effect so yes when you're not putting food or drink in theory in your mouth your your saliva if it's optimized and we should talk about that as well will be remineralizing but unfortunately I do feel so many of us are just not in Balance you know we're dehydrated we're mineral deficient we're calcium deficient we're phosphorus deficient um and we're mouth breathing so the pH is is changing just for mouth breathing can make the mouth more acidic and so there's a lot of factors at play but in theory if I can make one suggestion to someone out there who might be struggling with cavities I want to know not only what are you eating but how frequently are you eating it and this is a great reason why from a dental standpoint fasting intermittent fasting or you know time restricted eating is a great way to combat dental decay it's also better on gut health um as well you know the migrating um complex the cleans ability just giving things a break and a rest is really important I grew up hearing that Sugar causes cavities does sugar cause cavities and when we say sugar of course all the biologists and people with a nutrition background roll their eyes because sugar is a very broad statement right there are simple sugars there's fructose there's sucrose there's glucose there's all sorts of variation within the simple and complex carbohydrates but when I when I'm saying sugar I'm thinking about foods that taste sweet or that contain sugar that's masked by other flavors I just for for sake of Simplicity like added sugar like added sugar I mean now if you buy a cracker typically if you look at the package there's some sugar in there which is ridiculous but that's a whole other discussion yes but um or we could just even say starchy carbohydrates fermentable carbohydrates is what I like to say that get kind nerdy so not directly it's really acid that causes cavities so what sugar does and I like everyone to think of flour like sugar this is also very important uh because the bacteria in our mouth they Thrive the pathogenic bacteria they thrive on sugar but flour will act like sugar in the mouth so they'll also thrive on on flowers so the crackers the the bread good sourdough bread well the issue sour dough I like sourdough too the issue is more contact time so things that are really sticky and um dried I would argue so crackers or toast chips chips I mean think about if you take a handful of Goldfish crackers I haven't done that in a long time time but imagine that it's all throughout your teeth in between the teeth down in the grooves it's sticky it's just a schmorgus board for the bacteria and so what do the bacteria do when they metabolize the sugar or the flour they release acid and so if that food substrate is stuck against the tooth for a long period of time and these foods are also hyper palatable so we're meant to be just snacking and grazing hitting the Bliss point you know grab a handful go do something come back grab another handful you're just constantly feeding that bacteria so your mouth is staying constantly acidic so it's truly the acid that causes cavities but I would argue that Sugar flour is kind of the Catalyst that feeds the bacteria to create that b imbalance is it fair to say I know you prefer the term fermented carbohydrates or um trying to for most people who don't think in terms of starches versus fiber simple although nowadays people are more versed in that sort of thing think of um carbohydrates or foods for that matter that if you put them in your mouth and you just kind of kept them there for a little bit that they would dissolve like a cracker yes uh like a chip uh like rice like a piece of pasta as opposed to like a piece of broccoli which would get soggy but it's got a lot of fibrous material so it doesn't uh dissolve in the mouth and interestingly broccoli or Prebiotic fiber is what feeds the good bacteria so I work mostly with children now um and we can talk about why that transition happened I used to work with adults but um I teach them eat the rainbow feed the good guys okay so we want to feed our healthy bacteria more than we want to feed the bad bacteria and that's not to say you can't ever have fun um and enjoy some fun foods but it's all about balance and so I think people don't realize the true root cause issue with dental disease is primarily diet you know we're so hyperfocused on fluoride and what's in your toothpaste and the mouthwash and all these products but all of those things are really just masking the underlying issue which is how are these bacteria behaving what types of bacteria in in what ratios do we have them in the mouth and how often are we feeding them so I'm hearing this as a repeating theme that diet and lifestyle are going to be more important than drugs or products for keeping the mouth looking good and healthy yes I mean for example I personally haven't used fluoride for many many years um and neither have my children just because I know there are other ways to prevent disease um and I have many of my patients that choose not to use fluoride or these products also I think so many people have been taught you have to have this product fluoride Etc to stay cavity and disease free but if you eat a Clean Diet focus on just some of the pillars of Health that will translate into the mouth as well perhaps it's worth mentioning just what some of the uh facets of A Clean Diet are through you know through your lens of you know what you consider Clean Diet sure so I'm not advocating for anyone diet and I do believe we're all different so it works for some people may not work for others but generally what I suggest is really high quality protein sources um a wide array of vegetables fruit I would arue you you should limit fruit potentially especially if you're a high Decay risk just because there is sugar fructose um but I don't want to villainize fruit there's so many healthy benefits the polyphenols and and everything in it so um uh not seeds olives pickles I love fermented foods for for gut health and then oral microbiome support too so essentially a whole food diet you know things that come from the earth and Le more from farms and less from factories things out of bags um arguably Ultra processed foods should be avoided as much as possible or minimized and then trying to stick to minimally processed or unprocessed Foods is it fair to say that if one does that either a child or an adult that their oral microbiome will not will not only get healthier but that their teeth will get whiter and the reason I keep bringing this up is I think a lot of people want white teeth or at least not yellow teeth sure um having been involved in the public facing health education business for a little while now I realized that nothing that is um encourage to be good for us that takes away from the way that people want to look and feel about how they look gets much traction so what I what I like about what you're telling us is that all the things of eating mostly unprocessed or minimally processed foods those are going to be good for our entire body great that it's great for our oral microbiome probably is good for our whole body because of its effects on on the microbiome at least in part uh but what makes teeth white and will supporting the oral microbiome make our teeth whiter yeah and by the way there are some folks out there whose teeth need to be less white in my opinion agree totally agree we're being somewhat factious but not really um but I think most people would like to have teeth that are would be uh characterized as mostly white yeah we want to look good I mean I appreciate and respect that I do think we've moved a little away from reality with some of that so I agree with you I think there's there are um teeth out there that could could not be quite so bright but you do you I think everyone should do what makes them happy so what makes teeth white so interestingly if you look at a baby tooth next to an adult tooth and I get this call all of the time from parents so the child loses their first baby tooth the adult tooth starts to come in and adult teeth are quite a bit darker than baby teeth which are very white and bright and they're worried what's wrong with my child's teeth they're so yellow that's actually a very natural shade of enamel and why is that it all has to do with that crystallin structure in the mineralization so baby teeth are less mineralized and the crystallin structure is a little more haphazardly arranged it's not quite as organized so instead of like Lincoln Logs lined up it's more like Pickup Sticks to some degree why is that baby teeth are meant to resorb dissolve and fall out okay so this is why baby teeth are also much more susceptible to Decay so the whiteness is coming how the light reflects and refracts off the teeth which is a lot of times why you why you'll hear if you use hydroxy appetite or even coconut oil is changing the surface surface modification so it's changing the way light reflects and refracts off that tooth to make it seem whiter and brighter now certainly with adult teeth if you're using bleaching agents you know hydrogen peroxide or um my peroxide some of the stronger bleachings that's actually penetrating into the tooth and changing the structure pulling out stain do people do that they gargle with hydrogen peroxide well they do bleaching trays essentially um I don't well people will rinse with hydrogen peroxide yes and it will make your teeth brighter and whiter but I'm telling you it's going to do a number on your oral microbiome so I suggest it very in a very limited fashion the only time I ever had a bad canker sore was because I gargled with um 50% water 50% Hydro hydrogen peroxide because an acupuncturist recommended it he looked at my tongue and then he said you should do that you know and then I did that and then you know four or five days later I had this like you know nickel sized canker sore on the roof of my mouth and I was like uh and um I will say and I have no product affiliation whatsoever but um to any any specific products but but by switching to hydroxy appetite containing toothpaste my teeth they definitely have gotten whiter I drink a lot of yeah yeram mate and coffee and um and I brush but that that was it it was a it was sort of a progressive issue of my teeth dimming um so that's been been great I also used to get cavities fairly often when I was a kid we I'll talk about that a little bit later um but since switching to hydroxy appetite toothpaste I had like Stellar um dental reviews assuming my dentist is looking carefully I believe he is but we'll see and to me it just makes so much more sense like give teeth the mineral that they normally use to re mineralize um it just makes sense like biometic it it depends on how you look at life I think I prefer biomimetic materials personally it's again it's a personal choice but I agree with you my patients who have switched to hydroxy appetite and I'd like to point out not all hydroxy appetite toothpaste are the same it depends on sourcing and the other ingredients that are in there but generally speaking their teeth look healthier stronger whiter and brighter they're they just look more nourished more hydrated their microbiomes look more balanced too you're talking about kids and the fact that sometimes if their teeth are a little bit yellow that's normal one thing um that I've been really struck by as the discussion around longevity seems more and more prominent these days is um occasionally I'll run into somebody who's in their 70s or 80s um even 90s and it's very rare to encounter somebody in their 80s or 90s whose teeth are not like the color of this tea and for those that are listening it's like a very dark brown um I've never seen somebody unless they're doing something highly artificial with bleaching um I've never seen somebody 75 or older whose teeth aren't basically yellow to Brown and when you look at people when they're very close to death their teeth often look uh very opaque uh what is that is that a blood flow flow issue is it um what's going on there yeah it it can be a zero stomia dry M so we definitely lose salivary capabilities as we age very likely more mouth breathing so mouth breathers will tend to have darker teeth because the teeth desiccate they dry out and over time you will experience mineral loss um decades and Decades of coffee tea wine will do it too well I don't drink the wine but I've def had coffee tea since I was since I was a little kid I've been drinking B since was like five it's good yeah it's delicious yeah got to live life yeah but um yeah and so they're and they they're losing minerals too you know over time your teeth take a beating I mean they're we're living to be a hundred now that's a long time to maintain this non-shedding surface in our body you know so um and then it depends on the generation too but some some generations especially as you mentioned 70s ' 80s I'd wonder about tetracycline exposures when there's certain antibiotics that we don't use anymore that can um were known to darken the teeth which is why they pulled them from common prescription that raises a question I'd never thought about before so if one takes a course of antibiotics um typically the the advice is to um ingest low sugar Kucha have some Bulgarian or Greek yogurt like repopulate the the gut with healthy uh with the substrates for healthy microbiota um we now know because you've told us that the mouth is the gut which makes perfect sense we are but a series of tubes that's why I was teaching my developmental neurobiology class but it's true in embryology you learn that we're basically born of a bunch of tubes that are kind of do their thing in development um but the digestive tract obviously starts with the mouth so is it the case um uh therefore that we we should be repopulating the oral microbiome if we take a course of antibiotics yes yes very commonly um patients parents will report gosh my child just finished this course of antibiotics and now their teeth are stained or their gums are inflamed or they just seem off and it usually is because they've wiped out a lot of the healthy bacteria too you know it's all connected so I do suggest my patients if I have to write antibiotics which I try to avoid but sometimes we have to that they they do take a high quality probiotic and increase their probiotic Rich fermented foods as well so a high quality probiotic pill yeah generally yeah cuz it's hard to get in enough especially in kids I would argue you know kids aren't usually eating a lot of Sauer cro and kimchi and Nat and but you know you could do kefir yogurt as you mentioned low sugar kombucha Etc but usually a high quality gut probiotic will have some benefit to the oral microbiome but they also do have oral oral probiotics too focus on the bacteria of the mouth what about mouth washes yeah um I've never liked them um they feel they burn MH for one and then I learned some years ago and this is just kind of fun to qu to years ago it must have been like eight 10 years ago I heard I think on the Tim Ferris podcast somebody said oh you know mouthwashes will nuke certain chemicals that are essential for cardiovascular function and so don't don't use them don't use Min mouth strips don't use any of that stuff and at that time that was considered like clear quote unquote pseudo science nobody like alternative science outrageous now we know this is actually true and there's always you know there always um Delights me and scares me at the same time that many of the things that right now people go oh that's pseudo science I like creatine seems to be a big thing right now 10 years ago was only the gym gym rats that we're talking about now everyone's like creatine creatine everybody needs so uh what's the story on on mouthwashes and mouth strips and mints and things of that sort that again like people just want to have fresh breath or at least they don't want to be the person with the bad breath sure yeah so Listerine and those stronger rinses in particular uh they generally contain alcohol astringents really strong antimicrobials you know it says kills 99.9% of germs well I think we've learned we're over disinfecting you know this is why asthma is up eczema allergies are up in our children we now are saying get into the dirt get you know get exposed to microbes and things um so we're carpet bombing the mouth what we've learned through the the data and you're right there are studies to show that chronic habitual use of these uh mouthwashes including prescription strength mouthwash like chlorexidine is a common one it can damage the uh nitrate reducing bacteria so we have bacteria in the dorsum of our tongue specifically that is essentially your tongue that reduces nitrate to nitrite which is a precursor to nitric oxide nitric oxide is a molecule that is really important for cardiovascular health and vasodilation and immune Health um so if we're indiscriminately carpet bombing the mouth with these really strong astringents and rinses we can be affecting our cardiovascular health and there studies to show it can increase blood pressure and and potentially cause cardiovascular issues so when I hear someone say but my breath is so bad you know I have to use this multiple times a day I immediately think well gosh why is your breath so bad it's normal to have bad breath after you eat a garlic you know garlic hummus or have a cup of coffee but if it's chronic halitosis or bad breath I'm curious do you have peronal disease which is a chronic inflammatory um issue in the mouth which can have a slew of Downstream effects which we should discuss um in a bit um or do you have an infection it could be a sinus infection post-nasal drip do you have tonsil stones or tonsler infect infection like what else is going on in your mouth where you feel you need this multiple times a day to even feel like you can present yourself in public um really strong essential oils and mints again I you be cautious with that every once in a while of throwing in a piece of gum or a mint of course um it's really the habitual use of these things that can be damaging I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor ag1 ag1 is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink with adaptogens I've been taking ag1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring this podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still take ag1 is because it is the highest quality and most complete foundational nutritional supplement what that means is that ag1 ensures that you're getting all the necessary vitamins minerals and other micronutrients to form a strong foundation for your daily Health ag1 also has probiotics and prebiotics that support a healthy gut microbiome your gut microbiome consists of trillions of microorganisms that line your digestive tract and impact things such as your immune system status your metabolic Health your hormone health and much more so I've consistently found that when I take ag1 daily my digestion is improved my immune system is more robust and my mood and mental focus are at their best in fact if I could take Just One supplement that supplement would be ag1 if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 with your order of ag1 again go to drink a1.com huberman to claim this special offer today's episode is also brought To Us by ju ju makes medical grade red light therapy devices now if there's one thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast it is the incredible impact that light can have on our biology now in addition to sunlight red light and near infrared light sources have been shown to have positive effects on improving numerous aspects of cell and organ Health including faster Muscle Recovery improved skin health and wound healing improvements in acne reduced pain and inflammation even mitochondrial function and improving Vision itself what sets juv lights apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy device is that they use clinically proven wavelengths meaning specific wavelengths of red light and near infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal seller adaptations personally I use the juv whole body panel about about three to four times a week and I use the juv handheld light both at home and when I travel if you'd like to try ju you can go to juv spelled jv.com huberman chuve is offering an exclusive discount to all huberman lab listeners with up to $400 off ju products again that's juv spell jv.com huberman to get up to $400 off okay so those are some don'ts what are some things that we can do to improve the chemistry of our saliva and our mouth and um just to in full disclosure here uh won't be the disclosure most people are are anticipating what I'm trying to get at here is all the chemical aspects of the chemistry of the mouth like um because when I think about biology just because of my training I think you know you've got chemical forces and you have mechanical forces like there's stuff that literally like moves or you could you know chip a tooth or things that you shouldn't do to protect your teeth and then there's how to create the right chemistry environment so that's really what we're talking about out here and I'm trying to figure out you know how could I have um the best possible saliva yeah I want to be the person with the best possible saliva good spit don't underestimate your spit um it's true it's the golden Elixir so if I were to put spit into like a uh under the microscope or and then also take some of my spit and put it in MPC and separate out all the goodies that are in there just give us a a sense of the kinds of of goodies that are in spit cuz it just looks like a bunch of clear liquid to people but blood looks like just a bunch of red liquid and there's a lot of stuff in there there's so much in it it's so important so it has um bacteria viruses Fung fungi like all kind protozoa hopefully in the right ratios um so we want beneficial bacteria you we all have about 5% pathological bacteria however at that ratio it may those may not be pathological like they they're symbiotic at that point we are still unpack talking and learning more about the oral microbiome but essentially you'll have bacteria um there's hormones there's free cortisol hormones cortisol is in our spit folks yes absolutely there are enzymes to aid in digestion there are immune cells and there are minerals floating around too so um think about how important saliva is to chew if you have dry mouth or you're sick you can't chew and swallow your food and this is why a lot of elderly people have a very hard time eating certain Foods or if if you've undergone cancer therapies and things once you get zero stoia dry mouth your teeth can degrade so quickly so your saliva is so important and so how do we keep it healthy hydration you know so many of us are dehydrated um I would argue we aren't get enough minerals either so you know I I suggest to some kids I can tell in a child's mouth if they're hydrated or Not by the way their saliva looks if it looks more thick and ropy and mucousy they're dehydrated if it looks like water it's healthy um this is without any tests so put a pinch of salt in in your water or some electrolytes that can really help with bioavailability and absorption how you're breathing is incredibly important too for your salivary health so if you're mouth breathing you will have less saliva you know your mouth's going to dry out the pH will drop um and you're going to be in trouble you know dry mouth leads to cavities dry mouth leads to gum disease um so and then the foods we eat of course too we want to have a mineral Rich diet so many of us are mineral deficient or magnesium deficient we're fat soluble vitamin deficient particularly vitamin D3 K2 so I think it is good I like the idea of test don't guess you know um if you have the capability to work with a a doctor to see where you are with some of these these things to know if you need to supplement or not or how you can change your diet sorry interrupt but would would I test my saliva specifically is there a good saliva test out there that would be a different test this would be more of a blood test a standard blood test standard blood test but there is salivary analysis and we should discuss the importance of testing your oral microbiome um I think just like so many of us test our gut microbiomes now you know GI mapping stool test to understand what's happening in the gut there's salivary analysis now and this is what a lot of functional dentists are are working toward I do salivary analysis and biomarker Analysis in my practice we can tell a lot through a patient's saliva and what ratio and types of bacteria are there um as well as as fungus and viruses and things as well so if you have the capability if you really want to optimize your health I suggest testing your oral microbiome because there are certain Keystone pathogens that you may have that you're unaware of that can lead to many Downstream issues and we can jump into this now but the oral systemic connection is really blowing up now and how oral bacteria specifically pathogens can contribute to Alzheimer's and Dementia infertility issues pregnancy issues cardiovascular issues autoimmune disease rheumatoid arthritis diabetes obesity mood disorders cancers it goes on and on all coming back to the bacteria in our mouth amazing I really want to um not just double click but really dive into that no pun intended um I do want to just ask because a subset of listeners will be interested in how they could get their saliva tested yes um I've never had my saliva tested I will say that based on your teachings online I've made an effort to drink more water in addition to um massive amounts of yamate and and small amounts of coffee um I've made an effort to well I switched to a hydroxy appetite containing toothpaste um which has been horrific for all sorts of reasons I've um really emphasized nasal breathing that's something I was into before through the sports performance world because my friend Brian McKenzie who's a human performance expert was really big on this a while ago and um and the healthiest my breathing and cardiovascular function ever was uh for me was when um something I don't suggest people do unless it's their profession I was uh boxing for about a 5year span and I had a fitted mouthpiece and I would do my running my road work with my mouthpiece in breathing through my nose um and that taught me to like really how to breathe correctly through my nose and it translated to switching to nasal breathing when I slept I didn't sleep with the mouth card in um but I think that breathing through the nose is just so important for the reasons you're describing James Nester has described and I will share this little factoid and then I and then I'll um then I'll shut up and and nasal breathe um a friend of mine who is physician at UCSF he told me that the Methamphetamine addicts that come in have terrible teeth everyone knows this meth addicts have terrible teeth but do you know why it is he works with the School of Dentistry it's because they're mouth breathing I've worked I've worked with that population doesn't actually deteriorate the teeth it's the fact that they're they're they're mouth breathers and so I find this fascinating and then of course the book Jaws which was published by Paul erck and Sandra Khan my amazing colleagues at Stanford years ago and by the way when they published that book people said oh this is pseudoscience this is crazy you're saying nasal breed epidemic of you know fear-mongering well it is we now know this is a real thing it's an epidemic so um so how do you encourage kids and adults to switch from mouth breathing to nasal breathing yes this is a big part of my practice so it you we need to understand the why just like anything why are you a mouth breather so humans are obligate nasal breathers where we are meant to be breathing through our nose unfortunately so many of us are mouth breathers they estimate up to 50% of the population now breathe through their mouth I personally think that's an underestimate with what I'm seeing in my practice um so why is this so the theory is um that ancestrally we used to chew and masticate up to four hours a day this active chewing uh it pushes forces out it was actually what grows the face the lateralization of the tongue the tongue elevating it would grow the Jaws wide the sinuses wide including breastfeeding okay we now Flash Forward 10 12,000 years okay so we had the Agricultural Revolution we went from hunter gatherer Society to agrarian then the Industrial Revolution we started milling and processing everything everything's soft and mushy now we used to chew four hours a day we now chew four minutes a day so there's very little there's atrophy essentially we slurp our food we slurp our food it's like that movie what was that futuristic movie with the little robot I hated that movie oh I cried during that movie I hated that movie um I was so worried that it was true and here we are they slurping their food lying on recliners theyve outsourced pretty much everything yes yes so this is gener many generations of this happening we're essentially shrinking James now um phrases it were dis evolving okay so faces are shrinking Jaws are shrinking this is why we see so much crowding in teeth if you go to the Natural History Museum in New York Washington DC look at the ancestral skulls the teeth are pristine there's no Decay and all 32 teeth including the wisdom teeth fit perfectly into the dental arches so that was not that long ago in human you know our trajectory so what hased happen it's our food it's how we're chewing it's how we're breathing and so if this structure shrinks the nasal volume shrinks the sinuses shrink the airway shrinks our tongue has no room in our mouth anymore so it either sticks out tongue thrust or it falls back you know and it's obstructing us so there's so much sleep disordered breathing um disregulated breathing and sleep apnea now that's not getting diagnosed so if we look at children early and they come into me and I can I can see it as they walk in they generally will have forward head posture because they're trying to open their Airway okay forward head posture they have dark circles that's called Venus pooling that's a sign of inflammation secondary to mouth breathing um you can see more of the whites of their eyes so it has to do with their visual plane so forward head posture the droopy eyes from inflammation you see more of the Scara the white of the eye they just look con gasted and and sick they they just and their mouths open and those kids have major Airway issues and we need to understand why so it is generally either a hard tissue issue or a soft tissue issue so what would the hard tissue issues be that would be the size and shape of the Jaws the size and shape of the pallet um this the position of the Jaws you know is your jaw set back is it forward like a bulldog um and do you have a deated septum you know they they estimate um 75% of humans can have some sort of deviated septum and people think that's ridiculous it's not just from getting in a fight and getting your nose broken so think of it this way if your pallet is narrow and I smooshed your face like this the septum has to go somewhere and so it will can't okay so that's what creates the deviated septum and so if we expand a face and this is what early functional orthodontist and this is what I'm doing in my practice or doing in these younger kids you put in a little retainer that can help expand the face and the septum straightens and now we can breathe better so that's hard tissue soft tissues could be enlarg adids enlarged tonsils um oral motor dysfunction low tongue tone low low tongue positioning too how much plasticity is there of the sinuses so let's say um somebody has a partially or severely deviated septum and they they could get surgery and I want to talk about some of the different surgeries there's a um a balloon uh expansion thing that online it looks really cool I like want to try this I really want this to happen to myself yeah they put the balloon up there they inflate the balloon it's guided they do one that's guided they numb it and then they take it out and you know this kind of thing well is actually the appropriate way to do it both in and out through the nose but um if somebody makes the effort to nasal breathe so maybe they mouth tape at night or um I'm a big fan of shifting from any mouth breathing to nasal Breathing by insisting that I nasal breathe while I do any cardio unless I'm pushing really hard and then I need to bring mouth breathing into it but I've noticed just because I can measure snoring through I sleep on a n Sleep I can measure snoring that way but even if you don't do that there are other ways you can measure snoring with an app or someone can tell you you're snoring um so this isn't about a product per se but if I force myself to nasal breathe uh during cardio workouts especially kind of zone two zone three stuff translates to less mouth breathing and snoring and sleep so the question is is do the sinuses actually dilate or if you have a DV8 septum do you need it surgically or somehow other otherwise repaired it depends on your age so most facial development is done around the age of 10 so the the issue I would say with traditional Orthodontics which is when you wait for all the baby teeth to fall out and then you put braces on you can't can't control the the modeling of the face the midface the Jaws which is why we now are starting with um functional therapies as young as three or four years old with retainers so in the middle of our palet is a suture filled with cartilage and so with kids it's really easy to manipulate and change facial development if you make the Jaws wider not only is it improving Airway but the teeth will come in straight now they have room the reason they come in crooked is there's not enough room for them to come in it's important to note the floor of the mouth the roof sorry the roof of the mouth is the floor of the nose so if you expand the pallet the sinuses will get wider the septum is going to Upright everything's connected now as an adult um you it's really hard to manipulate bone structure just through posturing and habit there are myofunctional therapists which I they're the best and they're really important in this conversation think of them like physical therapists for breathing teaching you to keep your lips closed your tongue up all of this musculature is really important toning it um if you don't use it you lose it so if your mouth breather your tongue will lay low your tongue's a muscle it will get weak it will get flaccid so we want to strengthen these muscles to help with lip seal and nasal breathing but as an adult if you do have a skeletal discrepancy you usually you need some sort of intervention you're not going to just be changing it through lip taping or how you're training or myof functional therapy and there are more conservative ways now besides true jaw surgery there's um an appliance called the homeoblock which I know is what James Nester used you can read about it in his book that will actually start to to change facial structure there's less invasive treatments there's an msse appliance it's a Max maxillary skeletal expansion device it it does put these little mini screws in your palette but it will pop the suture and adults and this is you really would have to want this because you're struggling so much and people who aren't breathing well they're struggling I think it's it's the most important thing for health is how you're breathing and how you're sleeping and with children if they're not breathing appropriately and they're waking up a lot which is why I it would be interesting to get some sort of product on you I'm just curious do you get into deep sleep do you get into REM sleep in for great yeah I'm measuring deep sleep and REM sleep through the eight sleep or Loop or both um my deep sleep is great provided I get to sleep by about 10 10:30 because that's when you capture the Deep when I capture the Deep Sleep window if I go to sleep around 11: or midnight I lose out on some deep sleep even if I sleep longer yes um and my REM sleep's really solid these days yeah I'm struck by how convincing the data are about nasal breathing improving brain function there were a couple studies that showed that if people either mouth breathe or nasal breathe in a laboratory study um the nasal breathers have better memory recall um but those were of odors so everyone said well okay of course it's of odors and you're breathing through your nose and so you can remember those odors so they've now run these studies on with other types of memory and brain function it's just very clear that you oxygenate your brain better and you uh you think better your cognition is better your memory is better for everything just odors so you get 20% more oxygen when you nasal breathe and this is really important for children in these formative years of brain development and this is why we're seeing studies um showing that children who mouth breathe have sleep disordered breathing they they have behavioral issues and many are getting diagnosed with ADHD and um arguably potentially put on medications when really if we'd screened them for Airway issues potentially we could have avoided some of this and and it also has to do we're not getting into deep sleep the glymphatic system is not kicking in hormone functions not kicking in so a lot of these children um growth hormone is impaired anti-diuretic hormone is impaired if they're not getting into deeper Sor of sleep so this is why we see bed weding um some signs to look for in your partner or your children is tossing and turning clenching grinding snoring or noisy breathing um sleeping in really odd position like craning the neck cuz they're trying to open their Airway um spinning around the bed you know the child's legs are in and the B's like out of the bed the bed sheets are everywhere and then certainly waking up unrested and then noticing behavioral issues too all you have to do to convince the uh male half of the audience to um focus more on nasal breathing is to tell them and to not use mouthwashes is to tell them that um being a mouth breather will uh uh give them sexual dysfunction um or will will uh predispose them to sexual dysfunction and they'll start U working on their nasal breathing because of nitric oxide because the paranasal sinuses is what will help produce nitric oxide too so if you're breathing through your mouth not your nose you're not getting enough nitric oxide which is very important in sexual health but also we know men who have gum disease are 2.85 times more likely to have erectile dysfunction as well wow so so no bleeding gums we do not want infl blamed bleeding gums um flossing is something we haven't touched upon yet but it's incredibly important not only for cavity prevention but gum health um pink in the sink any amount of bleeding is a sign of inflammation and it doesn't just stay in the body it can impact the entire system so um please take your gum health seriously if for nothing else and for your sexual health great message so to shift over to nasal breathing if somebody's really struggling with this do you are you a fan of mouth taping yeah you want to make sure you can do so safely so with kids I always suggest they get screened by an airway focused dentist um or potentially an oenologist or an ENT um for adults there is a test that you can do um it's the three minute test can you breathe through your nose without panicking or feeling sympathetically challenged for 3 minutes so you can either put water in your mouth put a piece of paper tape tape your lips and literally time yourself um and if you can breathe through your nose successfully then you in theory can safely lip tape there are different tapes that you can do so you that are open in the middle so you can still off gas or you feel less it feels less invasive um and what I suggest if people are interested in it is just start five minutes while you're chopping vegetables for dinner and then move up to 30 minutes while you're watching a show and then watch a whole movie for 2 hours and then if you've been able to tape that long you can do so at night as well I will tell you it is one of the top things that I have done to improve my health and I I do see it with my um my wearables and my sleep data recently I had the privilege of giving a talk at Stanford with uh Renee Fleming it's like one of the world's greatest opera singers alive today and I said what are some things that you do for your breathing because I end up talking a lot for the podcast and she gave me some um lung and diaphragm strength in exercises but then the one that she uh suggested for emphasizing nasal breathing because there's a lot of nasal breathing that's done quickly and subtly um in order to maintain air air pressure in the lungs and for her craft which I know very little about but is instead of like doing weight training for the neck it's kind of a fun one it doesn't make the neck big so people um will who don't want a larger neck will appreciate that but the to exercise the internal muscles of the neck and the way you do this is something called kiss the sky the boxers will actually know this the old school boxers it looks ridiculous but I'll do it cuz I look ridiculous on this podcast all the time intentionally so you look up at the sky and you pucker like you were a puffer fish oh for 15 seconds per side interesting and she said it builds the the muscle the the mus the strength and the neural control over the internal muscles of the neck so again no widening or thickening of the neck but on the inside and it makes it much easier to take deep breaths through your nose it probably increases the amount of resistance so that you can fill your lungs more easily so I've been doing a little bit of like kiss the sky and it looks completely ridiculous yoga move too yeah so and you're just like really like lip smack as if you going to kiss this guy from side to side 15 seconds per side a couple times per day or just whenever you remember it and I mean her voice is amazing like her speaking voice and her uh posture and everything so um I borrowed that one from her you can do a lot to improve your Airway Health through breathing Rehabilitation so I think that is a big part that's missing in these conversations with Airway Health you know we talk about well you need to see the airway trained dentist you need to see the myofunctional therapist the orthodonist the ENT that's a lot just the just the scheduling of that alone makes me want to take a nap but it is it's a it's it's a lot to unpack Airway issues if parents are out there there's two books three I'd recommend if you're very interested in this since it impacts so many people certainly Breath by James Nester Jaws as you mentioned by SRE KH and um sleep wrecked kid by Sharon Moore if you're a parent what's the title again sleep wrecked kids sleep wrecked W E Sharon Moore um so it will just help you screen and understand why we're worried about these things more um but yeah I we can't overemphasize Airway Health um especially in our children you know and catching it early and intervening early is really important great um in trying to maintain Airway health and healthy saliva and now I'm obsessed with saliva I like cool it's got all this stuff in it I was thinking it's just like if we know blood has all these goodies in it we test blood we know um skin microbiome we know that um you know women go to an OBGYN they they get path smears they get a you know I mean they we know if you ever raised a kid or change diapers you you can tell a lot about somebody's Health by the fluids yeah they Emit and that they have within them I'd like to play salival on the list of critical things to pay attention to but gum is this good for our breathing and for our saliva or not um I I not a big gum chewer but um is it good bad neutral yeah I think it's time and place can be very beneficial so where I like it um is if because I will say hey parents you really need to avoid crackers and chips and granola bars and they sayh do I feed my kid you know um so if we' missed the window of of how to introduce food to children or they just favor those type of foods what's a good strategy if you're out on the go to minimize Decay risk and increase salivary Health choose some gum particularly Xylitol gum because xylol will inhibit bacterial proliferation um it will reduce strep mutans which is the bacteria that causes cavities um big fan of xylol so offering a piece of Xylitol gum after an exposure to some of these snack foods these fermentable carbohydrates is great it will loosen the food it will increase salivary Health some people like it to strengthen you know Mastic Gum I always get asked about that you can overdo it you know I worry about Temple mular dysfunction I have bad experience with mastic gum I was buying it I love the kind of the the um primordial aspect of it's like a it's like a tree sap that you chew on it comes in this beautiful paper package and you know no plastics or anything you get it going in there and you feel like you're really like working it the same way my Bulldog costell would like work he to like teeth on like bricks and like he was just and you feel great and then all of a sudden you'd go and your jaw would kind of stick and then and then later you like w like my jaw really hurts or you feel something pop up in your joint pop and yeah it'll give you that you know these days the the in the young influencers are so obsessed by this it'll give you a little bit of a golf ball um hypertrophy of your jaw that's not why I was doing but um but boy does it make your jaw feel sore yeah yeah I'm not a big fan I like to just explain it think of a baseball picture I mean how many of them go on the disabled list because they're overusing their shoulder it's it's a similar joint you know rotation if you're chew we're only meant to chew really for sustenance that's how we were evolved so if you're chewing gum all day it's it's very likely wearing down the cartilage in your joint so I'm not a huge fan of it I just personally don't love gum chewing but I think time in place too so especially from a a cavity standpoint or um hydration you know increasing salivary flow but just I would just chew it for a couple minutes throw it out you don't need to be chewing it for an extended period of time but chewing food is good yes yes thank you so the issue as we mentioned is you know we are slurping and smooshing our food I don't I to me almond butter is like never existed in in nature like the idea that you would take like I mean almonds are so delicious right but that you would like like grind them up and put them into a paste like to me that the texture is so aversive you do that in your mouth you're supposed to do that through chewing just the fact that like you peanut butter like to me these things make no sense whatsoever Yurts and app sauces and fruit snacks and baby food baby food for animals and people without teeth exactly so I'm not advocating in one camp or the other can be a mix but you know there's there's blended food that's offered or you can do more of a baby Le weaning which is eating more real foods obviously please be smart about this don't give choking hazards to your children there's a lot of information out there that you can look on how to safely prepare food for your child but chewing is incredibly important for facial development well I was thinking for adults I was kind of making fun of the fact that adults are eating like kids like they're like slurping their food and chicken nuggets and french fries and yeah we need to chew when really asked what's gone on with the airway why does everyone why your face is shrinking it's chewing we've lost chewing and then arguably breastfeeding too we've moved away from exclusively breastfeeding too what what are the numbers on that I don't know the numbers on that how many people I don't know either I don't know but it's certainly down I think it's making a Resurgence and a lot of people though are doing a blend you know we do what we what we need to do I mean a lot of women are working and so it it's important to know if you're not able to breastfeed or it doesn't resonate with you or you are working and having a pump that there are fixes okay so this isn't dire but just working with someone to catch these issues early and also unfortunately even if we're doing all the things correctly introducing hard Foods our child's chewing and they're nasal breathing and we're breastfeeding we it's hard to combat generations and generations of dis Evolution essentially so a lot of human are needing intervention now I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors function last year I became a function member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing function provides over 100 Advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily Health this snapshot offers you with insights on your heart health Hormone Health immune functioning nutrient levels and much more they've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful Plastics and test for P fases or forever chemicals function not only provides testing of over a 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from Top Doctors who are expert in the relevant areas for example in one of my first tests with function I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood function not only helped me detect that but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels which included limiting my tuna consumption I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with Knack and acetal cysteine both of which can support glutathione production and detoxification and I should say by taking a second function test that approach worked comprehensive blood testing is vitally important there's so many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be detected in a blood test the problem is blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated in contrast I've been super impressed by function Simplicity and at the level of cost it is very affordable as a consequence I decided to join their scientific Advisory Board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast if you'd like to try function you can go to function health.com huberman function currently has a weight list of over 250,000 people but they're offering Early Access to hubman podcast listeners again that's function health.com huberman to get early access to function earlier you mentioned the many different systems and diseases of the body that the oral microbiome has been directly linked to I would say in in science and medicine there are Direct effects like this mediates that and then there are indirect effects you know like if fire alarm goes off in the middle of the night your sleep isn't good but fire alarms don't regulate sleep they just can mediate they can modulate your sleep but my understanding and I'm not I'm not deep in this literature but my understanding is that we now have fairly conclusive evidence that certain bacteria from the mouth make its way to the brain or heart or other tissues and directly increase either the occurrence or the susceptibility of dementia cardiovascular disease that this isn't just a you know oh you broke your ankle so you move less you move less your heart gets less healthy your heart gets less healthy your brain gets less healthy this is the kind of point I'm trying to make but that there's but that the bacteria in our mouth bad bacteria can cause real problems for the brain and heart yes and many other systems too so much research so they're finding 57 diseases are linked back to oral dpois or oral pathogens um which is quite a lot and different species can affect different parts of the body so what does this all come down to it comes down to gum disease so it's important to not about 80% of the global population suffers from some sort of gum disease that's huge you know and um about 10% of the the population will have severe periodontal disease which is chronic bone loss tissue loss and this is where we get tooth loss too so gum it's a it's sort of a Continuum but these all have one thing in common it's the type of bacterial species that live in our mouths and when they get out of balanced so there's something called the red complex this these are the five bacteria that most influence gum disease and disbiosis um that can affect the heart and other organ systems the big contenders pin jaalis f nucleatum um T dentac Cola um there's AA um and then strep mutans too um is can affect the heart as well but why do these bugs how do they get where where these other organ systems are and what are they doing so I like to term this leaky gums so we've all heard leaky guts MH so let's say we're just in disbiosis and probably because maybe our oral hygiene isn't the best as well as some other things so we're not flossing let's say and our gums bleed okay that's a sign of inflammation but you now have created a a vector an opening in the skin in the mucosa where bacteria can get into the circulatory system catch a free ride and end up in places they shouldn't be and that creates an immune response so um an inflammation okay and then also these bacteria release endotoxins okay they can create cyto kind storms all kinds of things so the body doesn't like these bacteria to end up where they shouldn't so heart disease for example if you have gum disease you're twice as likely two times as likely to have cardiovascular issues um if you have gum disease you're three times more likely to have stroke a lot of this is correlative not quite causal yet but some of these are looking to have more influence than others and there's more research that's needed um fertility is a big one that I like to speak about so women who have gum disease can take two months longer to get pregnant and to conceive and there are studies that show um in couples that can't conceive that 90% of the men show some sign of gum disease and once they go in and get it treated um then they their fertility conception improves by 70% that's significant you know yeah and it's not only gum disease but just any oral infection and P and jaalis is being linked to Alzheimer's and Dementia you know these bacteria end up in the brain they cross the bloodb brain barrier and they create amalo plaques and inflammation in the brain and so there's been studies many studies now one big one was out of Harvard where they sampled the cerebral spinal fluid in the brains and saw that in these plaques they had pin jaalis of Almost 100% of the patients and when they tested them against other patients who had passed away without Dementia or Alzheimer's they didn't see any pin jaalis so there's a lot of Association and links right now um that we need more research on the other to be aware of is cancer and this is why I love people to consider oral microbiome testing I I personally have a friend who we tested her oral microbiome and she was through the roof with f nucleatum pretty asymptomatic otherwise but f nucleatum is linked to increased risk of pancreatic cancer breast cancer and coloral cancer I mean we swallow 2,000 times a day and we know some of these bugs these bacteria they can live through the stomach acid and make their way down into the gut pancreatic cancer is uh I sorry to interrupt I must say I've had a couple friends die of pancreatic cancer and while I wouldn't want any cancer that's the one that I really wouldn't want because so many of them are deadly I have someone really close to me dealing with it right now he actually just had his pancreas removed prophylactically cuz it was precancerous procedure yeah if they catch it early enough it goes anterior to posterior and if if you catch it early enough they can um Lop off the anterior portion the Whipple procedure as it's called but even a colleague of mine um a brilliant um uh bioengineer um few years ago who had the Whipple done and he was progressing well and and then he passed away about a year and a half ago yeah pancreatic cancer is don't want it no joke and um so if you could just test your spit yeah you know it's a simple test it's a and I we I can give some of the tests that I like in the show notes but you just spit into this little vial and mail it off and then they send back your results with you I mean that's pretty amazing you do need to find a dentist who can then guide you what do you do with this information a lot of these pathogens they do need antibiotics they're very virulent they're spet so they're cork screw shaped and they can just impregnate and wedge into tissue and so sometimes we really do need to be pretty heavy hitting with how we treat them so antibiotics what kind of antibiotics are used to treat these things it's usually an amoxicillin um type of blind that they'll use okay radical idea that's going to get me in trouble with my more um Natural Health audience but I speak to those are there more pharmaceutical more nothing don't take anything um what is the argument against once every three years as a healthy adult doing a round of of uh antibiotics to kill off um unhealthy bacteria replenishing the the microbiome and various tissues preventatively yeah just preventive like like kill off what might be living in the mouth might kill off what might be living in the prostate I learned recently that you know the prostate doesn't have its the same sort of immune system protection and so a lot of men you know while they don't have UTI they they have a prosti and they basically just need to do a 21 day or 31 day round of antibiotics and everyone will be like oh you're you're spreading meras with that or something no but um you can uh protect against a number of different cancers related to the prostate and things like that why don't um we do this as a regular practice like every three years or so you just kind of you hit the system hard for about a week kill off a bunch of bad stuff and a bunch of good stuff and then replenish the good stuff yeah it's a good question I mean I think it's harder to repopulate the the gut in the oral microbiome than one might think um I like less is more approach I think there's better ways to kill off bad things like ozone Therapies being used a lot I use ozone in my office tell me more about ozone so ozone um it's 03 okay so it's a very unstable molecule I use it in gas form or water you can use it as an oil it's carried usually in uh olive oil or hemp oil or flax oil and so it's antimicrobial it's antiviral it's antifungal and so what I'd use it for is to treat gum disease um and peronal pathogen but then also under fillings or under sealant or if I'm doing a pulpotomy or kind of a root canal procedure because otherwise we're just blasting water everywhere wait so is this um oil pulling this is the basis of I use it as a gas it comes out of a machine and I use it in a wand as a gas um very localized I got to try this but um what's the deal with with people swishing olive oil and and um oil pulling I know this is big in some of the um I don't even know what to call anymore what's what used to be alternative and it's now mainstream it sounds like music in the 90s right um Indie Indie medicine is now mainstream they sold out right like the the um I'm just joking folks but not really um it's there's so many mimics between the the Health Arena and kind of music and art like what used to be Niche becomes trendy and then becomes mainstream everyone's cool with it now yoga breath work uh resistance training used to be Niche um swishing olive oil spitting it out acupuncturists love this um alternative medicine types like this um is there any truth to it does it relate to Ozone it can so you can find ozonated oils on the market um for oil pulling so this is an ancient aric practice going back to Ozone though just killing off mot toxins and bacteria this can get kind of controversial but a lot of natural paths will use um gas ozone either rectly or they'll use that IV too you have to go to someone who knows what they're doing re ozone yes to get all the way up to the oral microbiome no it would affect more like the gut area um the pancreas the liver Etc it's it's used a lot with mold um elimination Moto toxin elimination you know I get a lot of questions nowadays about U mold toxicity especially people in Austin I don't know if you know this but like it's either Theory or real that lots of people who live in Austin or used to live in Austin think they have mold uh toxicity because of a lot of new Building architecture they say a lot new building cold the heat cold variation and the moisture I don't know I don't know if this is true or not but you know the last thing you ever want to do is tell somebody who thinks they have something that they don't and I'm I'm not saying they don't I I just I hear this a lot I've known a number of people that have left the City of Austin because they couldn't deal with the mold interesting mold that can be scary I mean it we see it affect the teeth the teeth will just start degrading too and some of kids who have tested really high microt toxins so rectal ozone yeah Wild Well Hey listen it's the digestive tract I mean you know we're a health science everyone can look it up on their own but there are providers out there doing it so ozone can be great as an antimicrobial instead of an antibiotic now going back to oil pulling oil pulling is an ancient Arabic practice it used to be with sesame oil more people do it with coconut oil now um I oil pull a couple times a week occasionally so what is that pract look like so I put a spoonful of organic raw coconut oil in my mouth let it melt and just swish it around as I'm you know dottling around nasal breathing yeah don't spit it into your sink it will clog your sink spit into the trash can um so what is it doing well it's dislodging the bofilm as you're switching okay lauric acid which is in coconut oil is antimicrobial um it can help with um lymphatic stimulation and and um has some anti-inflammatory properties too and a lot of people report makes their teeth look brighter and whiter I mean you do have great teeth well I'll tell you the story why Ian it's in your profession to have great teeth but I walked in and I met you for the first time in person I was like wow you have really really nice teeth they're not real I had facial trauma should we get into that yeah let's get into that so when I was 10 it's why I became a dentist when I was 10 um I was my I was trying to gain the attention of my older brother's friends who were very into dirt biking and being MX biking and we had just watched the movie rad and I thought I would impress them and they were all doing tricks out in the neighborhood and long story short I fell off my my bike and landed on the asphalt in a vault and knocked out my teeth and I broke my premaxilla and you can see this car still but this is part of my story and it's why I became a dentist because I was in and out of dental offices and oral surgeons and orthodontists and at the time I was an art theater kid I loved working with my hands um But as time went on I thought well gosh I don't want to be sleeping on couches in New York City I need to make sure I make a living what am I going to do and I really love science and I thought well how do I work with my hands and it was dentistry and Dentistry can be a little creative and artistic too so these are not real but thank you oh well you're welcome and thanks for the full disclosure they look very natural unlike some people's falsies you know or whatever what do you call them I I call them them FAL cuzz like cuz I've got half you know I've got a tooth that was kind of chipped in half from from getting hit honestly dumb you know if you're going to box make sure you're getting paid a lot of money and you wear mouth guard yeah and wear a mouth guard there they're better martial arts where you can go full uh full blast like Brazilian jiu-jitsu where you stand less of a chance of brain injury let's just say so as a neuroscientist I can't um support boxing but I remember the movie rad I remember the back flip at the end I remember thing I was I think I was trying to do that I don't know what I was doing anyway didn't land it yeah well you landed it but on the wrong but uh so this is a bridge you can get implants um people have flippers we were talking about hockey players earlier they you'll see them flipping their flippers around with their fake teeth so a flippers a retainer with fake teeth on it there's a a lot of different things you can do but what's interesting I was part of making my teeth I sat in the lab and helped so that's cool I wanted them to look not quite as contrived I suppose well they look very natural and uh thanks and today we're learning all the ways in which teeth are just part of this whole ecosystem that's so critical I have to ask and we will come back to some um things related to um avoiding really horrible diseases by way of taking better care of one's um oral health nicotine these days everyone knows or should know that smoking vaping dipping and snuffing and yes I did say vaping are all terrible for your health the vapors will say it's not progenic um cancer-causing and I'll say remains to be made really clear but the whole popcorn lung thing is clearly problematic um but nicotine doesn't cause cancer it's the delivery mechanism yes but these days a lot of people realizing the cognitive uh enhancement if you will I don't even like the phrase uh the stimulant effect of nicotine are using nicotine pouches and particular gums um let's set patches aside for the moment um and mints and things of that sort for the stimulant effect it's an unusual stimulant because it also relaxes one self a little bit at the same time so it's kind of that like you know that sweet spot and I confess I will occasionally take you know one or two milligrams very low dose most pouches are anywhere from three to eight pouches uh milligrams rather I'll take you know like one to two milligrams of nicotine in the form of a gum I'll just chew it you know and then take it out um nicotine is a Vaso constrictor what does nicotine do to the oral microbiome are you going to make me quit nicotine I'm I don't feel addicted but every addict says that so yeah the first step is admitting the issue um so I don't want to villainize anything no you can villainize it so I agree with you I don't think it's the nicotine itself but like the pouches for example are becoming very popular so what else is in those um and there's a really interesting case study that maybe we can link it for people to look at and I'll share it with you later um and then I have colleagues who are reporting this all throughout the globe but they one brand in particular it will have man and maltodextrin in it which are sugar alcohols and different carbohydrate and they Market them as sugar-free well products are allowed to have Trace Amounts of sugar still in the product very small amount and still be called sugarfree and the issue with these products is the duration of action the contact time and you're supposed to leave them in for 20 to 30 minutes am I correct that's right so it's quite a long time to have that up in the mucosa along the bone and along your teeth that potentially has some sugar in it okay so it's like if you're sucking on a hard candy um but also we're seeing changes to the the cellular um structure up in that area so you can see luopa which is like white patching which can be precancerous so this is why I just like everyone to get checked out and we are seeing bone loss and gum recession um again anytime you put put anything into the mouth it's going to change and shift the microbiome and that could be a filling that could be a piece of gum that could be a toothpick anything you know arguably besides neutral pH water um and so this case study this gentleman was going in I believe he was in his mid-50s he started using these pouches and and had always had very wonderful Dental checkups with x-rays and went in regularly and maybe he missed one appointment and after 15 months of use the x-rays are outrageous he just has rampant Decay along the side where he had the pouch very likely from potentially that Trace amount of sugar the microbiome changes I mean it looked like mothball chunks taken out of his teeth and he lost some teeth wow so this isn't to scare people but if you're going to choose to use these I just say know the risks and make sure you're going to checked regularly at your dentist don't just ghost your dentist um because if if they're starting to see cellular changes recession or early Decay then you may say gosh I should really cut back on this or maybe they if somebody is really adamant about taking nicotine they should just take a milligram or two milligram pill of nicotine yeah or a patch right you scared me with lucco plakia yeah cuz growing up we were all told you know don't no one really dips in in Northern California but um you know like don't dip or uh because and then I saw these pictures of luia jaw recession and it's pretty vile and and so you the design to scare you it scared me sufficiently I never wanted to chew tobacco uh anyway but good to know uh coffee are you in do I need to stop drinking coffee okay thank you you're from Portland after all or near Port say that okay yeah you wouldn't be able to return home coffee is great I mean it will dry out the mouth a bit just counteract it with hydration and it will stain in your teeth so go in regularly for cleanings and you may want to I mean if if that bothers you um there ways to bleach your teeth or lighten your teeth hydroxy appetite is a wonderful way to improve the brightness and whiteness of your teeth and oil pulling as well um or you can use heavy hitter bleaches to just just don't overdo it everybody's overdoing everything now and bleaching too much can damage your teeth it can cause um chemical harm to the to the pulp or the nerve over time and some people will get spontaneous abscessing or need root canals I mean these are people who are really like bleaching all the time the people who you need sunglasses to look at their teeth and it's just not really a natural aesthetic but some people are into that but just know what the risks are is what I would say the two things I've done in the last couple of years that have completely transformed my um oral health say says my dentist and um and how I feel are first of all I start I switched a few years ago I would say really about 14 months ago I just said that's it I'm not eating processed foods again I'm just not going to do it so I eat meat fish eggs you know fruits vegetables and I eat some rice oatmeal and um sour a good sour dough bread butter olive oil I just which is not to say that I won't have a slice of pizza someday but I just I was like that's it like I'm kind of over it 49 years old I've eaten enough of that stuff I'm kind of like bored with it anyway I hear you and what was interesting is I used to get a lot of tarar buildup a lot um despite brushing and flossing on the um what are the lower front teeth called in sizers yeah and it was and they scrape it away it's a non-issue now like it's completely gone yeah so we have minor salivary glands on the floor of our mouth and that is a common place people will see calculus or tarar those lower teeth that's where you'll feel your hygienist scraping a lot but I wonder if it's because you increased your K2 in your diet which helps with calcium metabolism and I supplement K2 but I was doing that before and then I um I switched and I have just full disclosure because there's nothing to disclose I have no Financial relationship to the toothpaste that you make or the toothpaste that they um that Gator dentists makes I don't know who I actually know his real name but he hides as Gator dentist um Gator dentist uh but I switched from fluoride containing toothpaste not because of fear of fluoride but excitement about hydroxy appetite so I switched to using your toothpaste and I occasionally well I routinely switch back and forth with knobs or I think it stands for nobs which is Gator densis uh to tablet product yes so I use them and no neither of them pay me I pay full price um I don't they don't send it to me I purchase it like anyone else and that's made a tremendous difference says my dentist like no cavities whatsoever I was constantly battling this when I was a kid had a bunch of oral health issues and I don't want to waste our time talking about those right now maybe we'll return to them a little bit later but um my teeth and oral microbiome never felt better um it's it's just remarkable yeah it's just remarkable and I have a family member who has some um gut issues like just digestion issues and it's unclear what's going on there and um I'm inspired to try and help them address that through the oral microbiome by switching to hydroxy appetite and and um and test oral microbiome that'd be very interesting to know what's going on in there cuz think you're swall sorry is there a Best test um like if because a lot of listeners are going to say okay I want if if they have the disposable income they're going to want to test their oril microbiome yeah is there one that your office uses or that I use either the silha test which is more just biomarkers so it's how do you spell that s i l l ha a this is done in an office it's just testing basic biomarkers so I use it a lot as an educational tool it will show um the pH the acidity if there's glucoside if there's red blood cells inflammatory markers so a lot of parents this is so new to them when I'm talking about this so but it prints out in a graph form swap um spit spit so kid or adult will spit in yeah kids usually won't spit till about four just physically it's hard it's hard okay anyway um but I really like tests that use shotgun metagenomics because you're looking for the whole array of bacterial DNA um and so my favorite is bristle like a toothbrush bristle and it's direct to Consumer so because the issue is I can talk about all of these things but sometimes it's hard to find providers that are offering them so I really love people to be able to get the tools to and in their home so bristle um is a company that people can it's an oral microbiome test yes and it's really user friendly their interface is wonderful and they will give guidance and Protocols are you affiliated with them I should probably ask cuz some of the audience will I am actually yes that's fine oral probiotic um we have a collaboration with their oral probiotic but regardless if it's bristle or not you look for a test that's using shotgun metagenomics shotgun metagenomics yes um there's PCR testing too and a lot of biological dentists will offer something like oral DNA is the most popular the issue with that is there it's really only looking at the top 12 pathogens parodontal pathogens which is important but there can be a lot of other information that you're missing so it's a great place to start and your dentist may offer that um it's called again it's oral DNA and I have no affiliation with oral DNA great thank you for that um I think people some people want to test their oral microbiome um and and other things in their in their and there's more and more popping up like if the oral microbiome is really blowing up so for those who are looking for investment opportunities I'd say look toward the oral microbiome it's kind of what the got microbiome was doing a decade plus ago yeah I feel like oral microbiome is so much more tractable I mean switch to nasal breathing get away from alcohol containing mouthwashes you know consider a hydroxy appetite containing toothpaste instead of fluoride which brings us to fluoride let's talk about fluoride I've already been accused of being a sunscreen denier no I actually believe that sunscreen exists I do occasionally use zinc oxide sunscreen a little bit I prefer physical barrier because I'll wear a hat or something if I you I don't tend to burn very easily but if I feel like I might burn I use a physical barrier um I'm being somewhat factious here because people will say all sorts of things but um I did an episode about water a little bit about oral health Al certainly not the depth uh or expertise that that you're providing today so thank you and I said yeah fluide does a bunch of things my question was and remains why are we drinking fluoride but this relates to okay I'll tell the story briefly it's not as cool as your story I was taken to a dentist when I was a kid and they put me they put these like a like a mouthpiece with fluoride gel in it on the top and bottom and they sat me in a little wicker chair in front of a TV with cartoons and I hated it it tasted awful and it kind of like had this sour thing so I it was probably six or seven so I drank it I just sucked it up drank it down turned around barfed all over the wicker chair oh my gosh fluoride's a poison but everything is a poison at high concentrations so most everything is a is a fluoride is a poison excuse me high concentrations so I don't have anything against fluoride but it is a a poison then the question becomes if something is not dangerous in a small dose or concentration what are its cumulative effects this is what this is what I have issu like people say oh going through the X-ray machine no big deal but what if you fly 150 times a year yes is it cumulative and so like the logic of the the sort of push back from the traditional if I will uh Community sucks like they're just not logical these are my colleagues sometimes too right just you go to the dentist you get an x-ray they're like running behind the the next wall put you in a Le shield and then they're like oh no it's no big deal well how many you know know maybe how many times a year can you do this before it becomes a deal so my question is what is the rationale for putting fluoride in water in drinking water given that the contact time in the mouth is so short and then what what's the cumulative effect of bringing fluoride into the gut over and over and then earlier you said something and I've never thought about this the bones contain hydroxy appetite 60% I think you said 60% your bone minerals are made from hydroxy appetite fluoride infiltrates the minerals of the teeth and replaces it so is fluoride going into our bones skeletal fosis okay so I'm not trying to paint a scary picture here but but frankly and people can probably tell my blood pressure goes up a little bit when people say oh you know you're anti fluoride I'm not anti fluoride but I just don't get the logic it doesn't make sense you're thinking critically about the about it like why would I continually bombard my system with fluoride at the level of the gut at the level of my bones if it's good for me tell me it's good for me but they're saying oh it's so that poor populations don't have uh decaying teeth sounds like a good argument not even counterarguing it but I can't piece together the logic and like most public health arguments I feel like neither side is is explicitly clear about what exactly they're arguing about and that's part of why I have this podcast to try and get clarity on things okay I'll do my best yeah and please don't worry that you're going to offend anyone because I'll offend everybody and they've already said anything they everything they possibly could and they'll and they'll say more so I'm not afraid to open up these topics anymore well I appreciate that and and I'll take the heat I well I will get it too don't worry I've already I have thick skin at this point but you have great teeth and they don't so and I haven't had a cavity for multiple decades and haven't used fluide and Portland isn't floridated Portland is not floridated not so let's talk about so fun story uh back in 2011 2012 I was working on the proat floration campaign volunteering in Portland picketing and handing out educational Flyers um because I thought we needed it in our water and this is because that's how I was trained um and I just never questioned it I never picked up a journal to look at the other side I thought anyone speaking out against water floration that's the tin hat Brigade that's the woooo caucus all the things I was that person the woo woo that's pretty funny I like that so I went to a debate um in Portland Pro versus against I don't like those terms but it's just the easiest way to describe it and I was sitting kind of on the pro side and just waiting to see these pseudo scientists come out to to speak and I was so profoundly impressed with what they said and also had no idea that there were any concerns with with fluoride I had never been taught that in dental school the endocrine disruption the neurotoxicity um this the skeletal fosis I knew about dental fosis but I at that point was of the mindset well it's just aesthetic you know but your teeth are stronger and the microbiome issues too so it didn't take long I just started rabbit H holding and it there's so much literature and this again this was quite a while ago um and more and more data in literature is coming out to question the practice so it's important to go back to the history of water fluoridation I'll try to be brief but in the early 1900s there was a dentist in Colorado Springs Frederick McKay who noticed his patients had modeled um brown spotted teeth but they were really strong they weren't getting Decay and so this kind of spread and they started kind of trying to understand the why and they realized there was a really high concentration of fluoride in the natural water supply that this community was drinking and this just kind of spread like wildfire with very little evidence-based medicine to back it because this was in the early 1900s now it was like the 1930s um so no long-term safety studies or efficacy studies and it was put in as an experiment in gr rapis Michigan in the mid-40s after about a decade or so they noticed that carries rates cavity rates were going down and so based on this observation it just went like wildfire throughout the United States and I believe about 80% of the United States is floridated so the pro Advocates if you will will say it's the greatest Public Health movement of the the century because Decay was such an issue it's important to know dental decay is the top chronic disease globally in children and adults it's almost entirely preventable I think we've just normalized it you just get cavities but I'd like to point out we're one of the only species to get dental decay wild animals don't get Decay our domesticated animals do because of what we're feeding them the kibble you know processed animal food so here we are so it's been controversial from the beginning you know epidemiologists endocrinologists neuroscientists have always challenged it saying this is a bad idea it's a highly reactive element you know the fluoride ion um Can interfere with iodine um uptake and again skeletal fosis neurotoxicity Etc so about seven years ago um there there was the PE there's a federal trial in Northern California but it was Federal the people versus the EPA it was a Taska trial and this has been ongoing for the past seven years and basically they were saying where is your safety data EPA on the longterm term effects of water fluoridation so the idea was that if we put it in the water it's not a very efficient way to get fluide to people but eventually it may will make itself into the saliva and have a topical effect coming out through the saliva they used to think systemically it was actually incorporating into the developing teeth and children making the anamal stronger that way but that's been debunked so now it's most likely still a topical benefit maybe a little bit of a systemic benefit touching the teeth um and we do know fluid really needs to work topically we don't need to be ingesting it and that is all through the data and they're teaching that in dental schools now too okay okay but this is the easiest way to get fluoride to the masses because carries or cavities are such an issue now my first comment on this is we're not addressing the root cause of dental decay which is our food it's all the ultra processed foods again we really see dental decay in humans until the Agricultural Revolution the Industrial Revolution and now the alter processed food craze that's been happening the past many decades okay is that right so if we look at skeletons from dead people obviously well you can look at skeletons and live people skeletons and dead people uh from dead people that um died prior to 1900 how are their teeth 1900 they still have they would have Decay but if you looked at about 10 thousand years ago um very little you know unless they lived in an area with a lot of fruit abundance or honey like where are you getting your sugar from you know and you go pick some berries on a bush you're competing with the animals and the birds you didn't have much opportunity to overc consume sugar um but you know there was the sugar trade and then we just sugar was a sign of wealth and royalty and people's teeth just rotted out and it was because of our diet so that's the root cause issue that no 's talking about you know we're just saying let's slap fluide on it how about we educate and teach people what is really causing cavities but anyway okay so the task of trial was going on and the judge um do uh judge Edward Chen was waiting for this National toxicology programs report which was under the Department of Health and Human Services and this is it reads like a soap opera to be honest with you um and it kept getting delayed and and postponed and they wouldn't release it and finally under the Freedom of Information Act he said this needs to be released and it said there is a strong correlation between increased fluoride consumption and IQ issues in children um and so with that he he took this information and he made his ruling now this was after years of expert testimonies as well okay um saying there's an unreasonable risk to current water fluoridation practices in the United States this was his ruling that just happened late last year I mean it's this is very new and EPA you now need to fix this you need to regulate this better what people will argue is a lot of the studies they were looking at that are showing lowered IQ in children or neurocognitive issues it was at 1.2 or 1.5 milligrams per liter of you know um that was the concentration the United States we now do 0 .7 milligram per liter but what this that's per liter okay so how many liters of water do you drink a day this is the controversy so for example the American Academy of Pediatrics generally recommends pregnant women drink 2 to three liters a day um you might be cooking with fluoridated water making your pasta making your soup um how do we really know how much someone's getting exposed to what's their body composition how much do they weigh what are the other outside sources of fluoride are they swallowing their toothpaste fluoride is in many Pharmaceuticals because it helps increase bioavailability especially um ssris and pyc a lot of these have fluoride in them really yes Ultra processed foods will have fluoride so the factory that's making your Rockstar Energy Drink or your high SE or you know whatever you're consuming they're not do using reverse osmosis to filter the water so you're getting fluoride that way it's naturally found in green tea and black tea and this is not to make people worried about green and black tea I still consume them it's more to say how are we really understanding how much is exposed to and so they were finding that pregnant women um they follow there's many studies now but a famous one was the Rifka green study out of Canada and they followed about 520 mother child pairs um they tested urinary fluoride and the mother per trimester averaged it and then followed these children to the age of three or four and did IQ tests and found that mothers who had higher concentrations of urinary fluoride the children tested lower on their IQ test up to five to seven points and that's on par with lead okay on par with lead on par with lead yes and so that was in 2019 there's been so many more studies now so the judge ruled EPA you need to regulate this better in that amount of time there was a meta analysis that came out that further supported the ntp report by Jamma Pediatrics okay and this is very controversial for these editors to be putting out by the way so I commend them um and also a Cochran report came out Cochran collaborative which has said this again was very recent looking at all the data from water fluoridation water fluoridation isn't reducing Decay like we thought it was it's only reducing Decay by about one quar a cavity per person one quarter of a cavity per person so that's not statistically significant so people will say well what gives why were cavity rates going down when we added fluoride to the water well it's hard to say maybe they were already just going to going down due to education more access to dental hygiene and toothbrushing flossing um but also we now have fluoride everywhere in our toothpaste so fluoride was put in the water in the 1940s it wasn't added to our toothpaste until the 1960s and now it's everywhere we get fluide everywhere rinses the varnishes that made you vomit at the office and by the way that's very common that's very common and it's because a lot of those fluide varnishes um number one fluoride you know it does have a poison control label on it you're not supposed to swallow it but these varnishes also have polyurethane and hexane derivatives and it's what makes them so sticky yeah I I still loathe going to the dentist I I think it's because of that that um early Association yeah so it's very controversial and unfortunately we've lost sight of the science is getting buried in politics right now and it really upsets me because it's not a political issue we just need to look at the data and I feel like we're losing sight of the scientific method um we you know the American Dental Association the American Academy of pediatric is doubling down and saying we have to put fluide in the water and for nothing else I think it's important to know 97% of the world does not fluoridate their water this is a very United States controversy um many countries removed it and found I think it was Denmark Germany Japan they have very low Decay rates and why is this well they educated their population and what's really causing Decay and also made fluide toothpaste accessible and I have Dan relatives they have very nice teeth if you told me that there's no fluoride in the drinking water in England I might um I might uh be like well you know sorry my English friends but that's the stereotype right that their teeth are bad I don't think that that's true any longer I think that that uh was true at one point that I think they're crowded and crooked too and a lot of that has to do I think with facial development as well I think we're we're we see a lot of um Western European they do have that kind of dis moric face if you will probably from nasal breathing who knows why Industrial Revolution allergies belth breathing Etc why did it why does it seem more prevalent there um so that's this that's the the take the quick take on it and so I just think it should be a personal choice you know if you want to use fluide you can go out to the store I mean you can get fluide toothpaste at the dollar store now they give it out for free at many clinics um to me I just think it's a it's a medical ethical issue where're Mass medicating a population without their consent and then the even bigger issue for me is no one's talking about this nor can I find any literature on it what is it doing to the gut microbiome because it is an antimicrobial so that would be a wonderful study NIH if you're listening can we test you know people that live in floridated areas versus those that don't can we follow them maybe it's a prospective cohort study to just see how their microbiomes are different because it just doesn't make sense to me and why would we ingest something systemically with all these potential risks when we could just use it topically or actually talk about what's really causing Decay if fluoridation worked it cavities wouldn't be the top disease in our country and our children and many worry well if we take it from the water Decay may go up and it may I mean there's been they they did this in Calgary Canada where Decay rates went up but if you actually look at the data the Decay rates were already going up when they removed it but they only show you the data that they kind of want to show you for that so um but again it's a risk benefit analysis I mean I think dentists tend to be too focused on teeth and so you mentioned like if they say it's good for me I'll do it well good for what good for your teeth or good for your whole body or good for your brain and I think that should be an individual Choice are you for as a parent do I want to choose one quarter less cavity in my child or do I want to preserve their optimal brain development I mean the the data that um show deficits on par with what one sees with lead exposure that's the most striking yeah thing to me yeah and I'm a dentist I was trained to fix teeth I can fix a one quarter cavity in a tooth I can't fix the developing brain we have one shot to develop a brain we have one shot to grow a faith you know it's really important I really appreciate you taking us through the full Arc of the history of it I think it's extremely important that people take that in so they can start to form their own opinions and um you pointed out a number of um logical flaws in in just the the way the whole system is is um arranged right now which is this um Mass uh treatment of everybody with a with a potent chemical especially given the amount of water that people drink and cook with Etc um without their consent and um and without a risk assessment so you're a low Decay rate I might be a really high Decay rate you you don't need anything extra your diet your balance your microbiome's great I'm not eating well my hygiene's terrible you know we we can't just blanketly be treating everyone the same we're supposed to be doing risk assessments I'd like to to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need but nothing you don't that means the electrolytes sodium magnesium and potassium all in the correct ratios but no sugar proper hydration is critical for optimal brain and body function even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance it's also important that you get adequate electrolytes the electrolytes sodium magnesium and potassium are vital for the functioning of all the cells in your body especially your neurons or your nerve cells drinking element dissolved in water makes it extremely easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes to make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes I dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up in the morning and I drink that basically first thing in the morning I also drink element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and therefore losing a lot of water and electrolytes they have a bunch of different great tasting flavors of element they have watermelon and citrus Etc frankly I love them all if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element.com huberman to claim a free element sample pack with the purchase of any element drink mix again that's drink element.com huberman to claim a free sample pack okay so I think that pretty much puts fluoride in a not in a box let's say on the shelf for all of us to look at I think this is going to be a very important aspect of public health in the year two three years to come with this new Administration and Bobby Kennedy paying a lot of attention to fluoride and I really like what you said about trying to remove the political aspects of this if this becomes a um blue versus red left versus right thing we're never going to get to the heart of the matter um yeah and that would be really sad and the ones that would really suffer would be kids their children yeah so a uh a nonpartisan uh look at this which is how I heard everything that you said um just seems really critical uh where are they getting the fluoride so water fluoridation um the flid that they get is a byproduct of the phosphate fertilizer industry and it's it's um called hydrofluosilicic acid so as a byproduct of the phosphate fertilizer industry it's considered a hazardous waste and it's very expensive to dispose of of uh but they have found that if diluted in theory and put it's an acid first of all so if it's put into our water system it is so diluted that it becomes safe but I will say it you know everyone can go research this and look at themselves but it does come in like cement bags with skull and crossbones on the front and they do have to wear hazmat suits to put it into our water um they're supposed to titrate it and I think what's interesting you know we're supposed to Target 0.7 milligrams per liter um I've been involved in some educational campaigns and and have tested communities surrounding Portland it's very hard to keep it in range you know and so there are some communities testing as high we've seen as 2.2 milligrams per liter which definitely falls into based on the the science and literature more concerning zone for neurocognitive issues and other health issues so um if you're concerned you can call your local walk um Bureau municipality I will say I don't think the federal government's going to have much control over this it would be nice if the EPA stepped in um they have appealed by the way uh but it will come down to more like on the state level and local level and we're already seeing States like Florida and Utah um have run it through and initially done a we're going to ban this um as a mandatory thing in our state and I think it's uh North Dakota Kentucky there's other states picking this up too and other communities that are removing it or or not adding it to their water so it's an interesting time to observe all of this super interesting um I will resist the temptation to ask questions about why it sounds like mostly red states are the ones doing this as opposed to Blue States although Portland is in a blue State Portland's traditionally City for sure blue City yeah yeah right blue City in a um red state in it went Oregon went red this last election uh the cities make up it's kind of like many states so Eugene Portland Bend tend to be pretty blue and I think the surrounding is is more conservative but no it it's shifted a bit but not enough to shift out of voting okay liberal all right well we'll do another episode in um uh 2090 about politics um meanwhile back to the oral micro oral microbiome and otherwise I'm very interested in the relationship between oral health and what you described as fertility pregnancy and hormones and obviously hormones could be about men or women but let's talk about oral health and fertility um what if any knowledge is there about how the oral microbiome or oral health would be impacting egg Health fertility um ovulation uh ovarian reserve is is that the sort of the level that the regulation of of fertility is thought to occur like what's what's what's known about the link yeah so again it ties back to that translocation and creating an immune response and inflammation as well as the endotoxins that are released um with men particularly they're seen increased um sperm challenges with sperm motility and sperm Mobility as gum disease and parodontal pathogens increase and again it probably it has to do with the inflammation um and with women you know it we can show that women take about two months longer to become pregnant um it does affect ovulation egg quality um but also we know it can lead to miscarriages and low term birth um a low weight birth pre-term birth um and just pregnancy complications as well and so we are finding oral bacteria in the placenta you know we're finding there's different microbiomes everywhere now the breast has a microbiome the placenta has a microbiome and so oral bacteria can end up in many of these places and and just create that Cascade of inflammatory events and so um certainly it's an exciting time to be alive because of all the research happening and right now it's again not causal there's a lot of correlation but I would love to see fertility clinics focusing more on oral health like how amazing would it be if they started testing the microbiome of patients and if they realize they're really high and P gingivalis or F nucleatum and they eradicated or less in that bacteria I mean I'd be interesting to see how pregnancy and fertility outcomes would would change and possibly improve great what are some of the mechanical as opposed to chemical things that we can do to improve our oral health so we were all taught Russian floss twice a day uh I even have a colleague Who Um can be caught in the bathroom brushing his teeth after lunch um so he's brushing three times a day um I don't know what motivated that do you okay um great so what's the deal with brushing when let's say kind of like exercise let's say if someone were going to only brush once yeah a day better to brush in the morning or at night obviously they people should brush twice a day but or more but if one could only brush once or a day would it be morning or night yeah I guide parents on this a lot because brushing a child's teeth can be challenging nighttime is always the most important one you're removing the food particulate matter from the day away You're disrupting that bofilm so that you're not sitting sleeping all night 8 10 12 hours if you're a child with that sticky potentially dis biotic bofilm on your teeth um and then you add in maybe your mouth breathing that's going to shift the microbiome and drop the pH more so it's really nice to go to bed with clean teeth so I suggest focusing on the nighttime um what does drive me a little bonkers is the fact that we tend to focus so much on brushing but we leave out flossing a lot of the conversation so thank you for mentioning that if you read children's books you'll see they all say go brush your teeth but never floss so we need to revamp there but most cavities that I see in children and this translates to the adult population as well are in between the teeth or in proximally in the molers um and it's really common so so a lot of parents will bring their kids in they think they've been doing everything correctly they haven't been flossing quite yet and we take X-rays for the first time and the children have eight cavities which sounds like so many but it's really common because we have eight molers and so it happens between the teeth where you're eating those Goldfish crackers those pretel those chips they they get stuck in between the teeth the bacteria come to feed the acid gets released and it just sits there hour after hour day after day arguably we week after week if you're never flossing so I really like flossing to be part of the routine too again if you can only do it once a day that's great that's fine do it at night I like to floss first then brush um you're dislodging the food in between and kind of brushing it away there's actually studies to support this too that order however Beggars can be choosers just do it you know some people get a suction cut mirror they'll do it in the shower some people do it in their commute in the car I'm not going to be picky about it um I will also say as we age flossing doesn't always cut it by itself so think about a little string of floss you know we want to put it between the teeth and they suggest you do a c and a backward C you're scraping the sides of the teeth to disrupt that bofilm but as we age we all lose a little bone so you get this little pocket where that string isn't cleaning the bacteria out of and that's where a water pick can come in and so if you really want to be an overachiever I do love a little water picking too I personally will alternate so one night I might floss the next night I might water pick um this works really well in patients that can't put their hands in the mouth maybe they have like an aversion to that sensory um children often will struggle with flossing so water picks can be fun you can do it in the bathtub so it doesn't get totally messy or in the shower they make cordless versions um but I can't overemphasize how important flossing is I or proximal cleaning it stimulates the gum tissue and and you're less likely to have gum disease as a result what about those little uh tooth picks with a little sling of floss across um you know the the hard piics that um yeah floss picks floss picks they're great especially in kids um it's the only way to floss a child's teeth first of all so I want parents as soon as teeth touch they should be flossing that could be the anterior teeth our Jaws are shrinking our teeth are crowded it's rare for me to see a child with space in their front teeth that is how we should be developing because adult teeth are wider than baby teeth they need more room to come in but very often we're crowded so anywhere teeth touch we should be flossing but usually around the age of two and a half the mullers are in touching and parents look at me like I'm crazy but we really should be flossing and so if you start some of these behaviors early it becomes easier and easier we know kids that floss become adults who floss but also floss picks are fine for adults too you know some people have big hands it's hard to get floss in I I have to use them I can't get in I can't get my hands into into my mouth they're fine yeah okay you just want to try not to just go straight up and down just kind of angle angle if you can okay and then maybe a water pick too and I was told by my dentist soft toothbrush because I tend to get in there and like I'm hearing all this stuff about how the you know oral health is so important for the brain and for and you that could lead some people including me to get in there and just start like scrubbing and scrubbing and trying to get everything out of there and that's not the right approach hate brushstroke very gentle so you want to do gentle circular movements you don't want to wear away your enamel this is also important many people will eat and then run to the bathroom and brush their teeth every time we eat our teeth demineralize a little bit right remember I mentioned it takes about 20 or 30 minutes for that remineralization to begin so if you're immediately going to you could be your bristles could be damaging your enamel and creating um just wearing it away and creating little marks and and it lead to sensitivity recession so if you can try to wait 20 or 30 minutes after you eat or drink to brush this includes with vomiting the same thing so we all want to brush our teeth after we maybe get sick try to just maybe rinse your mouth maybe with a little baking soda a lot of this is perfect world okay and I I get it but just I like like people to have the information you said marking and I meant to ask something earlier not to return us to the fluoride conversation but you said that the person who initially uh had the idea to include fluoride um in treatment of tooth decay noticed that kids teeth had dark spots on them does fluoride cause darkening of the teeth it can so I believe it was his pediatric and adult patients it was just this whole Community had these spotted teeth so that is something called Dental fosis um spots and markings on the teeth can be many different things uh one is fosis one could be hypoplastic enamel I I think we should touch on that but so fluorosis can be mild moderate or severe when it gets more severe that is where it can be dark spotted orangey Brown mild fosis usually is more brighter white you often see it on the incisal tips or on the cusp tips of the MERS a very attractive feature it's not and um it is a sign that you've had excessive fluoride you know and I will say 40% of teenagers now have dental fosis that very likely means they also have some degree of skeletal fosis as well so for all the um challenges that the debate around fluidization of water has um I willing to bet a significant amount of my savings that this issue will end up being the Lynch pin issue it might seem crazy right like here's the substance that may or may not be safe that we're ingesting for various reasons and there's a history there which you be beautifully described but having been in this public facing health education game for a little while now for the typical person who's like yeah whatever I've been drinking water and I feel fine or my kids feels fine or there's nothing I can do about it now they're 15 maybe they're you know 10 10 IQ points down from where they would be but if you tell people this is what I find so interesting about human psychology if you tell people did you know that fluoride not only might have some neurodevelopmental impact it's probably getting into your bones just like it's getting into your teeth but you know that those spots on your teeth that are those white spots or dark spots that are really unattractive that's because of fluoride now you've got everybody Aesthetics Aesthetics and and it's it's either a shame or whatever that this is the way that people people are but the moment that people realize that something that either is good for them or was intended to be good for them might be bad for their long-term Health you sort of got them hooked but these long-term correlations are very hard to to motivate human behavior but those white spots nobody wants those dark spots on the teeth nobody wants those and I I'd be willing to bet that that becomes one of the the key issues and if people go oh listen it's actually making my teeth uglier yeah maybe stronger but uglier um I I bet you this becomes a wedge in in the conversation that will come from the public but I will tell you I have dentists when I speak as I do about water fluoridation and in fluorosis specifically say well it's just Aesthetics at least their teeth are strong like they're making the decision for for the patient and I think that's not our right as providers to make that decision for someone but it's really common um fosis is very common I I've even seen late more recent data saying as high as 60% but that 40 is kind of the standard number that we go with of teenagers with fosis there is something called hypoplastic enamel this is something I'm very passionate about um this is under minized enamel and I believe it's a silent epidemic in children I see more and more children who their teeth erupt and they're model and chalky and some are so severe they're crumbling and I've seen a big optic in this in the my 20-year career and the data is starting to show this as well um and so unfortunately so many parents their kids will get Decay it's really common and they get shamed and blamed like what are you feeding them you're not brushing and flossing their teeth you're neglecting them um or they're told to stop breastfeeding because that's what's causing the issue but it's really that the teeth the enamel didn't form properly and it's not as acid resistant it's more fragile it's more Pickup Sticks than the Lincoln Logs okay and um I believe and colleagues globally agree that it's very likely due to all the mineral deficiencies that we're seeing globally and the vitamin D deficiency that we're seeing globally you know we're inside all the time we're not outside all the junk light that we're getting the blue light it can also be from environmental toxins high fevers viruses um but it's a real concern and so many children are under having to undergo general anesthesia now to get their teeth fixed the study I read said about 100 to 150,000 a year for a preventable issue that's you know there's risk to general anesthesia and this is where I do love to consider a more conservative approach like can we remineralize these teeth are there strategies that we can do to even just kick the can so the child's older so they could sit for treatment so that we're not putting so many children under anesthesia because I I don't think we have the data for all the long-term potential cumulative effects and we've we talked about this earlier it's not just one exposure right it's not just one exposure from an x-ray or one exposure from fluoride or one anesthesia exposure necessarily but it's that cumulative effect that we don't have enough data on going back to this um relationship between the oral microbiome oral health and hormones um and focusing specifically on female hormones um the menstrual SL ovulatory cycle that occurs each month as well as per menopause menopause um about half of our listeners are are women I'm curious are there certain phases of the menstrual cycle or certain uh phases of uh per menopause menopause or prior to it uh in which women should pay particular attention to their oral health is like is there a known association with like a you know when estrogen is rising or falling that the oral microbiome tends to be more vulnerable and they perhaps should spend a bit more attention on their oral health yes so we see it both ways rising and falling so around puberty we'll see changes to gum health so a lot of young girls will have more gingivitis or um gum inflammation and you know and certainly if they're on oral contraception that can change things too and and they'll go into the D and be accused of maybe not brushing a fline appropriately but it's really a hormonal issue so it's important to know that um as well as women who are pregnant pregnancy gingivitis affects 50 to 70% of women 50 to 70 it's a lot wow yeah and it usually goes away once you have the baby and you've gotten through some breastfeeding and hormones regulate um but it's important to know that you can also have relaxing can you know it helps us prepare for child birth but it can shift teeth we have a ligament around our teeth much like we have ligaments in our in our pelvis and that perodontal ligament is impacted by relaxing so you can see teeth shift and move and women May sometimes say my bite is different now um my gum health is different so it's very important preconception and certainly during pregnancy to to be really on top of your oral hygiene as best as possible and see a dentist regularly and then per menopause and menopause there's a whole slew of issues that happen to women and from an oral health perspective with hormonal shifts you know decreases in estrogen and progesterone can impact collagen synthesis so more TMD more headaches um certainly gum inflammation dry mouth burning mouth syndrome um more bad breath taste changes too and so what if it's just so powerful to be able to have these conversations with women rather than just say well just use this product brush and floss more maybe we could talk speaking of it from a hormonal lens like is hormone replacement therapy appropriate for you or how can we help support you in other ways maybe you should see the dentist every 2 or 3 months instead of every 6 months and also just the mental health component to say hey this isn't something you're neglecting this is a change your body's going through and so how can we support you from a dental Community yeah thanks for that um more and more I'm getting asked questions on social media and elsewhere but you know like what how is this different for women versus men um and in particular different phases of the cycle and um per menopause menopause and and essentially the entire lifespan so appreciate that yeah I I get burning mouth question a lot too from my community mouth sounds awful so your mouth feels metallic and it truly feels burning almost like itchy I think I I haven't experienced it but that's how it's described to me or kind of like a dry mouth it can be a sign of zinc deficiency or vitamin B deficiencies and we can see changes in in that um in those with per menopause and menopause I think it's important to know the mouth is the Gateway into the body and we can see nutritional deficiencies in the mouth as well so cracks in the corner of the lips can be a zinc deficiency um it's the same with wh varations on the line on your fingernails that can be a zinc deficiency B vitamins can be burning mouth or um geographic tongue is something people experience um what is geographic tongue caused by I don't have it I have a family member who has it it's a it's it's permanent because they're they're quite um you know far along in their life now and still have it from childhood um we're told in dental school it maybe has changed but it's benign you know and just tell patients to avoid Citrus and acidic Foods um it is cross link to um latex allergy and psoriasis so it's it's a autoimmune issue um it can be a sign of nutritional deficiencies usually zinc bee or iron mhm um and also it can be a sign of celiac Crohn's or gut issue again it's all connected so a lot of times when kids see me I will send them to a functional medicine doctor or naturopath to just make to rule that out you know and there's genetic predispositions too as we progress further along this conversation these ideas pop to my mind that I'd never thought of before like um because I don't tend to use them like um lip balms lipstick um I don't use lipstick I don't use lip balm I suppose I've put like one of those sunscreens when I went skiing or snowboarding years ago on on my uh and um now I'm wondering like was that just a terrible idea I mean it's good burn right people are going to use but I I suppose specifically like lipsticks are they safe for the oral microbiome well I don't think it's getting into your I mean hopefully you're not eating it that much but I mean we need to be mindful of our products you know there's a petroleum based products a lot of lipsticks lip balms they just have nasty ingredients in them we're learning more and more and you know they're not necessarily as regulated here from a cosmetic standpoint as they might be in the EU so read your ingredients but a lot of petroleum based products will actually cause more dryness you know and it has a reverse effect which is why people get addicted to chapstick I think they just their lips dry out more but when I see chronic dry lips I'm thinking dehydration and are you mouth breathing because when you mouth breathe all the tissues dry out so if a kid comes in with chronically dried lips I I do wonder if they're a mouth breather another way to to assess if if you have a mouth breather on hand is do you are you always asking someone in your life to chew with their mouth closed especially kids so when we're chewing we have to breathe so you should chew lips closed breathe through your nose but if you can't because of an obstruction deviated septum inflamed nasal turbonet you'll have that kid that Mells always open and they tend not to chew enough they kind of mash food and swallow it um because they they're worried about oxygenation they feel like they're going to choke these kids tend to get picky eaters because they stay away from meat carrots apples things you have to chew a lot and they eat more chicken nuggets mac and cheese because you can just mash it and swallow it that can be a sign of oral motor dysfunction in adults and kids so if if you have a hard time chewing with your mouth closed that's something you can explore and get help with should we be able to chew equally on both sides of our mouth you should chew equally on both sides of your mouth so if you're chewing just on one side not only will you get hypertrophy of the muscle on that side but it can cause a shift especially in kids of the way you're growing um but the I would want to know why why are you chewing that way is your occlusion or your bite off are you avoiding a tooth because you're in pain um it can be a bad habit there's ways to retrain but we everything should be symmetrical so you should kind of chew chew your tongue should to move the Bolis of food to the other side Sho Cho so if you can't do that it can be a sign of oral motor dysfunction too maybe your tongue doesn't have good range of motion or Mobility maybe you have a tongue tie or low tone um so there's a lot that can go into that and this is where seeing a myofunctional therapist could really help you said it so I'll have to ask tongue TI a few years ago this was a controversial area tongue tie being the the um stretch of skin between the bottom of the tongue and the bottom of the was it bottom of the floor of the mouth floor of the mouth thank you um and this idea that in babies it should be caught other people say it shouldn't be cut uh and then everyone starts looking day K me I think mine just seems to have naturally torn back some distance but you know uh what's what's the deal with tongue tie and should it should it be cut we're going into all the controversial conversations here I I'll take the heat so um it that's called your freenom okay so we all have a freenom it's the band of tissue that attaches our tongue to the floor of the mouth we also have a labial freenom and sometimes you have little um buckle foms up up here in the vestibule the cheek if you put your finger up in your mouth you'll feel yeah you may have them you may not and they dried my teeth out for something once they pull it back see yeah it's like webbed yeah so the whole thing with this conversation is all about function okay so does your tongue and do the oral structures function appr appropriately in which case you're good you know um what's hard is something to be mindful of you can't diagnose anyone from a photo on social media so I see a lot of parent blogs who are saying my child has a tongue tie my child has a lip tie you can't tell we have to look at function so is is it impairing or impacting breastfeeding can the tongue not lift appropriately it's all about um lifting elevating and lateral izing so many think tongue tie impacts you sticking your tongue out we don't care as much about that what grows the face in the pallet in in utero and then beyond is that tongue lifting elevating and spreading that pallet almost like an expander like an orthodontic expander and so if it can't lift that's the first sign and that means it can't um pull in the breast tissue and breastfeed appropriately um babies might have a lot of reflux women will have pain okay so that's one of the first things we look at um but then as children get older we look well is is there a tongue tie that is potentially leading to mouth breathing so when your lips are closed and you're breathing through your nose your tongue should be up at the pallet and it should have enough tone to stay there ideally while we sleep too but if your tongue is Tethered it can't lift up your tongue's going to lay low and you're going to have more of the Napoleon Dynamite look okay so that open mouth forward head posture that's just because the tongue can't lift many times when people have tongue tie their pallets are narrow too because in uteral the tongue wasn't up to grow the face optimally um and this runs genetically in families as well the predisposition so then the next thing we look at is speech you know and and is it impacting speech or is it impacting chewing and swallowing um so if all of those things are fine if it looks like there's a tongue tie that you're thriving you're doing great assuming you're not compensating and using other muscles and now having other Downstream effects like shoulder pain headaches postural issues you're great but if a child is having issues and you've gone through the right screening and and had the risk benefit discussion with the parents I do think a frenectomy is indicated you know um and I myself have had one and it benefited me a lot my issue were u neck strain and and a lot of shoulder tension that really there's a lot of fascial tissue that's impacted with a tongue tie or can be and so it helped me a tremendous amount but nothing's one size fits all and we're all different you know so this is where you do want to work with someone with additional training to see um if you have a tongue tie you know how are they assessing that and then is it impairing function and then do you actually need a procedure done sometimes just working with a myof functional therapist or different body workers a chiropractor a cranial sacral therapist an osteopath can be enough to create balance again so it's not always a surgical intervention in your case was it a general anesthesia or a local anesthesia I had my tonsils out also very recently just a few years ago um and because I had chronic tonsilitis um and so I knew I had a posterior tongue tie and I just told the surgeon just go ahead and do it I'm already getting my tonsils out sure you're already in there yeah already in there but for most people it would be a general anesthesia usually no um usually it is local it's really not bad especially they're using lasers now for the procedure it's pretty straightforward yeah yeah that can cauterize mhm as you make the cut exactly you do want to generally suture and you want to make sure you're working with a myofunctional therapist before and after for optimal outcomes it's like think about if I went in for a knee replacement I wouldn't just walk into the operating room here's my knee usually there's physical therapy before and after to make sure you're optimized and so it's the same with a tongue release peptides and red light therapy now we're we're in the um sort of specialized uh next um sort of cutting edge of uh health and self-directed health um or self-directed slash working with a working with a professional like yourself um oral health care so um can red light therapy like shining red light and near infrared light so long wavelength light into the mouth provide any benefits for a person that doesn't have any other issues like they just want to maximize their oral health is that something that can be helpful what else is it potentially helpful for yeah it certainly couldn't hurt I haven't seen any solid data on that but um it would reduce inflammation improve um blood flow you know so I'm not opposed to it it's wonderful posts surgery you know so if you have wisdom teeth out or a periodontal surgery a lot of um dentists and Specialists are using red light therapy extraorally or intraorally to help expedite healing collagen synthesis Etc um peptides are newer and exosomes as well that are being used particularly in root canal therapies and maybe cavitation surgeries and things um again just to help with inflammation healing collagen synthesis um it's pretty cool it's very Cutting Edge and it's very new and there's very few out there doing it right now there's a couple in La that I know are so I can share names but um the idea is to regenerate tissu specifically with peptides it can when put down in the pulple chamber potentially can help um build up the Dentin within the tooth and maybe help increase vascularization and get some more Vitality back to the tooth too so it's pretty cool yeah all right so we'll stand by on that yeah should we be concerned about Metal fillings um whatever I don't know what material they use for the other uh fillings and sometimes they'll use quote unquote sealants like they'll see a pit they'll put some sealant in there um and retainers are made from plastic now everyone's worried about plastic so uh what gives so the best Dentistry is no Dentistry I will always say that so that's why we always want to take a preventative lens as best we can but that's not the reality since 90% of us have suffered from some sort of disease in our life um so Mercury fillings this can get controversial um I think the first thing to do I don't love Mercury amalgam fillings and I I they were recently banned in Europe um I think if you're getting a new filling I would try not to have mercury placed that would be my recommendation try to use a composite ideally a ceramic based biom mtic material but if you have existing Mercury fillings amalgam fillings and you're concerned the first thing to do is is get a test get a blood test to see what are your mercury levels if they're within normal I wouldn't worry too much if you have mercury toxicity or Mercury through the roof then you probably should have that conversation with your dental team and your medical team to see could this be coming from my fillings um and certainly if a filling is breaking um damage it needs to be replaced maybe considering not doing a an amalgam metal filling so that's kind of my stance on that um composite fillings you know they are Plastics essentially um most are BPA free but that is a bit of a marketing idea you know there's still other plasticizers in there Biz GMA Etc so um I do really like ceramic based materials if you can find them nothing is perfect you know Le is the best available that we have regarding retainers I get this question a lot two um acrylic retainers those are the pink retainers what's interesting about those methyl methacrylate can have gluten in it so if you are Celiac um there have been case reports of of teens especially who they keep having GI distress or rashes because Celiac of often come out can come out in the skin um and they can't figure out why and it it ties back to their retainer so just be aware of that and then people will ask all Invisalign and again nothing's perfect um usually most of these retainers and things you're only wearing for a short period as you're trying to correct your Airway issue so lesser of two evils I mean I'm a big Airway Advocate I want people breathing optimally um that is the most important thing for your health in my opinion is optimize oxygenation and breathing and rest and recovery so you know I I I am an advocate for expansion and some of these materials and products um for short durations if necessary so we can't take all the risk out of everything right and this is why the host making sure your immune response is optimized your detox pathways are open your Phase 2 liver detox is optimized you know that's ideal so yeah cruciferous vegetables sulphoraphane supplementation maybe dandelion the same things that were recommended in the Plastics episode that I did that um other people have touched on so things like sauna sorane yes bers cruciferous vegetable intake should help bind to some of the microplastics that surely we are ingesting everyone has them so you just try to minimize your exposure um and then sealants I am an advocate of sealants they they really do reduce cavity risk um they're usually put on the molers in the grooves and the fissures of the back teeth um but again I use so I I use um spectometry to make sure I'm not sealing in bacteria so it's an image that shows me if there's like carries or cavity there I'm using ozone to make sure I'm killing the bacteria sometimes I'll use my laser which helps disinfect too to open the groove up and then I'm using ceramic based materials too um so I think there's it depends on your risk as well if you're lowrisk you're not eating a lot of these Ultra processed foods you're probably okay um but a lot of kids you know we have control over our children's diets only to a certain point and then they go off to middle school and start eating the Takis and the Doritos and you know they make maybe some bad choices and so if you want their teeth as protected as possible I'd suggest cence a somewhat unpleasant topic but something that I've heard repeatedly and I don't know if it's true is that dentists more than people in any other profession commit suicide at very high rates um and then there's this very dark joke that people make well you know their hands are always in other people's mouths so they don't have anyone to talk to you know like you know like or and then I always think well the logic's wrong there they actually could talk as much as they want it's the patients that can't talk so you know set setting aside that kind of like um you know Gallows humor which I I don't it's not my style of humor um do dentists kill themselves more than people in other professions yeah thank you for bringing this up I think it's important to talk about um dentists do have a really high rate of depression anxiety and yes suicide too I always heard this too even before I became a dentist and um it's a really hard profession and so we tend to be the brunt of the joke you know we're in the the song um there's songs like I'm afraid of dentists in the dark you know by Vance Joy and like Steve Martin playing The Eccentric dentist in multiple different movies I think Little Shop of horse Little Shop of hores um Horrible Bosses there's like a crazy dentist there's always like horror movies have dentist I mean we are the brunt of the joke a little bit and um so that's hard and and unfortunately there are just so many negative childhood experiences at the dentist and this is partly why I went into Pediatrics is that I was an adult dentist for many years I felt very dissatisfied with my career cuz I just felt like I wasn't making a difference you know dental disease is so prevalent and and unless we're talking about it from this root cause lens we're not going to move the needle but it's very hard when you get in the system to get out of it you know the way our appointment times are set up and the overhead is crazy and the student debt now and and the pressures and the things with dentists is we are the clinicians but we're also kind of the CEOs of our businesses like many of us have private practices so you're wearing two hats so when you're done with treatment all day and seeing patients all day then you're sitting in front of the computer and you have people to help you but you're trying to manage the business and we didn't go into school for that you know looking at spreadsheets HR issues ETC um and many of us are in Solo practices so it can be very lonely but also um we tend to be more type A personalities perfectionists and Dentistry is hard not it's there's a lot of unknowns there's a lot of variables you know I can put a filling in your mouth but I can't guarantee that you're going to brush floss follow my rules not you know not eat Ultra processed foods you're breathing through your nose what's your microbiome like so then you're doing all of these things that I've instructed you not to do and then you come back because the filling fails and we're the ones to blame for that and don't get me wrong there's all VAR variations of providers out there and there's people doing excellent work and people doing not so excellent work but I do think it's important for everyone to know that many dentists are having a hard time with work especially postco I would say there's a lot of pressures um are dental insurance is very challenging you know it's not truly Insurance like medical insurance it's really a benefit package and so you you tend to only get $1,000 or $1,200 a year and then everything else is out of pocket and so people kind of look at us like that's kind of a scam you know like it's so expensive but what they don't realize is many of these dental supply companies they have essentially monopolies on us like our equipment is outrageously expensive um and prices keep going up and up and up but what isn't changing are Insurance reimbursements okay so where does that Delta come in and usually it's coming out of the dentist pocket too so it's it's why corporate Dentistry is taking over um in a lot of ways kind of what happened in medicine but I would just say be kind to your dentist they're um just recently this is very timely but I don't know where this came from maybe it was like a Tik Tock thing but there were letters being mailed um specifically I saw in the Pacific Northwest Oregon and Portland that dentists were receiving these these hate letters saying dentists are scumbags and um they should all kill themselves so I think it's important for people to know what we kind of deal with behind the scenes you know and and to just be kind to your Dennis and I would say if if if someone doesn't resonate with you if their personality doesn't resonate with you just go find a different dentist and and I will I do want to understand there is a lot of post-traumatic stress disorder from from patients who truly fear the dentist it's usually from experiences in childhood and that's what I wanted to change too I I just said it doesn't have to be this way we can make Dentistry a very positive place a safe place so that children go into adults without dental disease but also that find the dentist to be a safe comfortable place to go so I mean some people if you're really that fearful you know maybe considering therapy or you know some sort of um anxiolytic like do you need something to help you feel calmer at the dentist but I encourage everyone to go to the dentist don't avoid the dentist but also trying to understand it it is a challenging profession it really is and there's a lot of unknowns and there are some mental health challenges out there too well thank you for being a uh an incredible Ambassador for dentist and um no small part that comes from your like obvious kindness and goodness and also the rigor with which you approach it uh so thank um the two are certainly not incompatible you're proof of that so thank you I wonder if now would be a good time for us to just sort of summarize the top 10 or top 12 things uh there are a bunch of don'ts maybe we can leave those out like avoid sugary uh starchy flowy foods that get stuck between teeth that kind of thing um but maybe I'll fire off a few and you can tell me what I'm missing um be a nose breather not a mouth breather unless you're eating or speaking keep your mouth shut basically right absolutely or you're exercising really hard and you need to suck for some air or you're scuba diving and you would drown otherwise um eat non-processed minimally processed foods we're hearing that over and over again these days brush twice a day floss twice a day water pick if you can yeah that's loading a lot on to people I would say floss at least once a day flossing twice a day is extra credit great yeah because it's a lot of people don't floss so we want to start out reasonable before sleep yes ideally mhm so it's um brush then floss floss then brush floss than brush but however you can do it no no no I I didn't get it wrong on purpose so you T scraping we forgot to talk about t yeah so I want to add in these these things so um uh maybe oil pole three times a week put some olive coconut oil in there swish it around practice your nasal breathing while you're doing it spit it out but not in the sink not in the sink and why why just a few times a week I don't know if I was clear on that it's because coconut oil is antimicrobial so I'm Aid on the side of caution because it will Target more anerobic pathological bacteria but less is more we don't want to disrupt the oral microbiome too much so just just a couple times a week you don't need to do it daily great soft toothbrush be gentle avoid alcohol containing mouthwashes for all sorts of reasons um pay attention to the fluoride debate yes consider hydroxy appetite if you're concerned great I love these hydroxy appetite toothpaste yours and Gator dentists love them I don't get paid a dime for it I pay my money for them I really love them my teeth are so much healthier now um I just like them too I like that I can um they they taste good I don't actually rinse afterwards we didn't talk about that but ideally you don't rinse after you brush correct so think about if you were a big advocate for sunscreen or a lotion you put it on you immediately jump in the shower you're washing it all off so it's the same with your toothpaste there is a duration of action that it takes for maximum efficacy so if you're brushing ma for 2 minutes and spit and rins all that goodness is getting rinsed down the drain so it really should you can still spit people get confused by this you can still spit but try not to vigorously rinse everything off you do want it trying to trying to sit on the teeth and in your s a little bit avoid nicotine I like alcohol and alcohol hydrate well yes keep your electrolytes keep your electrolytes keep your saliva abundant yes um espec for older people yes yeah um the the nasal breathing during sleep we can double click on that one because AB get your sleep right cuz that just checks so many boxes I'd say optimize minerals and fat soluble vitamins this is kind of Western price stuff I'm trying to think here if there's anything I missed well we could say tongue scraping tongue SCP excuse me I do like tongue scraping so um again aric you know Chinese medicine we'll look at the tongue um for from a health standpoint if you have a white coating on your tongue that's a sign of disbiosis you could have candida this is important to touch upon strep mutans gets blamed for cavi so much with with kids especially but with children we really need to be focusing on fungus too so candid is really prevalent in early decay in children no one's screening for this or treating it candy to love sugar you know and this is also with diabetics we're seeing a bir directional relationship with gum disease paranomal disease and um insulin resistance and and blood sugar imbalances too but so tongue scraping and it will do a better job than your toothbrush people always ask because it's it is removing the bofilm as the toothbrush is kind of moving it around so it's taking off that film of bacteria I know it's kind of gross but they tend to be Anor robic um and that can help with nitric oxide production too because the good bacteria on the tongue tend to live down more in the CPS so you don't want to scrape too hard but just get that film off you'll also notice Improvement in your taste perception too because you're getting food remnants and things off as well want that yeah oh I love it it once you start tongue scraping you you usually most everyone's a big advocate for it thank you so much for this you know really extensive and exceptionally clear Voyage Through oral health I am sure that people are going to take away many many things that are actionable and I really appreciate that you've been such a strong advocate for pointing out that oral health is not just about teeth it's not just about breath it's about that but it's also about your whole digestive tract and about brain health and about heart health and um we have a lot of control over this particular aspect of our body as opposed to like heart health which we have to get to indirectly unless we're a heart surgeon yes or gut health which which we have to get to indirectly unless we're gastroenterologist rightly what other biofilm do you have access to I mean it really is a window into the body so if you have gum disease or cavities that is a sign of a metabolic imbalance in your body so not to make you panic but I just want people to take it seriously that it is a window into other things that could be happening deeper within the system well I absolutely love the work that you're doing I couldn't think of a better person to bring on here Tok you educate us all and like I said you've given us so many valuable tools and we will provide links to all the incredible resources that you continue to put out into the world so thank you for doing that thank you for coming here thanks for uh it's clear that this is a a labor of love for you it's not just about like cleaning teeth or something so yeah that you're people probably can't see well certainly if they're listening they can't see the the incredible um extensive notes that uh Dr whitmann brought with her and her incredible handwriting goodness gracious what beautiful handwriting thank you so I could read it later not all doctors have bad handwriting no they're notoriously have bad handwriting but yours is you certainly offset uh whatever failures of handwriting the other Physicians have so this was really fun thank you so much thanks well we'll do it again and and um really grateful for you coming on here today thank you yes thank you thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr Stacy whitmann I hope you found it to be as interesting and useful as I did to find links to Dr Whitman work and the various resources we discussed please see the show note captions if you're learning from Andor enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zero costway to support us in addition please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review and you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and apple please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast if you have questions for or comments about the podcasts or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the huberman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments for those of you that haven't heard I have a new book coming out it's my very first book it's entitled protocols an operating manual for the human body this is a book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and experience and it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to Stress Control protocols related to focus and motivation and of course I provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included the book is now available by pre-sale at protocols book.com there you can find links to various vendors you can pick the one that you like best again the book is called protocols an operating manual for the human body and if you're not already following me on social media I am hubman lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram X threads Facebook and Linkedin and on all those platforms I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the information on the hubman Lab podcast again it's hubman lab on all social media platforms and if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a zeroc cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep how to optimize dopamine deliberate cold exposure we have a foundational Fitness protocol that coverage cardiovascular training and resistance training all of that is available completely zero cost you simply go to hubman lab.com go to the menu tab in the top right corner scroll down to newsletter and enter your email and I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Stacy Whitman and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 21 ---
Video ID: 5--yogtN6oM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5--yogtN6oM
Title: Supercharge Exercise Performance & Recovery with Cooling | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-03-20 12:00:07 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I discuss the critical role of temperature regulation in optimizing athletic and physical performance.

I explain why overheating can hinder performance and endurance and how techniques like palmar cooling can help extend physical effort by aiding temperature regulation. I also highlight how specific body areas, such as the palms and face, are key targets for regulating temperature, allowing heat to dissipate efficiently. Lastly, I discuss how temperature can support training recovery while cautioning that extreme cold, such as ice baths immediately after training, can block adaptations.

Huberman Lab Essentials are short episodes—approximately 30 minutes—focused on essential science and protocol takeaways from past Huberman Lab episodes. Essentials will be released every Thursday, and our full-length episodes will still be released every Monday.

Read the full episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/ZYC4CTc

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
X: https://x.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Physical Performance & Skills, Temperature
00:03:03 Temperature Homeostasis, Vasoconstriction & Vasodilation
00:05:38 Elevated Heat & Performance Barrier
00:07:21 Regulating Temperature, Glabrous Skin, “AVAs”
00:11:16 Strength Training & Heat Effects, Tool: Palmar Cooling
00:14:47 Endurance, Temperature & Willpower
00:18:21 Tool: Resistance Training, Running, Palmar Cooling & Water Temperature
00:21:49 Ice Bath & Blocking Training Adaptations; Tool: Glabrous Skin & Recovery
00:25:10 NSAIDs (Tylenol) & Training
00:27:35 Recap & Key Takeaways

#hubermanlab #strength #endurance 

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring you zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. We just closed out the episodes on hormones. Now we are going to talk about how to optimize physical performance and skill learning. There are so many variables to physical performance. And we can manage physical performance and skill learning from a variety of contexts. I made just a short list of some of the things that come to mind that can powerfully impact physical performance and skill learning. Some of them are what I would consider foundational. They allow you to show up with your current ability. And if you were to disrupt those, you would perform less well. So things like getting a good night's sleep. Things like being properly hydrated. Things like being well nourished. There are supplements. There are drugs. There are different ways to breathe. There are so many tools related to mindset, visualization. It's just a vast space, but it's not infinite. And there are a few things in the list of things that can impact and even optimize physical performance and skill learning, that have an outsized effect that any of you can use. So today, we are going to focus on what I believe to be one of the most powerful tools to improve physical performance and skill learning, and recovery. We'll talk about why that's important. And that's temperature. Believe it or not, temperature is the most powerful variable for improving physical performance and for recovery. There are two aspects to temperature, of course. There's heat and there's cold. We are mainly going to focus on cold as a way to buffer heat. We're going to talk about cold from the standpoint of thermal physiology. This is a literature that's rich in scientific information that goes back very deep into the last century, where physiologists and neuroscientists figured out that there are different compartments in your body that heat and cool you differently. And that you can leverage those in order to double or even triple, or quadruple your work output, both strength, repetitions, and endurance. So this is not weak sources, they say. This is the stuff that can really shift the needle quite a bit. And it's not just about performing well once. It's about being able to perform well and recover from that performance so that you do even better when you're not incorporating these tools on days where, for instance, you can't access cold or an ice pack or an ice bath, or things of that sort. Let's start by talking about temperature. How does temperature impact the body and its ability to perform, including learn new skills? So everyone probably remembers or has at least heard of the word homeostasis, right? That the body wants to remain in a particular range of temperatures, that it doesn't like to be too hot or too cold. Heating up too much is just plain bad. It's not just bad for physical performance. It's bad for all tissue health. Cells stop functioning. They stop being able to generate energy. They stop being able to digest things. You stop being able to think. And eventually, those cells start dying off entirely. Now, you don't want to become hypothermic either. You can die from hypothermia, just like you can die from hyperthermia. However, that you have a lot more range to be cold than you do to be too warm. OK? And in general, the idea is to keep the body and brain in a particular range. But any time we do anything, our body temperature can shift. So for instance, if you were to stand next to a campfire or you were outside on a hot day, various things would happen to dump heat from your body. Now, what are those things? Well, there are a huge category of them. But the simplest way to think about this process is that when we get cold, we tend to vasoconstrict. Our blood vessels tend to constrict, and we tend to push energy toward the core of our body to preserve our core organs. So our periphery, our hands and our feet and our toes and our legs become colder. And our core, therefore, can maintain blood to that area, and we are insulating our core. Conversely, when we heat up, our blood vessels vasodilate. They expand a bit and more blood flows to our periphery and more blood can move throughout the body generally. And we will perspire. We will sweat. Water will actually get pulled out of the blood to some extent, moved up through sweat glands, and will be brought to the skin surface so that it can be dumped. We are dumping heat. So it's very important that if you want to understand how you can leverage temperature for physical performance, you have to understand that you have vasoconstriction to conserve heat, vasodilation to dump heat. That you have, sweating to dump heat, and you have conservation of fluids in order to preserve heat. That's the most important thing in terms of understanding the mechanisms of maintaining and dumping heat. And now the most important thing to understand is that if you get too hot, your ability to contract your muscles stops. OK? I'm going to repeat this because it's vitally important. ATP is involved in the process of generating muscle contractions. The range of temperatures within which ATP can function and muscles can contract is very narrow. Somewhere around 39 or 40 degrees Celsius, it drops off and you will not be able to generate more contractions. That's pretty hot, but that temperature can be generated locally really fast. Put simply, if you get too hot, you stop exercising. You may not even realize it, but your will to exercise further, your ability to push harder is entirely dependent on the heat of the muscle, both locally and your whole system. If you can keep temperature in range, however, in a proper range, you will be able to do more work. You will be able to create greater output. You'll be able to lift more weight, more sets, more reps. And you'll be able to run further. Now, there are data that I'm going to talk about in a little bit that are absolutely striking, that underscore that statement. They are data from my colleague Craig Heller's Lab in the Department of Biology at Stanford. Many, if not all, of the NFL teams are now using this technology, as well as military uses it. And not just for sports performance, but also firefighters, construction workers, other professions where elevated heat becomes a barrier to performance. And you can leverage this to really improve your workouts. So how do you dump heat in order to perform longer safely? Well, in order to understand that, you have to understand that the body has three main compartments for regulating temperature. We don't just have a center and a periphery. We have three main compartments. And there's one compartment in particular that all of you or most all of you, I have to assume, have. And if you can understand how that works, you can do tremendous things for your performance and for your recovery. One is your core. We already talked about that. Your core organs, your heart, your lungs, your pancreas, your liver. The core of your body. The other is your periphery, which are obviously your arms and your legs and your feet and your hands. But then there's a third component, which is there are three locations on your body that are far better at passing heat out of the body and bringing cool into the body, such that you can heat up or cool your body everywhere very quickly. Those three areas are your face, the palms of your hands, and the bottoms of your feet. Now the skin on your hands and on the bottoms of your feet, and to some extent on your face are called glaborous skin. That's G-L-A-B-O-R-O-U-S. Glaborous skin. And what's special about those areas of your body and the glaborous skin is that the arrangement of vasculature, of blood vessels, capillaries, and arteries that serve those regions is very different than it is elsewhere in your body. In these three regions of your hands, your face, and the bottoms of your feet, we have what are called AVAs. AVAs are a very special pattern of vasculature. AVAs are arteriovenous anastomoses. A-R-T-E-R-I-O, arterio. Venous, V-E-N-O-U-S. Arteriovenous anastomoses, A-N-A-S-T-O-M-O-S-E-S. Arteriovenous anastomoses. You want to know about arteriovenous anastomoses. Trust me. AVAs are direct connections between the small arteries and the small veins. They bypass the capillaries to some extent. They are little short vessel segments. They have a big, large inner diameter. And they have this very thick, muscular wall. And they get input from what are called adrenergic neurons. They get input from neurons that release norepinephrine and epinephrine, which allows them to contract or dilate. Now, there are some rules of physics that talk about how the radius of a pipe, and small changes in the radius of a pipe leads to massive increases in the rate and amount of stuff that can flow through that pipe. It's a rule of physics that says, essentially that the radius is proportional to the amount of stuff that can flow through something to the fourth power. What you need to know, even if you don't want to know any of the underlying physics, is that these AVAs allow more heat to leave the body more quickly, and more cool to enter the body more quickly than other venous, arterial, capillary beds throughout the body. In other words, you can heat up best at the face, the palms, and the bottoms of the feet, and you can cool down best at the face, the palms, and the bottoms of the feet than you can anywhere else on your body. These three compartments of your body, palms, bottoms of feet, and face are your best leverage points for manipulating temperature to vastly improve physical performance. So what Craig and his colleagues did really illustrates perfectly what these body surfaces can do and why. They were studying overheating in athletes and in military and in construction workers, and trying to prevent it. What they essentially found was that cooling the palms, palmar cooling, allowed people, athletes, and recreational athletes to run much further, to lift more weight, and to do more sets and reps to a absolutely staggering degree. Let's talk for a second a bit more about why we stop, why we shut off effort when we get too hot. When muscle heats up, enzymes start getting disrupted, and ATP and muscles can't work so well and those muscles can't contract. The enzyme that's involved here is something called pyruvate kinase. And pyruvate kinase is essentially a rate-limiting step. It's a critical step that you can't bypass if you want muscles to contract. And it's very temperature-sensitive. Therefore, if you can keep temperature lower, you can do more work per unit time. You can do more pull-ups. But they essentially did is they brought someone into their laboratory who could do 10 pull-ups on the first set, and they were able to get 10, rest two or three minutes. Get another 10, rest two or three minutes. And if you've ever tried this, what you find is that you start dropping to, eight, seven, six, et cetera now the person might not necessarily feel like they're overheating, but the muscle is heating up. Then with their knowledge that these AVAs, that these portals in the palms are a great way to both heat the body, but also to dump heat from the body, they used a device. And I'll talk about what you can do at home, but a device where they had people hold on to what was essentially a cold tube. Now this is crucial. The tube can't be so cold that it causes vasoconstriction, because then the cold won't pass from the tube to the hand and to the core. But if it's the right temperature, it's neither too hot nor too cold, that cool from the cold tube passes into the hand, these so-called palmar regions, and then cools the core. And in theory, by lowering body temperature, would allow the person or the athlete to do more work. And indeed, that's what they saw. The actual data, the specific data showed that subjects could do, at least the subjects they worked with, on their first day, with no cooling, about 100 pull-ups across the time frame that they had. Then they came back and did the cooling. They did it the very next day, which if you've ever trained a muscle, the very next day, typically you wouldn't do as well in its training if it took any damage from the previous sessions. Or you at least do as well, but you probably wouldn't do what they then observed, which was they started cooling after every other set. The person would just hold the cold tube, cool down the body after every other set. Rest, everything else was kept the same. And they found that they went to 180 pull-ups, which is incredible. It's a near doubling. Now you may be asking, what about endurance? With endurance, similar increases have been shown. And the way that they would do those tests are a little bit different. And they also point to a really important mechanism of why we stop doing work at all when we perceive that we are putting in too much effort. So it gets right to the heart of the relationship between temperature and muscles and your willpower. Those are directly related. Your body heat and your willpower are linked in a physiological way. OK, so let's talk about willpower and heat, and how heat shuts you down. In other words, if you are cool, if your body temperature is in a particular range, not only can you go further, but you will go further if you want to. Said differently. If you heat up too much, you will stop or you will die. But there is a reflex that relates the body to the brain, and the brain to the body that shuts off our effort when we get too hot. So what Craig and his colleagues, and now others have done, is to do a test in the laboratory where rather than ask people to run outside until they absolutely don't want to run anymore, you put them on a treadmill and you set the speed. So they have to keep up with the treadmill. And at some point, they quit. And you take groups and you do those in different temperature environments. So some people are running in a nice chilly laboratory. They get their heart rate up. So they get into a steady state cadence or rhythm, and their heart is beating at more or less a steady state. People will continue at that temperature and at that heart rate, unless you start turning up the temperature in the room. And at some point, they will stop, and they'll stop much earlier when it gets hot because of something called cardiac drift. OK, so let's say I'm running and I'm running at a steady cadence on this treadmill, and my heart rate is 85 beats per minute or 100 beats per minute. It doesn't matter. Let's say 100, just for sake of example. Well, just making the room hotter is going to increase my heart rate further, even though I'm at the same output. And the brain does a computation. It somehow figures out that there's a heat component that's increasing heart rate, and there's an effort component from running that's driving heart rate. And if the heat component and the heart rate output from the effort get to hit a certain threshold, I stop. Increasing temperature increases the rate of quitting, in part, not entirely, but in part because of this thing called cardiac drift. Heat increases heart rate. Effort increases heart rate. At a steady effort, you'll have a steady heart rate. If you increase the heat in the environment that you're engaging in that steady heart rate, your heart rate will now go up due to cardiac drift, and you will quit. OK? So Heller and colleagues have done experiments where they do palmar cooling under these environments. And that's wonderful because not only does it enable people to go further and faster for much longer. That's been shown statistically significant every time, but it also protects the brain and body against hyperthermia, overheating, coma, nerve injury, nerve death, and actual death. OK. So you can see why this is such a valuable tool. So how can you start to incorporate this? Well, first of all, I always get asked, how cold should the water be? Should it be ice water? Should it be very cold water? The answer is no. If you want to experience some of this effect without a device, one thing you could do would be, for instance, to do-- I don't know, I'll use the gym or the treadmill as an example. You could do your maximum number of pull-ups, stop. And then you could actually put your hands into or on the surface of a sink that is presumably stuffed up with cool water. So not ice water. Not freezing cold, but cool water. Slightly cooler than body temperature before you started training would be a good place to start. You do that for 10 to 30 seconds. Then you could go back and do your next set. You would repeat the cooling. You would want to extend the amount of cooling somewhat. So you might want to do that for 30 seconds to a minute. This is not going to be perfect. You're going to have to play with how cold to make it in order to get the optimal effect. But you ought to see an effect nonetheless. The same is true if you're running and you're fatiguing. Obviously, you don't want to become hyperthermic. Cooling the hands or the bottoms of your feet, or the face would be the ideal way to dump heat in order to be able to generate more output. Now, the face is something that we haven't talked a lot about. Everything I've told you up until now also says that if you are somebody who tends to get cold when you are outside, say in the winter or even in the fall you tend to run cold, warming your face is going to be the most important thing that you can do. Now you understand the principle and the locations at which to deliver heat and cold. So let's say that you are out for a run and you want to incorporate this cooling mechanism. I talked to Craig about this. I said, what would be the kind of poor person's approach to this? And he said, well, you could take a frozen juice can, if you have one of those, or a very cold can of soda, and you would want to pass it back and forth between your two hands. The reason the passing back and forth is really important is because you again, you don't want it to be so cold that you constrict those venous portals that will allow cold to go into the body. Now, there are certainly people that are working on bike handles and that can actually cool the hands. Here's what you don't want to do. You don't want to cool the core if you want to cool the body. Right? If it's a very hot day and you're going to train, getting into an ice bath first, sure, it will cool you down, but that's not going to be as effective as cooling the palms, the bottoms of the feet, and the face. The one that I've tried, because in anticipation of this episode, was the dips, where then I would cool my hands. I actually decided to cool the bottoms of my feet as well, because it just feels good and it's particularly hot out lately. So no shoes or socks on. Put my feet into-- the bottoms of my feet, just kind of hovering about a centimeter or two below the surface of a bucket of water that was just slightly-- it felt cool. Slightly cooler than body temperature or so. It just basically what came out of the spigot after I let it run for a little bit. And indeed, I saw a 60% increase in the number of dips I can do in a single session. So it's actually a quite significant effect. And you don't have to be perfectly precise in order to do it. So up until now, we've been talking about how to use cold during a workout in order to improve performance. Now I want to talk about the use of temperature, in particular cold, to improve the speed and the depth of recovery. Recovery is obviously vital, right? During a weight training session or during an endurance session, that's just the stimulus for getting better the next time. And if you don't recover, you not only won't get better, but you'll get worse. There's a lot of interest in the use of cold in order to improve recovery in the short term. We see this, and probably the best example of this would be fighters in combat sports between rounds, or athletes in between quarters or half time. That's one form of recovery. The ability to go back into the sport very soon on an order of minutes, anywhere from one minute in between rounds in typical combat sports, or several minutes at a half time, et cetera. And then, of course, there's recovery that occurs from session to session. So outside of the game or the match or the exercise session. And many people are now relying on things like cryotherapy, which requires a lot of expensive equipment, big liquid nitrogen-driven machine. Those aren't so common for most people or accessible for most people. But a lot of people are using cold baths or ice baths or cold showers. And again, that's not going to optimize recovery. In fact, it's going to have an additional effect that is going to potentially block the training stimulus. When you get into an ice bath, you are indeed blocking some of the inflammation that occurs because of the training session. But in doing so, you also are blocking pathways such as mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin, which are involved in the adaptation for a muscle to become stronger or bigger. Put simply, covering the body in cold or immersing the body in cold after training can short circuit or prevent the hypertrophy or muscle growth response. It has other effects that can be positive. Right? It can induce thermogenesis, et cetera. It can reduce inflammation. But it can prevent some of the positive effects of exercise. Now, it hasn't been examined so much for endurance work, but let's say you come back from around of endurance work or a run or a bike or a swim, getting into a cool bath or cooling the palms, the bottoms of the feet or the face, in my opinion, based on the science, would be better than completely immersing the body in the ice bath. If you can cool the body back to its resting temperature for a-- and by resting temperature, I mean within the range that you would see at any time of waking day, but not in exercise. If you can do that, the sooner you can do that after a workout, the sooner that the muscle will recover, that the tendons will recover, and that the person, you, can get back into more endurance training, more weight training, et cetera. So cold actually can be a very powerful tool for recovery. But to maximize return to baseline levels of temperature, just simply cooling the entire body by jumping into an ice bath or a cold shower is not the best way to go. You really want to rely on one of these three glaborous skin portals of the palms, the bottoms of the feet, or the face. One of the more commonly used compounds that's sold over the counter are non-steroid anti-inflammatories. So things like Tylenol and Advil, and other trade names. And naproxen sodium things of that sort. Almost all of those drop body temperature to some extent. And that's why it's often recommended that people take them when they have a fever. Now, a number of athletes, especially endurance athletes, will rely on these non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs specifically to keep body temperature lower during long bouts of exertion. This is a little bit of a pharmacologic version of dumping heat. Instead of using palmar cooling or face ice pack cooling, they're relying on pharmacology to drop their core body temperature. That has certain obvious advantages. Lower temperature allows you to go further, harder with more intensity. However, they do have effects on the liver. And they can also have effects on the kidneys and during long bouts of exercise, or even short bouts of exercise. Water balance and salt balance are also going to be vital to maintain in order to perform well, generate the best muscle contraction, stay mentally alert, and also to stay alive. You probably want to think carefully about whether or not you want to use non-steroid anti-inflammatories before any training session, just for the performance augmentation effect, unless you're working carefully with a coach. I personally am more a fan of cooling of the palms, cooling of the bottoms of my feet by placing them into a bucket or into a cool bath after training. Or cooling the face after training, or sometimes even during training. It just seems like there's more of a margin to play with the variables to heat up the water or cool it down a little bit, to include one palm or the other palm. There's just all sorts of good parameter space, as we call it in science, that you can play with and work with to find what works for you. Whereas when you pop a pill, sure, you can adjust the dose and you can adjust it next time, but once it's in you, it's in you. And there's going to be some period of time before you can modulate it. So it doesn't give you a lot of opportunity to play scientist, which is what I like to do. Because what I'm always trying to do is trying to dial in the best protocols possible based on the mechanisms and data. And if you can do that moment to moment, that places you in a position of power. Once again, we've covered a lot of material. By now, after seeing this episode or listening to this episode, you should understand a lot about how your body heats and cools itself, and the value of that for physical performance. I hope you'll also appreciate that you have tools at your disposal to vastly improve your physical performance. I've given you specific protocols and some direction, but I've also left it slightly vague because, as I mentioned earlier, I don't know all the environmental conditions. I don't know how hot your yoga studio is or how cool your gym happens to be, or your body temperature or time of day. Remember, your temperature will vary according to time of day. Going forward, we're going to talk more about temperature and other ways to improve physical performance and skill learning. We're going to talk about specific ways to accelerate fat loss, to improve muscle growth, to improve suppleness and flexibility. These approaches and mechanisms are anchored deeply in neuroscience and physiology, and the relationship between our peripheral organs, which include our skin, and our brain, and all the organs in between. And last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention. I realize this is a lot of information. I hope you'll find some of it to be actionable and useful for you and for people that you know. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 22 ---
Video ID: U3cSnzdyyXU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U3cSnzdyyXU
Title: How to Increase Your Speed, Mobility & Longevity with Plyometrics & Sprinting | Stuart McMillan
Published: 2025-03-17 12:00:43 UTC
Description:
My guest is Stuart McMillan, a renowned track and field coach who has trained dozens of Olympic medalists, professional athletes, and team coaches across a diverse range of sports. We discuss how to use plyometric work to improve mobility, strength, posture, and overall health.

We emphasize the enormous benefits of skipping—a form of plyometrics—for joint health, aerobic conditioning, and coordination, as well as its advantages for people of all ages and fitness levels. We also explore the expressive nature of human movement, highlighting how certain movements reveal and can evolve one’s unique personality and abilities.

Stu explains how resistance training, skipping, and striding can improve movement efficiency in all aspects of life. Anyone who exercises, as well as serious athletes, will benefit immensely from Stu McMillan’s knowledge of human mechanics and the practical tools he generously shares in this discussion.

Watch a track and sprinting warm-up with Stu McMillan: https://youtu.be/Aj5SONT3T2o

Read the full episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/TktUQjo

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Our Place: https://fromourplace.com/huberman
Wealthfront**: https://wealthfront.com/huberan
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman
Function: https://functionhealth.com/huberman

_**This experience may not be representative of the experience of other clients of Wealthfront, and there is no guarantee that all clients will have similar experiences. Cash Account is offered by Wealthfront Brokerage LLC, Member FINRA/SIPC. The Annual Percentage Yield (“APY”) on cash deposits as of December 27,‬ 2024, is representative, subject to change, and requires no minimum. Funds in the Cash Account are swept to partner banks where they earn the variable‭ APY. Promo terms and FDIC coverage conditions apply. Same-day withdrawal or instant payment transfers may be limited by destination institutions, daily transaction caps, and by participating entities such as Wells Fargo, the RTP® Network, and FedNow® Service. New Cash Account deposits are subject to a 2-4 day holding period before becoming available for transfer._

*Stuart McMillan*
Altis: https://altis.world 
Articles (Altis): https://altis.world/author/smcmillan
X: https://x.com/stuartmcmillan1 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/fingermash
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@fingermash
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/@sallBollocks 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/stuart-mcmillan-89094215

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Stuart McMillan
00:02:27 Running, Sprinting, Event Distances
00:09:01 Sponsors: Our Place & Wealthfront
00:12:13 Natural Sprinters, Kids, Sports Specialization
00:17:00 Athletes, Identity, Race Selection
00:23:38 Walking to Sprinting, Gait Patterns, Tool: Flat-Foot Contact
00:30:35 Visual Focus, Body Position, Running, Lifting Weights
00:36:00 Tool: Skipping & Benefits
00:42:18 Sponsors: AG1 & Helix Sleep
00:45:01 Tools: Skipping, Beginners, Jogging Incorporation
00:49:50 Transition Points, Tool: Skipping, Maximum Amplitude
00:53:03 Concentric & Eccentric Phases, Running
00:55:32 Transitioning to Striding, Posture, Center of Mass
01:03:11 Older Adults, Eccentric Control, Tool: Skipping
01:08:00 Naming Importance & Public Health; Skipping, Plyometrics
01:12:18 Sponsor: Function
01:14:06 Cross-Body Coordination, Rotation, Gaits; Phones & Posture
01:22:27 Expression Through Movement, Playfulness, Confidence
01:28:53 Being Yourself, Expression, Essence & Movement
01:36:39 Connecting with Movement, Building Cues, Mood Words
01:45:05 Pressure & Peace; Exercise, Movement & Age
01:51:39 Music, Art, Rhythm, Coaching; Soccer, Greatest Players & Countries
02:00:25 White & Black Athletes, Genetics, Environment
02:08:27 Running Form, Tools: High Knees, Stiff Springs, Hip Extension
02:17:21 Skipping Rope, Aging; Protocols & Rigidity, Principles Alignment
02:22:12 Resistance Training to Improve Movement, Sprinting Kinetics, Individualization
02:32:29 Transferring Weight Room to Track, Staggered Stance, Stretching
02:36:52 Performance-Enhancement, Elite Athletes, Androgen, Reputation
02:46:45 Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT), Age; Pharmacology vs. Training 
02:52:14 Single Physical Metric & Sprinting; Pressure & Peace
02:58:34 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Follow & Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Protocols Book, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#hubermanlab #health #plyometrics #sprinting 

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Stuart McMillan Stu McMillan is one of the world's most sought-after coaches for teaching people how to get stronger run faster be more powerful and healthier today we talk about how to do that using what for most people might seem like a rather unconventional set of methods but for any serious track athlete will be very familiar because they do it almost every day and that's skipping and striding you heard right as you'll soon learn skipping what most of us think of as a kids activity is actually one of the best plyometric activities that we can all do at any age to build more power speed coordination and to improve our muscle fascial and nervous system function Stu McMillan has coached over 70 Olympians across n Olympic Games and he has coached the players and coaches of every major professional sport he explains how skipping and something called striding are zeroc cost activities that we all can and should include in our weekly Fitness routine they not only will have you moving better and having better posture in all your activities but they also take minimal time and they can help protect you against injuries and improve your longevity we also talk about the best strides for running at any speed so if you're into jogging or sprinting we talk about all the best ways to to do that we talk about the spor of track which both Stu and I happen to love and why certain groups of people excel in different sports due to genetic and environmental reasons we also have a very direct and open conversation about the use of performance-enhancing tools in the athletic and wellness worlds this is a really special episode because if you like or if you don't like things like running swimming cycling or other activities such as weight training or yoga there's going to be a lot to take away from it that you can apply Stu McMillan is a true svon of coaching how best to move and how to improve your health it was an honor and privilege to host him and to learn from him I'm sure you'll agree before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme this episode does include sponsors and now for my discussion with Stu McMillan Stu McMillan welcome thank you great to be here we go back a little ways yeah and you're the guy that they call in to make athletes or pretty much anybody faster stronger healthier and more powerful and who wouldn't want that athletes uh or otherwise let's start by talking about running you know I think for a lot of people they hear running and they're like oh no running hurts running is painful but I think most people when they think about running they think about jogging they think about running a distance longer than a mile but even for some people running a mile is a painful thought let alone a practice how should we think about running and sprinting in particular because when we grow up we learn to crawl MH walk run MH and kids naturally want to run fast at some point fast for them what is it about running that for you is such an enchanting thing why do you think that every four years or so depending on when they're scheduling the Olympics everyone in this country gets fascinated with who's fastest yeah who's fastest in the world and then they tend to put track and field aside for a bit but people can jump they can swim they can do all these things but running is so fundamental to Being Human what are your thoughts on running generally and let let's break it up into distances why do you love seeing people run fast why have you devoted yourself in part to helping people run faster and faster yeah there's a lot in that first running fast for me is the ultimate human activity like the fastest human on the planet is the fastest human on the planet where potentially maybe like the best football player is probably not the best football player the best soccer player is probably not the best soccer player there might be some someone down in Argentina who could be a better NFL linebacker than choose your All Pro linebacker right now where sprinting everybody Sprints as you said we all run when we're kids and we figure out or our teachers figure out or our coaches figure out well Andrew you're a sprinter so you're going to Sprint steu you're a middle distance so you go and do that and over the course of time we kind of figure out whether we're good or not and the sprinters like the truly Elite sprinters end up being the truly Elite sprinters when they are 2025 30 years old like that's what you do you don't move into something else if you are a super Elite Sprinter so I think that's part of it is that for me like it it is really truly the tip of the spear in human performance the fastest person on the planet is the fastest person on the planet Usain Bolt is the world record holder and he is the fastest person who's ever ran there's probably not somebody else who you know in the Congo somewhere in Jamaica that could have been faster than you say because they would have displayed themselves at some point so for me that is it you know and I you know I started coaching kind of 1984 like I've been coaching for a long long time and I started coaching professionally in 1992 and I've coached many sports many activities many tasks and I I enjoy most of them but for me it is that Pinnacle that true tip of the spear that interests me the most and that you only get from sprinting if you're an NFL football player most likely you are playing every game at about 80% of your best if you were 80% of your best and you got on to the 100 meter start line forget about it forget about it if you're less than 99.9% of your best forget about it that's why I truly I love the sprinting events so much and zoomed out from that a little bit like I I started off as a strength and condition coach so it was for me it was more about the the power the strength and the speed it was all of that and like coach Bob said for a long time and I really really enjoyed Bob said because you know these guys are massive they're really strong and they're really fast so that for me was really appealing and that was kind of that that fed my obsession about this peak human performance for a long time until I had the opportunity to actually go and work with like super Elite sprinters and now I can't do anything other than that I really can't it's it's fascinating to me how do we compare the fastest person in the 100 meters versus the 200 versus the 400 so for you is it coaching the one 00 that's the most exciting or the 200 or the 400 yeah that's a good question I I actually prefer coaching the 200 for a couple of reasons there's a little bit of tactics in the 200 or there's more tactics than there are in the 100 in the 100 the fastest person is going to win in the 200 depending on how you tactically set up your race because it's not an allout Sprint you can't run as fast as you can for 20 seconds whereas 100 m you can run as fast as you can for 10 to 11 seconds it is a it's all out right from the start with a 200 you have to kind of either push out really really hard and then smooth it out and then try to finish strong or you start off a little bit easier and you finish strong or you just go out all out and you're just going to fade and see if you can stay ahead so that tactical element to for for that race for me is really interesting so then you're combining the capacity you know the actual ability to run fast and be super incredibly fast you know high high velocities with the Tactical component so it's then you're thinking about okay who's in if my athlete's in Lane six who's in Lane seven who's in Lane eight how are we going to determine how we run based upon what the other races are going to do so for me it's a 200 that's not to say I don't love the 100 the 100 for me is the one that I if I'm just a fan that's the one that I'm paying attention to the most and every four years people become obsessed with it that that person is generally the winner is characterized as the fastest person on the planet because like you said it's it's all out yeah and at the same time I think most people can't really conceive in a concrete way what sprinting 100 meters really is about yeah and the world record is held by you saying Bold and the record is somewhere 9.58 seconds and yesterday you told me that means it's about 40 strides to cover 100 meters for you saying it was 40 steps correct yeah for uh many other Elite sprinters it's somewhere between 40 and 45 in the men and somewhere between sort of 47 and 5 too for the women I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor our place our place makes my favorite pots pans and other cookware surprisingly toxic compounds such as pases or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans as well as utensils appliances and countless other Kitchen products as I've discussed on this podcast these PES or forever chemicals like teon have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption gut microbiome disruption fertility is issues and many other health concerns so it's really important to avoid them this is why I'm a huge fan of ourplace ourplace products are made with the highest quality materials and are all past and toxin-free I particularly love their titanium always pan Pro it's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating instead it's pure titanium this means it has no harmful forever chemicals and that it doesn't degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time it's also beautiful to look at I cook eggs in my titanium always pan Pro almost every morning the design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly and without sticking to the pan I also cook burgers and steaks in it and it puts a really nice sear on the meat but again nothing sticks to it so it's really easy to clean and even dishwasher safe I love it and I use it constantly our place now has a full line of Titanium Pro cookware that uses this first ofit kind titanium non-stick technology so if you're looking for non-toxic long-lasting pots and pans go to fromourplace docomond and use the code huberman for 10% off your order with a 100 day risk-free trial free shipping and free returns you can experience this fantastic cookware with zero risk again that's fromourplace tocomin to get 10% off today's episode is also brought To Us by wealth front I've been using wealthfront for my savings and my investing for nearly a decade and I absolutely love it at the start of every year I set new goals and one of my goals for 2025 is to focus on saving money since I have wealth front I'll keep that Savings in my wealthfront cash account where I'm able to earn 4% annual percentage yield on my deposits and you can as well with wealth front you can earn 4% apy on your cash from partner Banks until you're ready to either spend that money or invest it with wealth front you also get free instant withdrawals to eligible accounts every day even on weekends and holidays the 4% apy is not a promotional rate and there's no limit to what you can deposit and earn and you can even get protection for up to $8 million through FDIC Insurance provided through wealth front partner Banks wealth front gives you free instant withdrawals where it takes just minutes to transfer your money to eligible external accounts it also takes just minutes to transfer your cash from the cash account to any of wealth Run's automated investment accounts when you're ready to invest there are already a million people using wealthfront to save more earn more and build long-term wealth earn 4% apy on your cash today if you'd like to try wealth front go to wealthfront.com huberman to receive a free $50 bonus with a $500 deposit into your First Cash account that's wealthfront.com huberman to get started now this has been a PID testimonial of wealthfront wealthfront brokerage isn't a bank the apy is subject to change for more information see the episode description yesterday we were out at the track at Malibu high school here were teaching my producer Rob and I um some bounding drills some skipping drills and we'll get back to this because there's such immense value for everybody not just people who seek to be competitive Runners but for everybody to I realize this morning it's hop skip and jump we were always told a hop skip and a jump away from but to learn how to move properly at speed to move properly not at speed I mean there's just so much value in in these drills and what we went through and so we'll get back to that but there was an interesting moment yesterday uh I recall where some of the kids were getting out of school and started running around the track and I had this question in my mind to ask you which goes hey can you spot any of those kids as likely to be really excellent sprinters but I didn't even have to ask we watched them go out in a few rows and then you said that kid right there yeah you said that kid right there he's got it mhm what was it about the way he was running kid probably was eighth or ninth grade um took one run away from us and he said that that kid's a sprinter yeah what was it was it his speed was it the the form what was it it first of all it was not the form cuz most of those kids are you know limbs are going all over the place right it's how they interact with the ground and it's it's this qualitative component that is really hard to Define it's if you if you watch a elite boxer hit a heavy bag there's a pop sound to it pop Po and it's the same with Elite sprinters or not even Elite sprinters but anybody who's fast and effective and efficient at applying Force against an object and you see that as young as as we saw yesterday with what 12 13 14 year olds right some of them are just thuing on the ground and just pushing back and kind of like Rob your your your producer um but which by the way folks we're going take a couple Jabs at Rob he's he's in the room with us now although off camera Rob has run multiple triathlons he's an incredibly impressive athlete and um as an incredibly impressive athlete we can we can jab at him every now and again but this one kid he was just re it was far more efficient on the ground than everyone else it was just Po and you could hear it and I hear it generally I hear it before I see it and that's I think is actually what I heard first and I looked around and said oh that's that's the kid like he's a sprinter and then you just kind of look at at at his form and it just looks better there's just a quality to that that you don't see with these other kids and even though limbs are going all over the place and head is going from side to side and you know it's feet are going all over the place and hands are flapping you know like wings there's just a fluidity even with him looking like that he just just doing it much more coordinated and fluid than everyone else who look like they were trying hard and with him it didn't look like he was trying hard and typically I mean that is by the way the differentiator between all Elite and sub Elite athletes regardless of the sport the best athletes are always the ones that make it look the easiest and that kid just made it look easier than everyone else could you send a kid like that out for a 400 meter run and then meet him at the line and say you know what you're meant to run the 200 or you're meant to run the 100 is it possible to tell whether or not somebody is meant for a particular distance based on how they do in a slightly different distance yeah I don't I don't especially not at that age you know at that age you want him to be doing or her to be doing as many different events as possible and let's just try all I don't think they should even at that age at 12 13 14 say you're a sprinter you're a sprinter and you're a jumper and maybe we'll do some middle distance and we'll do some relays and then we can do a couple throws as well and see which one that you kind of enjoying the most number one and then number two what are you actually showing some expertise towards and hopefully those two things match and then you can start looking at specializing for the kind of event group a little bit later and you know even and that comes a lot later than many you know people outside of track and field think um even with you know most NCAA division one college programs are pretty Elite I mean that's some high- performing athletes and many of those sprinters do the one the two the four all the relays and often your best sprinters are also your best jumpers so you might have a you might have your 100 meter specialist also do the long jump and the triple jump and it won't be until maybe the second or the third or fourth year of college or maybe even their first year as a pro where they start actually doing just the one or two events I ran cross country as a senior in high school I've been running consistently since I was 16 three times a week I don't consider myself even a runner I just run for the pleasure of it a long run a medium run and a short run um but perhaps it was the movies about Steve Prefontaine of which there were two I think one's called Prefontaine and the other one's called Without Limits that that are quite good they got me excited about track and then I started going up to University of Oregon and attending track meets as a fan yeah um but there's this dramatized moment about pre as they called him uh and Bowerman the coach up at in Eugene where allegedly um purportedly uh PRI wants to run the mile because everyone in the country at that time was obsessed with who's the fastest Miler but Bowerman says to him no you're a 5,000 Runner you're going to run the three mile and he said no one cares about the 5,000 he said you're going to make them care and it turned out to be the right fit the 5,000 was the right event for him so that was a moment where a coach could identify you could be a a great Myer but you'll be a spectacular 5,000 Runner MH is that based on sort of times and splits and recovery and all that or is or is there actually a body type and and a gate that um is best because one of my favorite things to find on social media I promise this is not a digression is where they'll set out a a race an animated race between like a rabbit a cheetah an elephant a human it's very interesting to see which animals are fastest over which distances they fall out over different distances and most people perhaps are surprised to find that the animal that wins the long long long longest distance and beats all the other species is US yeah the human right so we're not good in in the Sprint compared to the cheetah but we are alsoo good at the marathon and ultramarathon compared to the cheetah or any other animal so do you think it's something special about the gate um the personality times in various events I what what funnels um somebody's understanding of themselves uh or an athlete to say you know you're meant to you're meant to do this yeah I I think it nailed it at the end their understanding of themselves I think is a really important part of it you know we find ourselves through movement and we fall in love with whatever it is because that's what we do and we tend to do it really well so I coached a British Sprinter for a long time her name is jod Williams I coached her for about a DEC decade starting in 2015 she just retired at the end of last season she went when she was young so between I think the ages of 13 and 17 she won 150 straight races in the 100 and the 200 never lost was the best at every single age group all over the world for five years finally lost and did not really transition into being an elite 100 meter 200 met Sprinter but this was her identity she'd always been the fastest person so when I started coaching her in 20156 when she was 202 that was what she did she was 1002 200 meter girl but she wasn't Elite she wasn't world class and we kept on pushing her towards the 10020 because this was what she saw herself as and me external to that what I saw her as as well and everyone else expected from her because she was the best in the world for so long and it's a funny thing happened sort of five years into that we did a a relay a 4x4 early season at uh Arizona State University and she ran really fast in this 4x4 relay and she enjoyed it and she didn't enjoy getting beat in the 100 and the 200 anymore and she said hm maybe I can do the 400 and then the 2019 World Championships in Doha she made the British team in the 200 didn't do very well but ran the relay ran the 4x4 four and ran the fastest split of all the countries she ran 494 and a 4X4 split and said okay we're 400 meter Runner now so sometimes it's just that sometimes it takes a long time for the athlete to come to the realization that this is what they connect with like this is this is who I am you know you know what I mean like it's it's really it's not as easy as just saying oh we've got a bunch of tests and you're 100 meter you're a 200 you're a 400 for her it took her over a decade to come to terms with the fact that you know I can't do the 1002 200 anymore but I could be really good at the 400 and then and two years later at the 2020 Olympic games which ended up being obviously in 21 uh she was six in the 400 meters in the Olympics at 499 twice so it's uh you know it's um in hindsight we wonder if we moved into the 45 years earlier three or four years earlier maybe she could have had a medal but yeah it's it's an interesting one like it's we're always using all of the different pieces of information that we have at hand some of it's quantitative some some some of it is qualitative some of it is just a feeling and with with jod specifically it was you know what did I better connect with because you know that's typ that's as I said that's why we get into sport in the first place if we can't connect with that uh as an individual with why we're doing it then why are we even doing it I feel like this is a great metaphor for life in general for career I mean I've enjoyed different careers and um I'm glad I started in the one I did but that I've ended up in the one I'm in now even though you I still teach and involved in research in some ways it um there's such a immense pleasure to uh finding the the thing yeah for oneself but you can't get there first this is what I think is frustrating to young people now because of the internet they think like what's my calling what's what's my event what's my sport what am I built for and then you have all these examples right you've got your um Shaquille O'Neal's clearly built for basketball and then you have your growing up when I grew up your Spud Web yeah right much much shorter than most of the professional players in the NBA but wins the slam dunk competition and so he always used it as an example that you can Bridge these these gaps but I do think that dedicated application to one area is the best lane from which to exit to another freeway yeah you can't just get onto the the uh the Aon so to speak for you you have to sometimes get on you know Highway 101 for a while and speed a little bit or or crash you know I'm not being literal here um you said something I think is immensely powerful I'd like to use as a segue which is that we find ourselves through movement um I think this is so true um and not just for people who are trying to figure out what a athletic or exercise Endeavors are best for them but certainly there I'd like to contrast jogging and running yesterday you you mentioned a few things that to me just feel like gems because like I said I'll try and run Farish for me I go by time about an hour once a week 30 minutes on another day and a let's just say about a 15 minute not all out but close to all out on a separate day I've tried at nauseum to figure out whether or not it's best to heal strike and roll whether or not it's best to land on the toe whether to lift the knee I mean for the the uninformed um who goes to the internet you can get answers about this all sorts of ways let's start with the slowest movement possible which is walking let's forget about speed walking for sake of this conversation for a number of reasons race walking race walking excuse me race walking um see I even forgot the the name of it um no disrespect to race Walkers no disrespect to race walkers but most people don't seek to race walk I think um but let's talk about walking yeah when we walk do we we heal to toe roll naturally do we middle a foot to toe roll and then let's proceed to jogging M running and then let's step up through the various gear systems yeah yeah um there's probably five separate gate patterns walking is the first one and typically most people will strike on their heel they'll roll over and they'll tow off on their toe and we do that up to about 2 to 2.2 to 2.3 m a second until we can no longer do that so we start walking we walk really really slow and if we start increasing our speed you'll find that you'll almost self-organize into the speed that feels really nice for you if you were going going for a walk you would self-organize towards your most efficient or your most stable velocity for that walk and if you don't not thinking about it you will self-organize towards your most efficient mechanical solution as well that it might be flat foot it might be right up high on your heel with massive amount of dors Def flexion it might be a little bit lower on the heel but that's all contingent upon your individual structure how your foot is built how it coordinates with your knee and your hip if you're not thinking about it we typically will self-organize towards what is most efficient most stable for us and then as we get faster and faster and faster you'll feel that that stability and that inefficiency starts to rock a little bit and you can no longer walk and what do we do then to get and to get faster we actually have to transition to a totally different gate pattern we start to jog because we're with there so much instability inefficiency that that pattern just start begins to break down and we start to jog let me back up just a little bit so if you were to walk with let's say your your 80-year-old neighbor and you're doing a walk with her that's probably going to be pretty taxing for you pretty uneconomical pretty inefficient because you have to shuffle a little bit you're walking so slow you're probably going to be bent over a little bit but if the neighbor went in you just continue to walk you would speed up to your most efficient pattern So within all of these gate patterns There is almost like an upside down U where you start off really inefficient unstable as you get faster and faster and faster efficiency increases stability increases and you get keep getting faster and faster and faster stability goes down again efficiency goes down again before you have to transition to a different pattern so jogging occurs at somewhere around 20% of your maximum Sprint speed so you know whether that's 1.8 to two to 2 2.2 meters per second and then we start to jog and eventually we can't jog at that speed anymore so we have to transition to a different gate pattern and we start to run and that's kind of what we were doing yesterday in fact you know we spent some time running now it's important you asked me about kind of heel strike and and where we are within the foot we're thinking about the same thing throughout and that's just to move from here to there as efficiently as we can understanding that we will typically as a s as I said self-organize towards our most efficient pattern and the only time we actually think about doing something different than that is when somebody outside tells us to do something different that messes up the efficiency most of the time so for me it's uh like the big queuing and we we talked about this yesterday right we said flatfoot contact and if you think about being flatfoot contact and all of the different things that you do all the different gate patterns you do the velocity is what determines where in the foot you actually will contact so if you're walking and you're thinking flat foot you'll actually go heal strike you roll over and you tow off and if you're sprinting as fast as you can you're thinking back foot contact you will actually plant a flex slightly just prior to ground contact and you'll contact the ground more towards your toes than you will if you just walking or or running or jogging we should clarify for people dors flexion is when your toes come close up towards your shin correct uh you're you're narrowing that angle between your your foot and your you know front lower part of your lower limb and um planter flexion is the opposite pointing the toe I think uh attempting to go ballerina in point but hopefully unless you're a ballerina you're not getting all the way there you know to get to your initial Point as well it's like how many of us were taught to Sprint up high on our toes when we were kids like we all were right get up on your toes keep your keep your your arms at 90 degrees and and get up really really tall and that's totally opposite to what we should be doing yeah sometimes kids when they run when they're real little you know like three or four like when they're just running around the house Barefoot they'll like run on their toes um so what you're basically saying if I understand correctly is the speed should dictate the foot strike correct okay I think that's a very important point for people um who are interested in running or already running the speed should dictate the foot strike yeah that unless there's a problem to resolve yes that a coach has told you you need to resolve and how to do it you shouldn't be thinking about heel striking or tow striking you should be thinking about the speed that you're trying to cover the distance in and if you're thinking about anything just think about being flat just think about being flat and the foot will take care of itself due to the velocity let's talk a little bit more about body position and running mechanics um there may be no hard and fast rules to this but where should my eyes be you know I've heard oh you want to be looking assuming I'm not in a race against anyone I'm you know heading out for a run doesn't matter which duration um does it matter where I place my my vision um in sprinting 100% I feel like the longer the the distance is the less it probably matters because the velocity is so much slower I feel like when you're if you're going out for a jog and it's 10-minute miles you're probably looking pretty much straight ahead of you you know and if it's a little bit darker and maybe you're on a rocky surface or something or a little bit uneven surface you're looking down a little bit but it's it doesn't seem to really have a systemic effect on how you move but it does when you sprint because obviously your body is going to follow your eyes so if you're running down the track and you're sprinting as fast you can and your eyes creep up and you start looking up then the chin is going to follow that and you just start this extension pattern in the entirety of the system soon as you lift your chin up you get into more extension through the rib cage and the spine and then the lumbar and everything gets extended you end up standing up so more arched back bright posture for those aren't familiar with flexion and extension um unless say otherwise if we talk about flexion we're talking about assuming the dreaded c-shaped position that everyone seems so good at these days collapsed toward their uh midline uh versus extension where your chin is up and away from the chest and your um right upright posture and if the eyes come up first you're going to end up in what's known as a hyper extended position it's too much extension where really what we want the eyes to do is just come with the rest of the Torso so how I the Quee that I use for the sprinters is allow your torso to determine when the chin and when the eyes come up not the opposite way around because if the eyes come first the chin follows and then we get this disconnect between the head and the thorax and the pelvis and there's just too much extension we end up kind of just pushing our way down the track rather than bouncing yeah there's a a wonderful movement in yoga that's helped me a lot in my weightlifting uh over the years I did a little bit of yoga when I lived in San Diego um because they had good yoga classes where you they they have you do this kind of ragd doll hanging over at the waist position looks like a Jefferson deadlift for the for the gym rats or the Olympic lifters rounded lower back and then they have you stand up from that position but you deliberately start at your lower spine and and W unpeel yourself from that folded over position never letting the head lead yeah but you know so basically like a chain coming up from the spine and then the the head come moves last I mean it's moving the whole time but it uh you're looking straightforward last as opposed to what you're saying where you lift the head first that's been tremendously helpful to me in movements in the gym which I think have helped me a lot like um glute ham raises where you you know you're essentially in that position and you come all the way up and then you go into a hamstring cow or uh a deadlift or any kind of movement where you have where I'm going from torso bent forward to up I remember to move the Torso first and the head last and I'll just say in my own experience the strength increases that come from doing it that way as opposed to moving the head first and trying to then pull the weight up it's remarkable yeah you're we are all so much stronger than we think if we um engage the motor neurons in the proper sequence so I think that's what you're referring to 100% okay do you um here's a question for you when you were first uh taught how to squat were you told to look at the ceiling or up on the wall yeah I was told um the weight will go where my eyes go but now I now I where did that come from I still don't understand where that came from I don't know I mean some of the most useful things that have been told to me over the years that made a tremendous difference would be like this um again borrowed from Yo guys who brought it into the gym then when I talk to proper you know uh people like proper biomechanics folks like yourself or Kelly Star at they go yeah of course you have to move your spine and torso before um but one of the most useful things for the squat and for the deadlift um has been because it's very difficult to think about many things at once especially when you're on pulling or or trying to squat heavy loads is to move uh my chest and my hips at the same time together so that you don't end up doing the the dreaded um uh good morning back Rays followed by standing up right um so moving them in unison so thinking about my chest and my hips moving at the same time that's been tremendously helpful and tends to put the head in the right position and the other one is oh right when deadlift to not think about pulling the weight off the floor but rather pushing my feet into the ground while driving back you know and these little things end up making a huge difference not just in terms of the amount of weight that you can pull or or squat but the safety of the movement just so much more stable to drive the feet into the ground yeah and you think why did why was I trying to pull a weight off the ground all I had to do was like push my feet hard into the ground and hold on to this bar and boom you're up that easy it's wild how um we pick up bad habits it's also so wild how quickly those bad habits can be resolved so in keeping with that back to running I I believe that everyone can and should run most everyone there are certain people who can't run for uh you know various reasons but um but that people who can walk very likely can run and I'm becoming more of a Believer with every moment I spend with you that um sprinting is more valuable than jogging that sprinting is more valuable than any kind of distance run and I'm going to offend a lot of people but I love longdistance running so I'm offending myself um yesterday we didn't Sprint but we did a lot of skipping let's talk about skipping and yes I'm talking about Skip Skip Skip this okay this thing I'm not going to sing the rest of that skipping is such a natural movement for people most people and it feels so damn good and it's actually a bit more taxing than people believe and I came out of that workout skipping yesterday from skipping yesterday feeling like my hips were nice and open tons of extension my posture up I feel like I grew an inch I I was strong in the gym this morning I just feel incredible what is it about skipping and why do you have Sprinter skip so much and why isn't why aren't more people talking about skipping and yes we will return to to gate stuff but I think we have to talk about skipping yeah uh yeah first of all we skipped a lot because the reality is you could not Sprint and that is the reality for almost everybody because we stop sprinting when we're whatever AG some people stop sprinting at 15 Sometimes some people it's 20 but very few people are actually sprinting through their 20s and next to nobody is sprinting through their 30s so we know that the movement of sprinting or running fast and we kind of know what what this does and why this is good for you right we know that yeah moving our body intensively with intensity is probably something we should be able to do for as long as we possibly can but we can't because typically we've still got pretty good engines into our 30s and 40s and 50s but we don't have the bodies to be able to handle the stresses and the forces that this engine could put into the body so our tissue and our joints just is not able to handle all of these forces if you were to go out and Sprint yesterday even if we did you know we ended up warming up for how long an hour and a half warmup if we did a let's say a real proper warmup we warmed up for 30 minutes and then I just said Andrew I want you to Sprint as fast as you possibly can for 50 metters that's not going to end well for most people maybe you could get through it yesterday but for most people that wouldn't end well you end up with a pull or a strain or a couple days of just feeling n well because we just don't do that and we don't have the tissue capacity to be able to handle that anymore or the joint capacity you know there's so many people as soon they they they have to run really quickly somewhere and they just didn't know that they had to do it or they're playing backyard basketball or football and they tweak a hamstring or TW tweak a calf or something even worse right happens all the time we just do not have the tissue capacity anymore to handle those forces so what do we do instead and I I typically recommend two activities one is up hills there's a lot less stress on the tissue and the joint system by sprinting up a hill than there is on sprinting on a straightway but second I think more important is actually skipping and I and I'm I'm with you I don't know why we stop skipping I think it's associated with uh only childlike Behavior but that's like saying jump rope is only associated with childlike behavior and I'm a big believer in skipping rope we'll talk about skipping rope but I think that's it um yeah I mean maybe this conversation or this portion of the conversation could be titled you know um let's normalize skipping yeah for adults absolutely it felt awesome yeah you can cover a lot of ground quickly heart rate gets up but not to an outrageous degree you're not sucking for airh but it does feel a little silly if you're not on a track but you've mentioned uh you've what's the longest distance you've ever skipped 10 miles did you get some funny looks I got a few nice and you're a real tall guy you're 6'3 so you can't really uh hide uh very easily that was in the park so there wasn't a lot of people okay but I skipped for uh 20 minutes every morning on the roads I get a few honks that's okay I me they could be honks of approval could well be yeah or something else but you think about it like it's you you're actually taxing the coordination patterns and the tissue and the joints in pretty similar ways as if we were going to Sprint we're working on pushing the knee behind the hip getting into this knee behind butt pattern this hip extension pattern which is so important and and I know this is a a topic of conversation that you had with Kelly When Kelly was on here the importance of getting your knee behind your butt and finding and searching for opportunities to do that more often because we lose that so easily so skipping allows us to do that secondary to that is the coordination aspect between how we coordinate the flexion extension at the ankle the flexion extension at the knee and the fle extension at the hip and we do that in a very similar way of sprinting where each of them stiffen at this at this time that is um uh considered throughout the entirety of the system where it's just like the spring the leg acts as a spring where if you think about when we jog or when we run we're kind of running on our ankles and knees a little bit we don't feel like we're really using our hips when you're running a 10-minute mile it's all it's a lot of stress through the foot it's a lot of stress through the the cast and by the way I'm not anti- running or anti- jogging I jog and I run and I still do all that stuff I'm not saying now stop doing all that and just go and Skip I'm just saying find some opportunities to also skip because skipping where ashy can tax the system in very similar ways as pretty high-intensity sprinting I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor ag1 ag1 is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink with adaptogens I've been taking AG 1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring this podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still take ag1 is because it is the highest quality and most complete foundational nutritional supplement what that means is that ag1 ensures that you're getting all the necessary vitamins minerals and other micronutrients to form a strong foundation for your daily Health ag1 also has probiotics and prebiotics that support a healthy gut microbiome your gut microbiome consists of trillions of microorganisms that line your digestive trct and impact things such as your immune system status your metabolic Health your hormone health and much more so I've consistently found that when I take ag1 daily my digestion is improved my immune system is more robust and my mood and mental focus are at their best in fact if I could take Just One supplement that supplement would be ag1 if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 with your order of ag1 again go to drink a1.com huberman to claim this special offer today's episode is also brought To Us by Helix sleep Helix sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep needs now I've spoken many times before on this and other podcasts about the fact that getting a great night's sleep is the foundation of mental health physical health and performance when we aren't sleeping well or enough on a consistent basis everything suffers and when we are sleeping well and enough our mental health physical health and performance in all Endeavors improves marketly now the mattress you sleep on makes a huge difference in the quality of sleep that you get each night how soft it is or how firm it is how breathable it is all play into your comfort and need to be tailored to your unique sleep needs if you go to the Helix website you can take a brief two-minute quiz which will ask you questions such as do you sleep on your back your side or your stomach do you tend to run hot or cold during the night things of that sort now maybe you know the answers to those questions maybe you don't either way Helix will match you to the ideal mattress for you for me that turned out to be the dusk mattress I started sleeping on the dusk mattress about 3 and A2 years ago and it's been Far and Away the best sleep that I've ever had so much so that when I travel and I'm not on my dusk mattress I really miss it and when I get home I just find that I sleep so much better because of that mattress if you'd like to try Helix you can go to helixsleep.com huberman take that two-minute sleep quiz and Helix will match you to a mattress that's customized for you right now Helix is giving up to 20% off on all mattress orders again that's helixsleep.com huberman to get up to 20% off I want to hover a little bit on knee behind butt so knee behind shout Kelly starett shout out Kelly starett I mean if you think about this folks like knee behind butt means into extension so the hips are opening so to speak I know in yoga they say hip opening means a different thing but hip extension generally means posture is more elevated chin away from chest generally I mean you could get knee behind butt with your chin down but it's tougher just the the um sternum comes up um kind of naturally puts us into external rotation so think uh thumbs out to the side like The Fawns as opposed to inward then you think about the the typical sitting standing walking jogging pattern of everybody yeah especially if you're a commuter um doesn't matter if you're on a subway bus um car or otherwise or plane you're you're folded in and so what I'm starting to realize is that knee uh knee be behind butt ankle elevated sternum up I mean these are the Hallmarks of locomotion yeah and so it's interesting that walking well jogging in particular seems to follow this kind of like forward folded kind of like almost like falling forward kind of thing I'm not trying to beat up on jogging because I also like to jog but I wonder if minute for minute skipping would be a much better activity than jogging for people who want to elevate their heart rate you know all all the Standard General adaptations that occur with exercise improved insulin regulation etc etc um do you think for the person who has not skipped in a while to go out and Skip for a couple minutes is the way to do it or should they skip for a lap and then walk a lap what would be the way to break into this yeah I think I think probably the the worst thing to do is go out for a 10m skip don't do that I think we start off with like a 30second skip 30 second jog 30 second skip 30 second jog or 30 second skip followed by a 30 second walk and the difference is you'll feel this right if you think about when you Skip and we talked about this a lot yesterday I was asking you to be expressive Express Yourself think about what your posture is and how you're holding yourself you don't really feel you don't seem to think about those things when you jog you just Jog and as you said you're kind of closed and small and short and you're just trying to get through it right the heart rate gets up to whatever it is and yeah you got some good exercise but skipping here's your opportunity to truly Express Yourself be big and free and open and bouncy and rhythmical all of these things that were at one point in our lives pretty important to us and we lose and that's what's that's is what we get from sprinting right the best sprinters are the ones who can express themselves truly maximally like totally let go and it doesn't have to be like massively powerful like the skips that we were doing yesterday were what we call low amplitude skips where we're just sort of skipping back and forth but you're still asking you to be tall and expressive and swing and be stiff on the ground and I feel like like there's as I said there's so many different benefits to this whether it's just been the plyometric benefit whether it's the fasal benefit whether it because this is such a a crossbody coordinative aspect there's all sorts of brain benefits to that as you know it's uh I mean it's it's just there's so much more benefits to skipping than there is to just jogging so the the on-ramp for me when I talk to people about the benefits of skipping is just to put it in their jogs so I was talking to one of your photographers yesterday and he said how do I do this I usually Jog and I I'm I'm going like 10-minute mile Pace I said well next time you jog just in you know go for your jogs you know go for about a mile or so when you tune doing a typical Jog and then just go back and forth between skipping and jogging every every 30 seconds or or so and I guarantee you that you will feel better with every skip that you do every single one because there's this again this self-organizing coordinative aspect to it where you start feeling a little bit more bouncy a little lighter a little bit more coordinated a little bit more rhythmic which feeds your jogging so for me that's probably the best onramp is just to work it into your current jogs and then from there start getting a little bit more powerful with it a little bit more expressive with it now we start driving the thigh up and back and getting a little a little bit more hip extension start being you know now we can start talking about skips for distance where you're trying say okay from here that tree that's 50 MERS away how many steps do I need to take to get to that 50 meter away tree so doing things like that yeah I'm fascinated by activities both physical and mental that facilitate the transition into a more difficult activity physical or mental I started to think about this when I started working on my book in Earnest it's very hard to just jump into writing but I noticed that if I did some drawing listen to a lecture while I was drawing and I I do anatomical drawings very easy to transition into writing I enjoy drawing I'm not trying to accomplish much with it but it's a very natural activity for me and just very easy to drop into a deep Groove for writing for hours really and then I started talking to a musician friend of mine who he's a songwriter very accomplished songwriter and he does the same and then I saw a post from Joanie Mitchell that she would paint before she would sing and I think these transition activities that are natural for us that don't feel as constricted by distance over time or you know sometimes I put my drawings on social media but they're really for me their way of kind of um thinking about the biology from a circuit standpoint is is very personal and kind of abstract M um as you talk about skipping it seems a little bit the same where you know skipping we're not necessarily trying to become the fastest Skipper in the world or beat our yesterday's skipping time we're just trying to skip with more as you said more expression more enjoyment but perhaps it sounds like indeed it can help transition into a faster gate with what we're doing for jogging or for running or transition us right into into to sprinting and I think that these um transition points for physical and mental activities are very important because these days there's so many tools and protocols you know dare I say and people start to feel like oh I have to do all of these things how would I do this right how am I supposed to meditate and get sunlight and do you know I'm already exercising a ton now now you want me to skip the way you describe it is completely different it's saying no you're still doing your cardio quote unquote but maybe you do your zone two cardio and you incorporate some skipping which will make your zone two faster for you or your your your high-intensity interval training more um you'll feel more pliable more explosive I that I think that's that's part of it I think Step One is incorporating in so you can actually be comfortable skipping and step two is now can we add a little bit more speed force velocity to that skip where it becomes in and of itself a workout where you're skipping as hard as you can for 50 m and walking back and doing that t to to 15 times is that would you consider that a solid workout for skipping that would be a great skipping workout skipping 50 m walking back yeah doing that 10 to 15 times yeah because that's that is safe if you warm up I'm not saying go out and do a maximal effort skip for 50 m without doing a warm-up do a good warmup first that includes some low amplitude skips and maybe some jogs and some stretches do that for 10 to 15 minutes and then do some maximal amplitude skips for over 50 m that's a great workout in the Nu itself like a lot a lot of really beneficial plyometric work being done there let's talk about concentric and Ecentric aspects of running and skipping so folks concentric generally associated with the lifting phase although sometimes it's the pulling phase if it's a pullup and then Ecentric would be the lowering phase of of some movement um in running where's the concentric where's the Ecentric for the uninformed if you could just tell us uh well in running conent entric is pretty important because most of running is pretty concentric dominant you're on the ground for quite a long time and you push behind your Center Mass for quite a long time in striding and sprinting which are the two faster Gates so you've got walking jogging running striding and sprinting striding and sprinting which is upwards of so striding if you think about being 75 to 90% or 80% to 95% of your maximum Sprint speed that's called striding that's called striding and it's sprinting is anything above that where actually it's purely truly maximal as we said these are different uh gate patterns entirely um those sprinting and striding is almost entirely Ecentric entirely break you're breaking it's all Breaking it's all Breaking forces is how well do you handle those breaking forces if you do not handle those breaking forces well you're not fast it's and and concentric any concentric Force ability or concentric El Force capacity is just not a differentiator at elite elite speed in fact it seems to be reverse so we we did a lot of testing through the 90s when I was up in Calgary I was working for the Canadian sports center in Calgary uh starting in 1994 or so and was there for a long time and we were we had you know because 27 different national teams are based there and all of the University of Calgary uh sports teams were also there we could test out the yin-yang for hundreds of athletes every single day and one of the things that we tested was was concentric isometric and Ecentric Force capacities and which ones actually related to being actually good at your sport and almost every single sport the concentric Force capacity and you pick the one whether it's Peak whether it's rate of force application whether it's time time to Peak conent Force capacity just did not at all differentiate between the elite performers in that Sport and the sub Elite performers in that that sport but Ecentric did all across the board I'm absolutely struck by this stride comes before Sprint thing and and I'm remembering back to to uh to cross country where they said we're going to do a stride workout at the end of a run we get back to the the track at school and do some strides and um I'm just chuckling to myself because I always would tell myself in subsequent years you know okay I'm going to Sprint but I'm going to Sprint at you know 50% of my allout speed yeah so I always think of allout speed for me as um somebody's chasing me with a a syringe filled with poison okay and I've got to get away okay um that's all outspeed I don't want to die so 50% of that 60 70 you know it's sub you know and I'm measuring it subjectively I'm not doing this by heart rates or anything like that and indeed anytime I've done 100% all out like in my mind imagining you know someone trying to trying to really take my life and I'm running all out I end up with this lower back thing because of the you know it you get hurt yeah um but striding sounds like something that people could work up to how do you know after doing the uh skip workout that you described that you're quote unquote ready to stride and start doing a stride workout and I should mention that the these workouts because we did one yesterday um you finish them feeling great this is an aspect of exercise that I think most people don't talk about unfortunately that this leave it all on the mat you know you take every set to failure in the gym or your you know these long runs where you're just shredded they they're not great for teaching people how to be healthy because people are exhausted afterwards they're tired they overtrain quickly and then people say there's no such thing as overtraining it's like yeah if you can sleep all day eat all day and your profession is to do this but there is such a thing as having a stressful life and wanting to be healthy and exercising and trying to incorporate that in a way that feeds the rest of your life yeah and I think these workouts that we did the workout we did yesterday excuse me um left me feeling you know posturally energetically mood Wise It's feeling great I slept great last night felt great this morning had a great workout in the gym as I mentioned earlier so I want to encourage people to give this a try and in doing that I want to give them a road map so a warmup of 10 to 15 minutes 50 meter or so skip um could they do it on lawn dirt or concrete does it matter no it doesn't great yeah if you've a really flat grass perfect okay but if if you if you don't and do it on concrete no problem okay so basically no cost to this except a little bit of time and attention um 10 to 15 of those you know 50 m out walk back repeat after a warm up and if you need a little bit longer recovery than the probably 90 seconds it takes to walk back take it not a big deal the quality here is a determining Factor as you said you're not trying to get really fatigued from plyometric work this is a plyometric session M you want to be kind of fresh going into each one and that's going to take you know for most people doing a maximal skip over the course of 50 50 m it's 90 seconds is about enough but if you're really explosive and you're a really good Skipper it might be 3 minutes that's fine as you said you want to feel good at the end of that you don't want to be beasted at the end of that now if you can do it where you're if we transition say from the skips and you can stride really well and if you can stride really well maybe you can Sprint really well really well that doesn't necessarily mean that you shouldn't be tired at the end of the session but the quality of the movement has to be the governor there not the capacity not I got to get the work done and I don't care how that work looks or what it looks like I just got to get it done no with high intense work with Sprint work your your Governor is always the quality of the work what does it look like what does it feel like it's a lot like resistance training in that way 100% always quality so um how does one transition into striding and what what what does that look like this is saying okay I'm going to I'm going to Sprint but it's not a Sprint because I'm going to hold back a bit but how do you hold back and still have the expressive part because the expressive part it's a little hard to describe in words but yesterday you were encouraging Rob and I to get us you know tall with our posture as if we were being pulled up by a string from our heads and it has a profound psychological effect and then you just feel your your body opening up in natural movement you don't have to think about coordinating the hand lift it just you're you know like this full Bo out it's really wonderful if we describe the difference between all of the gate patterns just through the amount of space that you take up on the planet so when you when you walk it's a small space when you jog you're taking up a little bit more space and when you run it's a bit more space when you start to stride it's more space again and then when you sprint you're up here and you're being maximally expressive so just think about it from that perspective the other part is jogging and running typically happens behind your Center Mass you crash onto the ground and you push back you have this propulsive phase there's not a lot of a break of breaking phase here there's a long propulsive phase that happens with the foot pushing back behind the center mass striding and sprinting happens in front of the center Mass there's an actually a longer Ecentric phase where you drive a lot of force into the ground it's in front of the center mass and then you Propel yourself off and it's a very short propulsive phase so think about it that way so it's bigger shape and it's primarily more in front and it's also as I said this is important you can't Sprint and most of the people that are listening to this cannot Sprint are you telling us to not Sprint no no I'm I'm what I'm saying is you do not have that strategy available to you most of us like everybody who's listening to this almost everybody will be able to walk and if you can walk as you said you you could probably Jog and most of the people on the planet can walk Jog and maybe they can run most people on the the planet can't stride they can't get any faster than 75% of what their capacity is because they will they just can't do that anymore if you're a kid you can do that you can run you can you can stride along all day but you get to a certain point where our tissues and our joint systems and we just do not have the capacity to run that fast safely and we definitely don't have it when we're sprinting and the difference here is when you're striding it's essentially a a pretty simple traditional spring Mass system the body acts as a spring just whether it's 50% on the front side 50% on the back side you hit and you bounce off you hit and you bounce off where sprinting is a little bit different this is the work of Dr Ken Clark who's a good friend of mine that he he uh published this in I think in 201 uh 189 it's called a two Mass system where it's the body is not acting as a spring there's a secondary mass of the shank and the foot that's contributing to up to about 8% of the total Force Through contact so this Elite Sprinter is hitting the ground so hard that so there's another Mass that's added to the spring and that's what I'm saying that's not available to you because you can't move your limbs fast enough and you don't have the range of motion that's big enough to be able to get that sort of velocity there's a dozen players in the NFL that can do that every Elite Sprinter is actually a sprinter most every other athlete and most every other sport can't actually Sprint they're just they're operating as spring Mass they don't have that secondary Mass because they can't move their limbs fast enough when Dr Peter AA was on this podcast and elsewhere he talked about one of the major causes of death mostly in older people is they'll fall they'll be mobile they'll catch some sort of of infection um related to contact with the bed or um you know C postsurgical lack of circulation and that's what takes them out I was shocked to learn this right I mean I thought it would be heart attack or cerebrovascular disease or that instead but that led to this whole notion that I think is gaining more popularity nowadays that part of longevity is maintaining things like grip strength one's ability to jump and land and jumping and Landing is Ecentric control yeah my mom's turning 80 this year and she's fortunately in very good health cor my dad's already 80 he was on this podcast and for anyone that saw that he's clearly in very good health but I worry about them and I worry mostly about a step down off a curb a step going down a stairwell that is not controlled and then a slip and then a fall and then the break and then the immobility and then the the sequence that AA and others have referred to would skipping be a good activity for people in their 60s 70s or 80s to undertake carefully as a way to learn Ecentric control because I'll be honest I've seen some wonderful inspiring videos of um people in their 70s and 80s jumping off of boxes doing PLO type work in the gym I don't know many folks in their 70s and 80s who are going to embark on that yeah but you can skip kind of small skips then you can do larger skips you can skip anywhere it's free um if you approach it carefully you probably don't even need a trainer there's some videos now of you having us Skip and um I you know here I'm like inspired to start a skipping movement uh with you um for all these reasons U you don't need even need a piece of equipment probably even do a Barefoot on grass if you couldn't afford shoes right 100% what are your thoughts on folks who are um in the 6 up Club yeah um skipping yeah I think you've nailed it I think that is so important that Ecentric control or the Ecentric capacity is the one that we really lose the ability to handle ourselves eccentrically is just it's it's we don't do that work anymore everything that we do is concentric and nature and uh it is it's not just Elite Sport I said before that the differentiator is always in the East Centric Force capacities in Elite Sport also in Us in gen pop we have we lose the ability to apply Ecentric Force whether it's fast or maximal so 100% I think it's so important my dad um was an elite athlete when he was younger and has probably averaged four days a week running for almost his entire life good for him yeah he's 78 in 2019 he ran the New York City marathon ran 502 so he's at at 74 or 73 years old and he doesn't do that anymore but he still runs 4 days a week and he runs about 20 to 25 miles and two of those days are skipping sessions where he walks 30 seconds he skips for 30 seconds and then he strides as fast as he can as fast as his capacity will allow for 30 seconds and then he walks then he skips and then he strides and he walks and it's it's it's so key it really is like it's it's for me like the ability to express yourself maximally through running and I'm already said I don't feel like most people can do this I don't know if there is a better single metric to as a measurement for whatever word you want to use here Vitality or health than the ability to safely Express maximal speed of of the you as you as an individual like you choose V2 Max you choose all of these different things that you might come up with I don't feel like any of them are as good as the ability to just run maximally so let's start with that if we feel like that is important and you can argue whether whether it's the the most important or the 10th most important we know it's important if we know that's important how do we get there and as you said I think skipping is the way so I'm I'm on board with the skipping movement let's get everybody skipping because it is as I said this is your ability to be petric to work on those Ecentric Force capacities and move in a way in which you can actually express yourself again there's this um peculiarity to um anything related to health and Public Health in particular uh for instance a colleague of mine at Stanford um Dr David Spiegel he's our uh Vice chair of Psychiatry and he and his father actually founded this area of Psychiatry which is basically hypnosis for the treatment of trauma for pain relief for smoking cessation and they are tremendously good data to support it as a practice it's actually approved by the American Psychiatric association one of only four I think behavioral things uh EMDR cognitive behavioral therapy hypnosis and I think there's another in any case the problem it's called hypnosis and people hear hypnosis yeah and their mind goes to boing and squawking like a chicken on a stage this is why we refer to deliberate respiration as opposed to breath work in our study St our clinical trials on that which David and I have published Etc and it's it's not euphemism the the issue is the name is a separator often and that's a shame when there's a practice that's very valuable Yoga Nidra non-sleep deep rest right right yeah yeah I have tremendous respect for Yoga Nidra and all of its um early uh creators and but the language is a separator I'm sorry sorry and and there's a there's a public health mission that to me is more important than the naming just say that and I'll take the heat for it with no guilt whatsoever skipping unless it's skipping rope has this connotation of of childlike activity let's just be honest and adults doing childlike Behavior while not necessarily a problem in its own right I mean look at all these adults with social media accounts acting like children and the children acting like adults different discussion entirely but what if we were to give it a different name not with the intention of pretending it's not skipping yeah but to relieve people's guilt and shame about doing it um is it bounding bounding is a little bit um more nondescript for most people um I'm having this conversation with you openly in public here in front of many many people um to illustrate a couple of points one is that the name often times people like I'm not going to skip down the street but there's so much value to this that I think it'd be a real shame to to lose the opportunity to have it um Wick out to many many millions of people it because it's called skipping yeah it's plyrics it's plyrics great love it and it is a like bounding is left to right so you go left right left right left right left bounding is really really difficult extremely challenging skipping is a regression from bounding so if you can't bound if you can bound great go and do some bounding chances are if you can't Sprint you can't bound like it's really really hard to do real true you know high quality bounding we can all skip so look at it that way this is petrics this is just the your most simple and probably for most people your most effective means of giving your body a petric activity how else you going do you jumping onto the box is not app ply metric that's all concentric it's basically useless it's a waste of time let's find Ecentric things to do and what is your best Ecentric or the the one that is the simplest the one as you said we spent entire childhood doing it's familiar to us there's something innate in this there really is skipping so just think about it as being a petric I'm going to do my plyos today and by the way this isn't something that I've just made up there is not a Sprint group on the planet that don't skip every single Sprinter skips every single one of them because of the of the importance of this specific gate pattern it's really important I love that thank you um and you also saved me from trying to find a name that uh you know um petric I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors function last year I became a function member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing function provides over 100 Advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily Health this snapshot offers you with insights on your heart health Hormone Health immune functioning nutrient levels and much more they've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful Plastics and tests for paases or forever chemicals function not only provides testing of over a 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health but it also analyzes the results and provides insights from Top Doctors who are expert in the relevant areas for example in one of my first tests with function I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood function not only helped me detect that but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels which included limiting my tuna consumption I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with Knack and acetylcysteine both of which can support glutathione production and detoxification and I should say by taking a second function test that approach worked comprehensive blood testing is vitally important there's so many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be detected in a blood test the problem is blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated in contrast I've been super impressed by function Simplicity and at the level of cost it is very affordable as a consequence I decided to join their scientific Advisory Board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast if you'd like to try function you can go to function health.com huberman function currently has a weight list of over 250,000 people but they're offering Early Access to hubman podcast listeners again that's function health.com huberman to get early access to function one thing that people will immediately realize when they go out and and Skip when they do their apply metric skipping um that's a little bit hard to understand just from hearing us have this conversation but just trust me on this two things that are very surprising and immensely positive at least two things one is this expressive component and the way it reshapes your psychology and your mood I want to set that aside but make sure we return to that the other is the um crossbody coordination of movement the fact that one knee is back toward the butt on one side and the opposite arm is raised up just naturally as you skip this is just you know in fact if you're wondering now oh goodness do I actually know how to skip um that occurred to me a couple times yesterday because I had many cameras on me I thought do I still remember how to skip I'd been ski skipping the night before in preparation I didn't know we were going to skip but I've always worked some skips in if nobody's looking I'm a skiing private kind of guy um until now until now now I skip with pride in public um plyrics I will ply metric in public that's right but one thing that was interesting I would think okay we we'd get back after walking and think okay we're going to skip again how do I do this it's basically I I would think about lunging kind of a fast lunge out and then it automatically would put me into that that motion skiing um but this cross body coordination is incredible for purposes of motor neuron coordination across the body for the fascial component can we talk a little bit more about crossbody coordination because I'd like at some point to talk about sprinting a little bit because even if people aren't going to Sprint this idea that when we're sprinting we're not just turning over our legs faster of course the arms are pumping but the arms and legs are coordinated in a very interesting way that the forces are actually running like a like an axe from uh across from one shoulder down the leg and from the other shoulder which is going to sound very um complicated to people but you'll explain it so crossbody coordination um when we walk we do this some people don't they're kind of robotic yeah yeah but most people flow their arms as they walk if if we were to put a camera above the Earth and look down on everybody you would see this very distinctly at every single gate starting with walking we rotate so the the pelvis rotates up and down and forward and back so it oscillates and undulates and then the shoulders counter oscillate and counter undulate so the shoulders go back forward and backward and up and down just pay attention to this next time you're out for a walk you can feel your hips going backwards and forwards and also going up and down if it didn't go up and down you'd trip yourself every step and the shoulders do the same and then you have a spine which is this column of a bunch of different pieces that connects the shoulder to the pelvis which also rotates side bends and flexes and extends the whole system is this big torsional system this crossbody system and some people take maximum utility of this system and you can see it like some of the best movers some of the best sprinters you just watch them and you can you can just see how they wind up and they coil into every single step and they just use this crossbody coordination so effectively and as you said some others are just it doesn't seem like there's any rotation going on here at all what looks better to you who looks better it's the ones that are using this effectively that look okay that just looks better I don't know why necessarily but that looks way more athletic we think robot dance versus somebody who really knows how to move their hips and shoulders in coordination we'll talk about dance a little bit later you have an interesting relationship to music that I think is very relevant here we'll get back to that but I'm seeding the conversation but yeah it's um when the shoulders and the hips are moving in unison it's it's like magic it really is yeah it really is and just feel this when you walk like when you're going out for your next walk just try to pay attention to what your shoulders are doing and what your hips are doing and start thinking am I getting my knee behind my butt when I'm walking and what does that feel like at my Hip Flex or my quad and as I do that what's happening with the opposite shoulder and is that getting wound up and is that coiling properly am I taking advantage of the extremely innate extremely natural movement tendencies that we all have or have I because of the way in which I've lived or some of the things that I've done or maybe even some of the things that somebody has told me tried to be really square and linear with everything I've done because think about it right when we're taught to run when we're younger any excessive movement outside of in a straight line has been told to us Ah that's inefficient you're wasting energy you're bleeding all your all your force not understanding the actual biomechanical mechanism of the pelvis the shoulders and the spine that connects them and how we are actually built to rotate into Bend you know so it's and that's not to say by the way that more is better everything is a is an inverted u in this world almost you know there's a goalie loocks effect to this it's what is right for you some people will use this torsional system extremely effectively and there'll be a lot of it and some they'll be a little bit less they're a little bit more linear and they'll still be good that's all dependent upon their own individual and unique structure their morphology their genetics how they're built and how they're born what to do what they do with it as they as they age but the bottom line is we are all rotational beings and we need to try to find ways to take advantage of those rotational forces rather than to constrain them it's one of the reasons why I really dislike this anti-rotation um terminology that's come into many of the exercise many of the exercises that we do in the way room this exercise is about anti-rotation why do you want to be anti-rotation we are rotational beings you're anti- excessive rotation but not anti-rotation so I feel like that just as you were saying before with skipping that's the wrong terminology for me and that's just sending the entirely the wrong message to everybody about the importance of us being a rotational being yeah naming matters it does especially in in exercise and anything related to um uh dare I call it Wellness anything mental health physical health and performance the naming matters because it can take people's minds off track from the major point it can uh be a separator as as we mentioned before in the best case it can be uh an aggregator um I have to wonder with people walking around looking at their phones all the time are they losing the crossbody coordination I I um snuck in because I uh to one talk at South by Southwest I got a ticket I got a pass I don't mean I snuck in I mean I I went there for just one talk the other day and I was walking through the hallways this is a big meeting tons of people and it was incredible everyone was walking looking at their phone now of course there's a program that's on an app these days so you're saving paper so that's good right but it was remarkable people were like walking and reading at the same time so I don't want to make more of this than we have data for but this can't be good this just can't be good I think that's a really good point I haven't I haven't thought about that actually but I think that's a really good point I have a rule when I'm walking that if I if my phone buzzes and I want to pick up my phone I stop I stop I get out of the way of all all the other walkers M I push myself up against the building and I Look to what's on my phone if I feel it's important and then I start walking again m i I just despise people who walk and look at the phone at the same time because that's what you see you see this unnatural constrained overly flexed posture and if you spend too much time doing that I don't think you need data you know that's not good it's not good to walk that way that's not the way we're supposed to walk again it's it's all about coming back to Let's express ourselves let's understand what our bodies are supposed to be able to do and find ways to continue to have that ability as we a age this isn't it let's talk about expression through movement um and let's use the extremes as a starting point I find that useful in any kind of scientific conversation you take the the extreme outcome so um the person who is trying to take up as little space as possible chin toward the chest fold it in thumbs toward the midline so so-called internal rotation eyes down trying to make themselves small mhm I don't need to spend another 5 Seconds explaining all the psychological phenotypes that's associated with and the way it makes us feel now of course it's possible to curl up in a small ball and think amazing things about the world and oneself but generally those things are not um happening the same time let think about the other extreme and let's talk about him usin bolt this also be a fun opportunity for people to learn a little bit more about usin let's start there what is so special about usin bolt besides the fact that he's still the fastest man in the world and what about his willingness to express himself do you think contributed to becoming the fastest person in the world not just feeling great that he's the fastest guy in the world and therefore who wouldn't feel great yeah yeah using is is unique if we look over the history of some of the elite male sprinters there was a time you know when I started getting into the sport the way to be be as an elite male Sprinter was hyperfocused hyper intense if we think about Mo green stalking behind his blocks and licking his lips getting ready for this basically he's going to war and it seemed like so many of the sprinters were trying to encapsulate this kind of feeling like sprinting is it's Macho it's ego it's I'm I'm coming here to knock you out and then Usain came along with the ex exact opposite and I think you know it's just he's out there having fun he's as I told the story about jod a little bit earlier right she was for a long time she would didn't connect herself with the activity they were two separate beings she was doing something that no she no longer really connected with and you say they're like this like he was really expressing his entire being in his in the way in which he went around about this task of sprinting 100 m or sprinting 200 m and I feel like that is such an important piece at all with All Sport and probably with all within all things you know if you can connect your entire way of being with the thing that you're spending most of your time doing chances are you're going to be really successful at that thing and if you look at all the other sports right it's it's the ones that you can tell they're just really confident in who they are in what they do how they express themselves and whether and that doesn't necessarily mean that you have to be you same B and playing around at the line and doing things like this and you know jumping around and do he always like that does anyone know when he was a kid oh no he was yeah he's he's he's a kid he's a big kid he still is he's he's a he's just a you know he he brings this this this really childlike intensity to things like he's still intense he's still he wants to kill you but he's you know he'll laughing your face just before he does it you know like I I love that about him but when but that's not every body that's not every Elite Sprinter I coached a guy named Andre degrass for for a while who won three Olympic medals in 2016 remember coming right behind you say bolt in that in that famous 200 meters where they were smiling at each other um Andre is very quiet very kind of tipe B kind of just down here very insular on his phone not really living life kind of lived life down here very closed and that's the way in which he performed that's the way he practiced that's the way he trained that's the way he competed he didn't feel like he had to be up here and bouncing around jumping around because that was not him and if there's one thing that Andre is famous for and he's now got seven Olympic medals I don't think I don't know how many big races Andre has won outside of the Olympic Games but he's got seven Olympic medals he's he he really stands up when it matters because he is connected with who he is he knows who he is and and what he brings out to the performance arena is connected like this with that where others and I the biggest example that I know is assafa Powell so if anyone knows doesn't know who assafa Powell is assafa was Usain Bolt before Usain Bal Assaf has ran sub 10 seconds in the 100 meters 99 times more than anyone else in history he's by all intents and purposes one of the greatest male sprinters of all time he's a leg he's he's he's had a world record I think he's had set two World Records he's an incredible Sprinter who's choked at every single major championships has ever been he's always folded and he's does that because he feels like he came up in the era of Mo green you know this this animal thing this being really really super intense so Safa tried to be that that didn't work for him and then Bernard Williams who's kind of jumping around and playing around a little bit that's that became a thing for a while so SAA tried that hat on that didn't work either and then Usain came and say is Usain is playing with the camera and being bringing his personality out so SAA tried that hat on Guess What that didn't work either so there's this yeah Usain brought this almost um yeah it's okay to to be to jump around and to dance and have fun but it's not for everybody if that's not who you are and I feel like that was an important thing if I was coaching assafa say man H Safa just be you man like you're a relaxed you're you're Andre deg grass before Andre de grass came along you're just you're just cool and chill just be cool and chill man just be that just bring you to this performance and you'll you'll get a lot more out of yourself but uh you know to get back to your question you saying just gave everybody I think the permission to to have fun like that's why we do this thing it's to have fun and if you're not having fun then why are we bothering it's so so interesting you know and his name comes up so often now and I'm grateful to have him as a close friend but you know I've had hours upon hours of conversations with Rick Rubin about why certain musical artists just have that thing um and it doesn't matter if you're talking about Tom Petty Joe Strummer Johnny Cash Adele it's just you you ask about all these different people and it's the answer is always the same it's they know how to be themselves in that moment yeah and people will say well it's a constructed where he rck will be like no this is why he likes to work with artists early on like a lot of the hip-hop artists he worked with a lot of the punk rock music artists he worked with they were just being themselves they had no success prior to their you know like LL Cool J sending him a demo tape and so there was no self-awareness or or there wasn't enough self-awareness to hinder their expression they were just being them and that's always what explodes people to immense success now there's something to be said for ignorance isn't there there's something to be said for ignorance and there's something of a gravitational pull as an as a spectator or a listener uh to the artist The Athlete the musician who's just being themselves and we know we can detect at an unconscious level when it's not real mhm you this is one of the things I love so much about podcasting or at least I'm very blessed to be in the earlyish cohort of podcasters I wasn't in the first cohort like the Dan Carlin and the rogans but I came in early enough that none of us really knew what to do except just be ourselves it's a it's a now it's changing there's a big flood of commercial um you know uh entities in podcasting and some of those are are good and and most of them are not frankly because they're not real they're more like a new show it's produced it's like it's not real the person on camera and off camera are very different but I can tell you that Joe Rogan off camera that's Rogan yeah um and I was thinking about really expressive people in different domains to compare more or less to this example that you were describing with usin so Rogan I through other Muhammad Ali big boisterous personality huge attractor to him yeah it was not a construction he might have honed it as part of his craft but clearly that's who he was he's a fast talker yeah um Mike Tyson Mike Tyson very different yeah but that's him right you know right and everyone loves Mike Tyson because it's very clear that that is Mike Tyson Jean Michelle Basia yeah you know this like even just the size of the paintings and the way he worked and the physicality of it um I think it was Haitian I'm going to get back to this kind of nationality thing a little bit later and then we had on here the great Josh whiteskin who was the subject of the movie The search for Bobby fiser and um his whole strategy in chess of that he learned in Washington Square Park of creating Chaos on the chess board this game that everyone considers very very linear and very very constrained and his he liked to create chaos because Washington Square Park especially in the 80s and 90s chaos you drug dealers and crime and there's people uh doing it pretty much every activity there um and and and on and on right you know I think that when people are just being themselves this is what you're saying and this is what Rick has said over and over you know that that Essence piece is so magnificent and um not just to see but it it it evolves humankind it really does and um so when you work with an athlete or for the listener who's trying to figure out well like who am I does it work in Reverse meaning and I believe that movement can actually teach us who we are in addition to allow us to express who we are and I'm not going to say that skipping is the only way to do that but it it was very interesting yesterday to notice the transitions in my state of mind as I got permission from you uh to you know go bigger get bigger stride bigger yeah and we were the adults on the kids playground in my mind behaving like kids but it it is transformative I think to move differently makes you feel different and when those things line up I think is what you're talking about yeah I I think it's a brilliant question I I really do think it's it's everything in sport but I think as you said just when you zoom out it's not just sport it's all everything and I feel like so so often in sports specifically people like me steal the essence away from the athletes because we have pre our own preconceived ideas of what this that what you should be doing should look like and it's my idea but it's not your essence and it's not your idea and I always feel like we should be coaching towards what the athletes best solution is not what our best solution is I've got I've got an athlete I'm working with right now who's super gifted she's a two-time Olympian she's got Olympic gold medal in the relay and she's been coached for a long time to move in a way that does not align with her Essence it does not align with what she is good at and what what will that do to you over the course of time it's obviously going to negatively affect your confidence it definitely negatively affects your the way you move because you're in a move you're moving in a way that just doesn't align with you whether that's psychologically emotionally or physically biomechanically so this is a a tall elastic expressive Sprinter who's been taught to be really small and Compact and accelerate with with really short choppy steps and she's lost the ability to even understand who she is anymore in this sport so my objective now is try to reintroduce herself to herself what was it that got you into this how did you move why were you really really good at this let's reconnect with that and the challenging piece with that is how do you understand what that is especially years if you've been being taught a certain way that is not in alignment with who you are whether that is sport or anything else it's really difficult to reconnect with it if you don't have a really good guide because so often those guides and it's that's that's whether it's a coach or a music producer will screw them up not not purposefully you know they're coming at this from a very optimistic standpoint and positive standpoint I'm trying to help you Andrew this but this is what I think these are my experiences this is my subjective view this is how I see you doing the thing that you're doing and that's based on my history rather than where it should be and that's based on your history and that's that's the difference between Rick Rubin and many other producers and it's the difference between Elite coaches and sub Elite coaches you always start with the person what is the unique ability that you have what is it that you have that makes you better than everyone else what is it you have that that really that you want to show everyone let's connect with that let's show that let's let's build all of our training around that let's have all of our conversations around that I'm remembering the example from that documentary last the last dance about Michael Jordan um some of the description of the Chicago Bulls coach um encouraging Dennis Rodman who in the '90s was 80s he's like first of all very few people had that many tattoos who weren't in prison or um in a niche music Community right Dennis had a ton of tattoos he had earrings he dyed his hair he loved to party he was wild and his coach understood that it was part of his reset mechanism and you you don't put um a bulldog in a race with a bunch of greyhounds and you don't have Greyhounds tug a rope with with a kettle bell on the end I know this as a bulldog owner who loves all breeds of dogs so he gave Denis permission to party yeah what no professional coach would probably do and it brought out his ability to play brilliant um you know an incredible rebounder incredible player all around but you know famous for his rebound uh stats so this thing of of who am I how do I express myself I think the the authenticity piece is so key like if you're a nice person being a jerk in your sport is probably not going to work um but if you enjoy competition and you're a nice person then it seems like there's a place for that M and I wonder whether or not a big component of all of this and discovering it for for people that are going to try ply metric skipping and these sorts of things to try and better understand themselves and express themselves which I I think would be a wonderful thing to come from this discussion is the trying to shut down the self-conscious part the the the the self-critic do you think the best sprinters are also not thinking about anyone else they're just enjoying themselves or at least are they feeling the Sprint more than they're paying attention to their form as a like how does this look so I'm thinking about it I'm on the track with you I'm gonna I'm going to run or Skip and I can either just feel where it's more expressive or I can try and show you that it's more expressive two different very different things one it's a there's a self-conscious awareness piece the showing you I'm going to show you this as opposed to just doing it for the feel of it yeah is that the distinction yeah that's a really good way to put it um one really good example of this in the Sprints world and I think you were there for this is 2022 World Championships in Oregon yeah I was there and uh Noah LS won the 2 200 in an American record 1931 and that was for me like that's the epitome of just being so lost in what you're doing that you have no idea what you're looking like and he's just maximally expressing his everything that he's got and he he bounds across the line I said man that was beautiful like I've never seen that like it was so beautiful like totally lost in flow and that it doesn't happen as often as many who don't work in sport think it does not every single performance is a flow performance but if you're lucky you'll get one or two of those in your career where you just lose connection with everything that you're doing and you just wow what happened and in fact every time that a sprinter sets a personal best I asked him what was that feeling like I don't know no idea I don't know I don't know how that felt I just ran so all of these things that we we talked about all of these incredible coaching cues that I gave you to think about when you were doing this you forgot them all so I just ran I just ran and almost always that is the answer to that I just ran and I just connected with it and something in the background you know we were able to one of the ways I'll bring this um home a little bit more maybe practically so we train 20 to 25 hours a week and my goal each day is not to say a lot like I want the athlete to kind of find their way through things and I will encourage them and guide them and sort of facilitate this discovery but often we'll talk about different things and if they're if they're struggling with something I'll give them a specific cue and over the course of time we build you know this library of different things that the athlete thinks about or the different cues and then my objective coming into more of a competitive season is to try to align these cues with an emotion what I call what what are called mood words so for example um when an athlete is accelerating they're on the ground for a little bit longer than when they are upright because they need to actually Propel themselves forward they need horizontal Force they need the ground to push themselves forward so they push and they push or they drive so qes could be drive it could be push it could be power it could be pize forward it could be all of these different things that are around power but for me the mood word that really expresses this better than anything is pressure I want you to feel like you're applying as much pressure through the first half of this race as you possibly can and the second half of the race is the exact opposite of that so we talk about things that we do technically knees up thighs up uh step off the ground be vertical be be expressive be tall all of these different cues but really what we're trying to get to is freedom or peace so that's what 100 meters print is it's 50 m of pressure and 50 m of Peace So I try to align these mood words with these coaching instructions and then all the athletes need to think about is this emotion or this mood word and all the instructions come along for the ride that is the goal and that is you know going back to it something we talked about quite a while ago now probably one of the things that I love the most around the 100 meters is this dichotomous relation ship between pressure and peace or power and fluidity or violence and Rhythm all of these things are at opposing ends of the spectrum that every single Elite athlete regardless of the sport can come together perfectly if you can have the power but if you don't have the peace good luck you can have the peace but if you don't have the power good luck no chance it's always both simultaneously so it's um yeah that's that's the that's the massive challenge in in this Sport and going back to uh to Noah in 20122 that World Championship uh final in the 200 incredible that's that's maybe the best example of that I've ever seen Amazing Amazing Race really was really feel blessed to have been there uh and by the way folks if you have never been to a track meet it's per for many reasons it's one of the most wonderful things first of all it will give you an example of what real coordination is all about and I'm not talking about physical coordination although that too you'll be watching the pole vault and then you'll shift your eyes to the right and there'll be another event starting right as the pulv ends and then another one it's a it's a beautifully orchestrated event done properly as they do in Eugene and elsewhere the other piece is that um nobody goes to track meets unless they love track although hopefully a few people uh who are not familiar with track will try it and so every the the amount of spirit there is incredible um and there's also I don't know there there's a lot of identification with individuals there that even if you've never seen them run or anything you you pick up on the different um on the different personalities of of the the runners and the jumpers and the throwers and it um it's really special check out a track meet if you can you won't be disappointed abs you won't be disappointed and I don't work for USA Track and F people are like do you work for big track no actually I don't I buy a ticket like everybody else um this notion of pressure and peace you know it brings me back to this thing about these transition activities like for songwriters even you know who so skilled Joanie Mitchell or you know I was referring to earlier you know Tim Armstrong you know having these transition activities you know trying to um to get into one's craft and and the pressure and then it kind of opens up into peace and um I feel like anytime Rick is talking about working with musicians and I was like how'd it go you know he's in the studio and it's like they work super hard they work extremely hard and then it's always the story I always hear is oh yeah in the last two days it all came together yeah right because they set real deadlines right and I think this is why deadlines are important this is why um writers and artists who have no dead lines often times don't do as well and maybe athletes as well that the the pressure piece of getting everything organized around an activity and then the nervous system just kind of takes it yeah the commonalities here are are fascinating uh to me U maybe we all could approach our exercise that way too that it's okay to be rigid rigidly attached to to detail at the beginning but the goal is peace in the final minutes of it right yeah I think that's a good way to look at it yeah I think you know more than that if we zoom out I feel like you know Society or the way in which we think about exercise now has become detached from why why we actually started doing the things to begin with movement right we fall in love with finding our way around the world through moving our bodies in space and time doing whatever whether that's hiking or playing a sport or whatever and then we finish school and we get a job and now we don't really move anymore that becomes exercise and we go to the gym and we exercise and I feel like that's so many degrees removed from why we actually do the thing I feel like we don't ask ourselves is this what is really serving me or is this what everyone else is doing so I'm just going to go along with it and for me like I lift weights I go to the waight room I do that four or five days a week I skip every single day I run like three or four days a week I do some boxing I move my body I play I do as many different things I can I can do includes hiking and I feel like that's what we should be doing I'm asking myself what is it that I want to get out of this practice is it I want to go to the gym for 45 45 minutes a day and get as strong as I can or as big as I can whatever and if that if that is it great but I need to ask myself that question I don't feel like many of us are asking that question question and for me we've alluded to this a couple times now is you know what's important about moving as we're aging and being connected with that and having the ability to continue to be able to you know express ourselves maximally over the course of our lifetimes that isn't developed in a weight room that's developed by doing those things you know you you might appreciate this like if you are looking if you are looking for good movement would you go to a weight room or a skate park definitely to a skate park 100% yeah cu the movers are so much better like the movement there is wow this is incredible don't you want to be able to do that rather than do a squat there's some madeup exercise that somebody's told you is going to be you know do this and this and this for you or do a deadlift or do a bench press all these madeup things and as I said those are things can be good can be fun can be interesting can be important but what really is most important is can you still move your body can you express yourself maximally for as long into your lifetime as you possibly can and people I feel like they have to ask the question whether the thing that they're doing this exercise is it actually leading to that and in most cases I think it's not I came up in part Through Skateboarding that was my main focus in high school up until about mid high school and then I got into other things um skateboarding everything you're saying is especially true the personality matches yeah the way they skateboard uh level of aggression level of technicality personality I mean sometimes there's a mismatch like there's a the every vert skateboarder big ramp skateboarder now will attest I mean everyone from Tony Hawk because I've heard him say it um uh to everyone I know that there's a there's a kid um named Jimmy Wilkins um who does everything faster bigger with more technical ability than anybody's ever seen he's he's a absolutely remarkable um addition to the sport and a super nice kid his mom's a ballerina oh yeah amazing and he's got very um loose hip joints he actually guides the board with his KNE back knee like so he can do a lot of things hands with no hands that most people have to grab to do and his dad is uh an Orchestra conductor great so if you were to like make up a story about a highly technical powerful precise you know uh athlete it would Jimmy wil in it um he's he's he's won X Games he's he's astonishing um to watch and so much fun to watch so skateboarding it's very apparent um but then I was trying to think of some daily activities that so getting away from Sport and exercise for a moment and I was just thinking in my own life like if you wanted to understand um my mom you just have to see her gardening The Way She Moves about her garden the way she tends to it she loves gardening it's like her greatest I don't know if it's her greatest joy it's one of her great Joys and so if you if you could just see her gardening for 10 minutes you would understand her as a person completely it's it's amazing and and I think she's a very good Gardener but it's not that the garden isn't the point it's how she moves about the garden y um and I think that's true for certain people how they cook yeah certain people how they dance and I was going to say you know if you want to understand people at a wedding or a party just when the music comes on you get a lot of insight people's personality and the best is always that like older guy or or gal or couple that look like they're just kind of sitting there like turtles and then they get up and you're like oh my goodness they can really dance or they're just enjoying or just enjoying it completely even if they're not great dancers yeah so let's talk about music and dance for a second I think we can't avoid this any longer um your Instagram handle was maybe still is finger Mash correct I thought that had something to do with sprinting but I learned right before we sat down that you're you you're a reggae DJ uhhuh and you grew up around that yeah and sprinting has a lot of Jamaicans in it yeah what's the deal educate us um how much of how you understand athletes and how they move and people generally in the general population how they move um relates to your understanding of kind of music and Rhythm because this pressure piece right I mean like that's a great song that's a great concert that's a great album so you know what I don't think I explicitly truly understood the connection until in hindsight you know because when you're doing it you're just doing it you're just living your life and you're not really thinking about it I'm doing these things they have creative probably similarities but I'm not really understanding those you know I'm not thinking about them you know I started uh I started DJing in 1984 so I'd been 15 and I stopped DJing in 2010 I had a radio show in Calgary for 20 years called level of Shad out level The Vibes it still goes on to to this day level of Vibes level The Vibes level The Vibes level The Vibes with my old DJ partner T and uh it's yeah absolutely like it's I was an artist as well so when I was in school everyone figured I would just be the artist like I I was an okay athlete but not great I wasn't good enough to go into professional sport and make money it was just art that was it I went to art school and I figured out you know this just isn't serving me anymore but the entire time I'm doing this music thing and I'm doing this sport thing and I think all of these creative Outlets are just all coming together I've always been sort of a creative coach and I think like this is how I actually got into sprinting is I was a soccer player most of my most of my friends were sprinters most of them most of those sprinters because I was based in Calgary there's a big J Jamaican population there so most of them were Jamaican and I just got into sprinting through that so is uh I feel like as as as I said it's it wasn't an explicit connection that I understood at the time but in hindsight I could see okay me being a a DJ an understanding Rhythm and putting things together and how putting these things together influenced other things less than maybe the people that I'm playing the music for that really served my coaching ability 100% 100% as did my art it's really interesting and hindsight to to look at those things and look at those as you say these call them the transition events and these other things the other skills that you know Masters in some of the domains have what athletes nowadays um which athletes are you excited about because they seem to have this Essence we don't want to make them self-conscious but um that you're like wow like there's really something there yeah yeah who who are you excited about in track specifically yeah or well any sport sure it's I mean honestly I'm not a massive sports fan like I don't watch a lot of team sports in fact I I watch no team sports other than soccer and I watch soccer because you know that's the game I played that's the game My Father played who's your team uh Manchester City and so who's the greatest soccer player in the world in your mind for you like the one that not necessarily the one that everyone agrees is the best but oh Messi is the best player and I think most people would agree that lonel Messi is now playing for inter inter Miami is maybe even still at the age of 35 or 36 the best player on the planet because of his expressiveness just the the way in which he plays his game and expresses himself is just perfect and in fact this is a really good uh analogy to to discuss what you're talking about here because there's there's in the goat debate the greatest of all time debate there's two players that come up in soccer Cristiano Ronaldo and lonel Messi maradon is no longer in the mix no and Pelle is no longer in the in the mix either it's the it's these two okay Ronaldo is 40 and Messi I think is 36 and i' I'd say probably if you took a poll of all of the millions of people that have an opinion on this 45% of them or so would say Cristiano Ronaldo and 55% is that close 55% would say Messi but both of them are so authentically themselves it's crazy like Cristiano Ronaldo is perfect like he is the perfect Greek god he's 40 years old he's about 5% body fat he's big muscular powerful fast always look sh he shines he shines he literally he GLE he does and he plays that way right and he he's just got a certain personality that he brings to the field and Messi's just like this you know just Glides around and just Elusive and you can't see him and oh there he he's over there and just the things that he can do with his feet and the ball and the interaction between his feet and the ball it's just that's incredible and for me I align with more of the messy you know I just love the creativity that's a player like that has or or in you know a little bit more um upto-date maybe you know um Steph Steph Curry like changed the game of basketball totally be while or through being authentically himself he's totally changed the league he's changed how everybody plays basketball and how and everybody will play basketball forever more so it's yeah it's it's I really really appreciate incredibly beautiful and authentic movers I don't like sport but I love the the movement part of it yeah it's the son of an Argentine you know my dad's first generation immigrant to the United States I I um I really put myself to Shame by not being a huge soccer fan but I've got cousins that you listen and watch at the dinner table and you couldn't distract them if an atom bomb went off you know it's and his kids you know um such a such an interesting sport because of the this notion that different teams and different players play it differently right like the the Brazilians like the Rhythm to their game versus that you know argentines are considered a little bit more uh traditionally more rigid among South Americans as a culture more rigid and a little bit more aggressive as well more stiff upper lip absolutely abolutely they take them argentinians take themselves very seriously I can say that as a half argentin we're taught to take ourselves seriously as people mhm and um at the same time to enjoy life but to take ourselves seriously yeah I think there's a lesson in that too right right Brazil has been the most successful national soccer team of all time and you know like you just said you don't know how a soccer fan but you know how Brazil plays soccer everyone knows how play Brazil plays soccer they dance and they play and it's just this thing you know party it's a party yeah and that's how they play and everyone kind of knows how Argentina plays as well you just said that you're not a soccer fan but you know that nobody knows how England plays England haven't won a World Cup since 1966 they haven't won a major title since 19 1966 even though this is where the sport originated from everyone knows how Germany plays and how Germany has always played there's a way there's a German way of playing football there's a Brazilian way of playing football there's an Argentinian way of playing football there is no British way anymore so I think there's something in that right like if there's a connection where every single person that comes up from the age of four years old they know that the way in which everybody in this country plays oh okay I get that and we're all on the same team and all contributing to the same system in the same way where in the UK it's it's so desparate that no one understands it anymore I'm just soaking this in because my mind immediately goes to like like art one of my favorite movies is the movie bia by about joh Michelle bka not the documentary I mean the cast is like Gary Oldman David Bowie I it's in Dennis Hopper Christopher walon it's in just an unbelievable cast um and the fact that BS was part Haitian he was in you know New York in a time when New York was pretty gritty and like brought that together in his art it was like one part graffiti Modern Art and had this kind of tribal component that people made more of than they probably should have and and you could say the same thing about you know um Andy Warhol or about Chuck Close or you know when people are just being themselves but they're also taking their ancestry and they're taking their personal history which includes their ancestry and they're putting it into their art or their sport spectacular things happen so along those lines this is a somewhat controversial topic but I'm just going to go right into it because I think everyone wonders about this I'll say this directly why are there fewer white strength and speed Champion athletes in fact if you hang around track and field long enough you'll hear that's the third fastest white woman that's the second fastest white guy um people are using very specific language but we could put it differently got a lot of fast Jamaicans MH um what's the deal is it um genetic contribution to fiber type um let's also talk about calf belly length which turns out to not be about calf belly length at all um what I'm saying there is people with quote unquote small calves tend to be fast Runners MH what's the deal and I realize why this is a controversial topic but it's like so obvious BEC that it's almost silly to avoid at this point how how can you not have the conversation yeah let's have a conversation about it it's it's it's obvious so what's the deal well as in all things when we're having discussions around topics like this it's both nature and nurture sure it's primarily in this case nature if you don't have the genetic capacity to run fast you won't run fast sorry you just don't you don't have enough type two fibers whatever it is proportion of type two FIB it could be limb length it could be joint structure uh typically faster people have tighter smaller joints typically faster people have longer tendons and smaller muscle bellies typically faster people have more type 2x fibers typically faster people are slightly taller so all of these contributing genetic factors if you do not have those things and then that's not even talking about some of the hormonal factors some of the endocrinological factors some of the neural factors that we may not even understand yet there's all of these genetic determinants that play a part in what you are able to do so first and foremost we have to yes that is a fact that almost every single statistically almost every single human being that's ever ran sub 10 seconds is a black athlete from you know evolutionarily from maybe say West Africa let me ask you sorry for interrupting but I think has a white person ever broken the 10 second Mark in the 100 met there's been a few so it was first uh Kristoff lametra I believe in either 2017 or 2018 was the first White athlete to break 10 seconds and then there's been uh I feel like there's probably five maybe six Asians now who have broken 10 seconds everybody else and that's close to 200 are are black and of course there's the nature component too which is if you come from a a country where sprinting yes is a popular sport um or soccer is a popular sport or um you know distance running is a popular sport then there's going to be a selection bias there 100% so we're taking those into into that is that I would say that the Gen if you don't have the genetics good luck you're not even in the room the genetics will get you in the room once you do in that room whether what nature is what that upbringing is what that environment is that is going to determine what you know what you do with your genetics so for example a massive percentage and I don't know what this is but it's big a massive percentage of the athletes the male athletes who have ran sub 210 in a marathon come from the same little District in Kenya like it's very very high percentage and part of that is not only their genetics but the environment which they're growing up in every single person that they know is a marathoner every single person they know are running in excess of 100 miles a week every single person they know have you know this these are all of the things that that we need to do to be this right so they're seeing that from the day that they're born so for sure environment really matters what you do with that nature really really matters but if you don't have the genetic capacity to begin with you just as I said you don't have any chance at all and as you said like Jamaica sprinting is massive in Jamaica like it's it's really really important if I I would encourage you to do one thing go to Champs at one point if you like track meets this is the best track meet in the world Champs is the Jamaican High School National Championships and it's in Kingston and it is incredible absolutely incredible the stands are packed so there's 45 50,000 people it's loud it's noisy it's boisterous and kids are just killing themselves trying to beat each other it's just an amazing event over the course of 3 or 4 days go to the last couple days of Champs and just watch that and you just see ah I understand why Jamaicans are so fast this is the environment in which many of them are operating within as they come up and this is like this is you know I I I talked to so I'm a good friends with Donovan Bailey Donovan Bailey was a 1996 Olympic champion he was a world record holder in the 100 meters for a while he's of Jamaican descent uh grew up in Jamaica until he was 12 he moved to Canada in 1981 which is the same year that I moved to Canada so we've talked about this a lot and he said if you know if you do well at Champs you're set you're you're going to do really well as a professional Sprinter because there's nothing that has more pressure in it than actually competing well at Jamaican High School National Championships so understand what that environment does for the ability for your typical Jamaican athlete to succeed at higher levels and all of those Pockets you know Pockets like this exist all over the world whether it's in in Russia or whether it's in Kenya or whether it's in West Africa or whether it's in you know right now we're seeing some interesting things in Norway and some of the Endurance Sports right so it's for sure nurture is really really important but genetics gets you in the room what you do in it within that room that's that's up to you and your environment that you create it's so interesting how these different cultures shape the the future of a sport or an Endeavor um in China um kids are highly incentivized to um learn a lot and test a lot in the math and sciences and they're really big on Neuroscience in China I think these nature nurture questions are are are super interesting it sounds like Jamaica is still churning out a lot of excellent sprinters um because of the huge numbers that are fed fed to the sport and and can be you know essentially grow up their nervous systems are shaped around sprinting Yeah couple that with any number of different um features and we were talking about you talked about short calf bellies right this is the um this is the fear of every uh uh bodybuilder right they they want long calf bellies but short calf bellies make people faster and better jumpers not because the calf is short but because because the tendon is long okay essentially we've got you know each muscle is really a muscle tendon unit and if you've got a longer tendon relative to your muscle effectively you're a little bit more plyometric you can store and release energy a little bit more effectively than somebody who has a shorter tendon and a longer bigger fatter thicker muscle so we want really if you want to be fast you want long skinny tendons and small little muscle bellies so you know so what uh serves Aesthetics sometimes doesn't necessarily serve the sport and and vice versa so if you had to pick one you'd want to be able to jump and run faster would you sure I mean I don't I'm not yeah I mean I suppose that having very short calves would be we but who wouldn't want to run faster or jump higher you know uh for all sorts of reasons it just be so much fun yeah absolutely I I don't have a lot of hops but um this actually a time to talk about knees over toes guy Ben Patrick yeah he um uh fought a lot of adversity to encourage people um including a lot of exercise physiologists and the people who do rehab from various um aspects that you know putting your knees out over your toes is okay um caught a lot of heat but I think the fact that he's so skilled at jumping and dunking and back bend and landing in back bends and things of that sort puts them all the shame frankly I think most people understand now that that Ben is really onto something with this um one of the things that he's a big proponent of is um a lot of Ecentric loading um but also not being afraid to get that knee way out over the toe what what is the deal with a running form as it were is the idea that if you can get your knee higher you can stride further and then when we talk about um knee back toward butt how far back are we supposed to like kick our own glutes when we when we stride I mean what is a proper running stride or is it going to vary by by structure well that's uh that's a big question yeah like like explain that in five seconds I'm just kidding the but you know for those of us who want to run a bit faster do some some um stride work yeah should I be reaching with my front leg and pulling myself forward on the ground 100% not please do not do that right and I shouldn't be just quickening my uh my turnover of a jogging stride so no but that's part of it yeah first of all let's start at the start and understand that the way you move is going to be governed by the things that you are moving so how you move is governed by the stuff that you've got so you cannot move in a way in which your body will not allow so if you have a certain structure of your joints or a certain Mobility structure or or a certain genetic makeup or a certain stiffness or a certain muscle fiber type all of those things come together they all coales to S of govern your motor strategy so the LA the last thing that I would want you to do Andrew is to copy Usain Bolt sprinting stride because Usain Bolt is 6'5 215 pounds he's a little bit more Dynamic than you he's probably got slightly longer Achilles tendons than you he's probably got tight smaller joints than you he's probably a lot more elastic than you are he's probably a little bit more coordinated than you are so why would I want you to try to copy that so my job first and foremost is to understand how you should or how you could move based upon the constraints that you have based upon what what are known as your action capabilities so your Force capacity your Mobility capacity all of these things that make up who you are your height your weight your joint length your joint ratios all of these different things your your limb limb ratios so first it's understanding that we are governed by the stuff that we have so it's we should never be trying to copy someone else first and foremost number two is then we should have some sort of understanding of what is the common way to do a thing and we can probably simplify this we kind of know a little bit about how we what a model looks like for a back squat or for a deadlift or for you choose your exercise we kind of have a model for that whether that's a mathematical model or whether that model was based upon the average of a bunch of elite movers we kind of okay we kind of understand what quote unquote optimal is mathematically but we also have to understand that we are not math we are biological beings that will all move in slightly varying ways depending upon the stuff that we are moving so yes we look at that model but we also look at what we've got and we try to find somewhere in the middle that serves us so in sprinting and in probably in most activities we try to identify like what are the non-negotiables what are the rules here like in squatting we know what the rules are right we don't want to bend to one side we don't want to overly Flex our our spine we don't want to anally rotate our shoulders we don't want to have knee valgus where our knees come in and touch each other we don't want to have super wide feet we don't want to have internally rotated feet when we're when we're squatting all of these things that we know that we don't do they govern the things that we can do so in sprinting we have something similar we don't know as much about sprinting as we do in some of the more uh or the maybe the less complex movements more discrete movements like a squat like a deadlift like a power cing because sprinting is coordinative it continues it's rhythmic so it's a little bit harder for us to actually study but we do know that as you said uh one of the things you said was high knees and most of the elite sprinters converge upon similar positions when their knee is super high and that knee gets up to about waist height like just almost belly button height when they're running as fast as they can so we know if we want to be fast we got to kind of try and bring our knees up and we talked about that before too right the difference between striding and sprinting and jogging and running where jogging and running happens behind the center mass and riding and sprinting is in front of the center Mass so maybe first and foremost we think about bringing the knee up knee's got to be a little bit higher you have to think about being in front we know that for sure every Elite Sprinter sets up a very stiff spring on the ground by being very very strong and stiff and rigid through the foot ankle complex so you have to be stiff on impact so think about the analogy that I give all the time is if you think about you're a boxer or you're boxing and you're hitting a heavy bag what would you do with your wrists and your fist you'd squeeze it and hold it rigidly because if you didn't it would really hurt and if you're trying to hit it as hard as you can you want it to be you have to be sque squeezed it's the same thing with sprting because the forces by the way are pretty similar an elite boxer hits a heavy bag in somewhere in excess of five times their body weight in less than 300s of a second it's exactly the same as sprinting an elite Sprint is an excess of five times our body weight in less than 300s of a second time to Peak force on ground contact so knees are up and we're very stiff on the ground and the third thing is if you do not have an effective hip extension pattern you just can't move well never mind run fast you have to have the the ability for your knee to come behind your butt now that's a hard thing to Define it's a hard thing to quantify people ask me all the time like what do you mean like what is a good pattern if I talk about the hip extension pattern and the importance of that it's not just range of motion so that's the one that you alluded to is you know how far behind well the further the knee gets behind the center MK the more the range of motion is not just that because in sprinting when you're upright especially you want to almost limit the amount of time that the knee travels behind the butt because the longer that the knee travels behind the butt the longer you're on the ground the slower you are so range of motion for you or for me or for Rob or for anyone listening for running is going to be very different from a Noah ly or an Andre degrass or a Usain Bal but this the qualitative aspect of all of those things is still really important and the way in which I judge the quality of a pattern is kind of five fivefold do you have the force capacity to be able to extend your hip are you strong enough can you actually get your knee behind the hip and many people just can't do that because they're not strong enough do you have the Velocity capacity can you actually move your limb fast enough to get it behind do you have the range of motion and most team sport athletes you know if I'm going in and talking to to coaches who work in team sports that's the big that's the low hanging fruit they just don't have the range so number three is the range number four is the control and if you're a kid if you're a 14-year-old you probably don't have the control of that pattern and five is can you do it over and over again can actually repeat it so when we're looking at the judging of a pattern it's force velocity uh repeatability control and range of motion is those those five things so that's you know that's a long answer to what what I could talk about for for literally days is what are the things that we're looking at for sprinting the ability to get the thigh up high the ability to contact the ground really aggressively and the the ability to get the thigh or the knee behind the hip with high quality what are your thoughts on skipping rope yeah I think the ability to coordinate flexion extension at the ankle knee and hip is really important so you're coordinating the movement pattern at both the an or at the ankle at the knee and the hip and coordinating all of those in space and time and the ability to do that as we've talked about is one of the things that we lose as we age so skipping is one of those things that can quite simply work on that coordinative aspect what I see too often though is people skipping incorrectly and skipping only through their ankles and not really doing a lot through the knees and the hip and they just sort of PL oflex or dorsy Flex PL Flex dorsy Flex so they just push up on their toes and they come off where we need to understand that planter flexion or going up onto your toes is in Dynamic movements a reflexive movement it's not a volitional movement it's not a movement that we should be thinking about or trying to control all we should be thinking about is just bouncing as if we're bouncing on a trampoline just bounce bounce bounce bounce bounce bounce bounce and actually keeping our foot as stiff as we can just like skipping for me I just equated to hitting a heavy bag over and over and over again po you can't do that if you're on your toes you want to be on the balls of your feet like right on the base of your of your toes like and just then you it's a lot easier to Just Bounce think about it bouncing so I think it's a great activity from that perspective is sort of just teaching how to coordinate the the uh what's called the amortization of all of the joints of the lower body and then as far as how to do it what to do it I just feel just do it yeah you know what I mean just do it heavy ropes do do it the light ropes have have fun with it I I think there's there's probably too many times that we're constrained by what people like me say to do what is right just have fun man just just just you know find a way in which to express yourself and enjoy the movement if you love jumping rope or hopping rope go do that just make sure that you try to understand what doing it well looks like or feels like so you can do it well I like to put on an album and Skip for the album and then somehow just let the the music when I feel moved to skip different faster or high knees or something let that dictate yeah because then there's like this e external coach slash Rhythm it's something I like I'm not thinking about too much and then next thing I know I've got you know 35 minutes of quote unquote cardio done um with a piece of plastic I don't know there something very satisfying about doing that I don't know why um it's a yeah I I as you can probably tell I'm getting more and more interested in things that um draw more aspects of the nervous system mind and body for exercise because I I while I love the JY I think it's it can be too linear and too rigid yeah and I think it leads to rigidity in one's thinking yeah um and that might come as a surprise to a lot of people think oh you know it's all you know all these protocols have to be done you know there's a fundamentally correct way to do most things like get morning sunlight in your eyes but if it's 5 minutes or seven minutes depends on how bright it is and that what time of year I mean you know I feel like the biology is flexible yeah um and learning to go by field can be very very helpful yeah I think we lose that too right we got to remember you know principles are few and methods are many there's many ways to do different things as long as they align with the principles just think about what the principles are and then just be creative in choosing the methods that work for you yeah this this is where peer-reviewed science unfortunately can't measure every variable yeah you know people say well like what have has there been a study comparing you know 5 10 15 20 minutes or 30 minutes of morning sunlight VI no yeah because you're lucky if you get 100 subjects you got to pay those subjects you got to get them to come in you're tracking sleep you're you use 10,000 luck in one group and you know you know control light and another I mean you just don't have the option to work through every variable in anything even a po response study of a drug you can't account for nutrition and the drug and then people go well then how can we trust any of this it's you know standard science as it were a reduction of science is just one lens through these things yeah that doesn't mean that people's experience is necessarily smarter than data it just means that data have to mesh with experience and and experience with data yeah I think data data can inform the decisions we make but they are not the decisions that we make MH you we use that data but what's you know it's it's um what's most important is how all of these data points all this information comes together you know it's the it's the relationships and the interactions between the component parts which is more important than the individual component parts themselves so we have to understand what those relationships are that's the thing we need to focus a little bit more on I'd like to talk about weight training what do sprinters do for their weight training and if somebody like me is interested in becoming a faster runner doing maybe even sprinting someday uh besides just doing skips and strides what are some ways of doing exercises in the gym that can potentially facilitate our ability to move better outside of the gym first let's look at the kinetics of sprinting sprinting is only really truly about four things how much force you apply into the ground how fast can you apply it the direction in which you apply it and how heavy you are and it's just those four things how much force how fast which direction what is your mass so we need to yeah force is important we have to be able to apply a certain level of force but there's a threshold to this everyone say there's a big question and has been for a long time how much strength quote unquote is enough in sprinting well enough is it's the same question that we ask we should ask in every task there's a rate of diminish and Returns on all of these capacities that we need that we Quire is spending an extra few years trying to get an extra 5 kilos to your power clean or an extra 25 pounds to your back squat as effective as a means to get faster than it would be if to say you start skipping maybe do some more explosive work actually start sprinting a little bit more so there's always this um from a programming perspective is understanding where the athlete is what they require what they've got where they are in the r diminishing returns on each of those capacities so first we have to understand that um let me zoom out just a little bit I coached Andre Andre degrass as we talked about Andre when I started coaching him in 2015 could barely squat his body weight eight months later he's three-time Olympic medalist eight months later he was one and a half years into his sprinting career he'd sprinted for 18 months he had three Olympic medals in the Sprints the 100 the 200 and the 4x1 he could barely squat his body weight he could clean 60 kilos so 135 PBS he definitely couldn't bench a plate and a half he might have had 145b plate uh bench yeah maybe super weak but on the other end of the spectrum this is the example that everyone gives you've got Ben Johnson famously Ben Johnson did this 600lb squat a couple of days prior to Wi in the Tokyo Olympics in 1988 running 979 obviously that was thereafter taken away after he tested positive so you've gone on one end of the spectrum somebody like Ben Johnson who applies incredibly incredible amounts of force and on the other end you've got somebody like Andre degrass who doesn't apply relatively any Force but does it really really fast so this gives you like an understanding of the spectrum of capacity and abilities that humans have to do a task in an almost infinite number of ways so to get to your question it depends on who you are and what you're good at and why you're good at it there's not one way when you've got a Ben Johnson who can apply incredible amounts of forces and that's one of the reasons why he's fast on the other end of the the Spectrum you've got Andre de grass who's weaker than most high school girls who's incredible F incredibly fast where does that leave us that just tells us okay there's many different ways to do this which is great it's cool that gives us again some freedom to better ask the questions about what it is that makes you Andrew really good like you apply a lot of force okay let's lean into that let's try to improve your speed by try to maximize your Force but what are you limited by okay you're you're having trouble getting off the ground you're not super reactive or reflexive so we have to work some things into your program that's going to make you a little bit more reactive or reflexive so maybe we'll do some jump squats maybe we'll do some hurdle hops maybe we'll do some more skipping maybe maybe we feel like okay you've reached the the rate of diminishing returns on your Force capacity you don't need to squat four plates if you squat 385 is going from 385 to 405 going to make you any faster no not at all so let's keep you at 385 and we'll just do some other things so first and foremost it's respecting the individuality of all things and understanding that there's not one way in which I can tell you do this because this is what he did and that's what's going to work for you now there is as I said before there's non-negotiables and there's rules to things so sprinting is how you transmit that Force into the track in a really fast period of time in the right direction so the transmission of force is typically more important than the magnitude of the force at least at the elite end at least at the adult end so transmission of force means how the the amount of force that you put into the ground how do you use it to propel yourself forward so what are the types of exercises that maybe would what would you think about if I said this is a Force transmission exercise rather than say a force magnitude exercise is that something that appeals to you yeah jump squat comes to mind you know um jump squat comes to mind um any kind of uh like push clap push-ups um you know the ability to like yep double clap or you know or more um yes that's what comes to mind I think that's pretty accurate Olympic lifts is one is one that where a lot of people would say yeah it's Olympic lift that's kind of what we're doing with Olympic clean you're kind of yeah I I'm not an I don't do Olympic lifts but from what I understand I you know they're they're pushing off they're going to get get the bar up yeah it's it's essentially can we apply High forces fast over a long period of time so that's kind of we do we spend a lot of time looking at those types of exercises sled work um we don't do any sled work I'll be H we can get back to that if if you no sled work for elite sprinters we don't we do resisted acceleration work so we'll Sprint we'll do some specific strength work where we're pulling uh you know probably in excess of 10 to 15 kilos you know so 20 to 30 pounds is do you use the parachute that was a big thing a few years back remember that when like the I used the parachute 20 years ago absolutely we don't now we we we uh we actually have a we have a piece of equipment called the power cord we use that I use that spr and the 10 1080 Sprint which is this uh incredible piece of equipment that we use that we can really dial in the resistance down to like you know a half a kilo yeah it's beautiful so we use that but that's for different reasons so the you you talked about the weight room in in the in the um the population of athletes I work with maximum strength is at the rate of dimin returns already we don't spend almost any time working on that at a lower level of population maybe if you're high school kid or if you're in your 20s when you're not super or if you're super weak just by increasing your Force capacity so your ability to apply Force you will get faster because remember what the calculation is amount of force how fast Direction and body mass so it is important it just becomes less and less and less important the faster you get so it's and then it becomes when it's less important when the ability to produce a high magnetude of force isn't important what is important so then we're starting looking at plyometric things and probably most specifically I'm looking at specific isometric stuff in the weight room so let's look at the position in which we're applying in excess of five times our body weight and that's when the foot is directly underneath the center Mass the foot is flat on the ground there's about a 15° knee Bend and there's about a 5 to 10 Dee hip Bend so you can you think of think about that position so we're pushing up against an IM movable bar or holding a very very heavy bar on one leg with as heavy as we can or as hard as we can for somewhere between three to 5 seconds times three to four repetitions and we'll do like three sets of that that's Alex terra's work he's one of the the premier researchers in what's called run specific isometric strength training so it's getting strong in really specific positions to the task that you're trying to become better at so that's that's the primary one for me is that position where the foot is directly underneath the center Mass there's a little bit of a knee Bend there's a little bit of a hip Bend and we do a lot of isometric work right there that's that's and then I this is my bias I do nothing bilateral at all you mean parallel stance parallel stance nothing except occasionally if it is an issue you know with neural drive or whatever I'll do some uh uh trap bar deadlifts so some parallel stands trap bar deadlift I think it's a great exercise I think that's difficult to do with a staggered stance it's very difficult to do with a uh a single leg stance but you can load up some pretty good weight on a parallel stance trap bar deadlift and yeah I feel pretty good and you get a good feeling out of that it's not necessarily be to be um be able to apply or generate more Force it's more about sort of neural Drive than it is for anything else every every single other thing that we do is in a staggered stance heel the toe or kickstand which is kind of the same same sort of thing just's a different terminology or split stance or a stance where the the front foot is elevated or the rear foot is elevated so we'll do as as we as we've talked about quite a bit now find opportunities to get the knee behind the butt that's a really important position can we get stronger faster more control more repeatability and more range at that position one of the things I learned from you yesterday is um well let's I'll double click first on this um the staggered stance so this is one foot slightly in front of the other um I've been doing this with various lifts in the gym for a long time I would say the exception would be if I'm belt squatting or hack squatting I don't do that um but for everything else overhead presses um anything where my feet are in contact with the ground that is on not on pull-ups and dips of course but um curls tricep extensions and I make sure to vary The Stance so one foot is in front for one set one is in front for the sometimes even in the middle of the set I'll I'll I'll switch them up after um and I found that to be tremendously helpful for building core stability and a number of other things um and it sounds like it might help running gate as well the other thing that you said yesterday that I think is really important I've not thought of before but now I'm doing is anytime you have a a foot elevated in the gym to get onto the toe front foot can be flat I think the ability to get off your first Ray so for the big toe to bend and flex is really important so for me if I if if that's important I'm going to search for opportunities to do that as often as I can so if I have an option to either Flex a big toe or not then we're going to flex a big toe now if you can't and many athletes cannot you know there's a lot of athletes that just cannot extend to that big toe or some athletes have bunions and just can't get over it and that's okay we can go on to the top of the foot which not the not the end of the world but I look for opportunities like that like I look for opportunities to extend the hip how can I work hip extension exercises into everything I do how do I look at or do I I look for full um full chain or full body Force transmission exercises as much as I possibly can ideally from the left foot to the right hand and the right foot to the left hand so cross body so I'm looking for these long fasal change like ways in which I can bring some function to the work that I'm doing in the weight room some level of transferability between the things that I do in the weight room and the things that we do on the track because frankly most of the things that we do in the weight room don't transfer to the track that squat doesn't really transfer it's a totally different exercise performed a totally different way at a to totally different time totally different weights so the transference is very very far it's very it's not very nebulous so I'm looking for ways in which we can find a way to transfer the capacities that we are building in a weight room directly to the track and with respect to stretching I'm thinking again of yoga because this is where probably the first timebody done this where one would lunge so front foot planted flat rear foot up on the big toe if possible the knee back of that rear foot um or rear leg excuse me back behind the butt and then the opposite arm raised above that's that fascial um sling AC that cuts across from you know an anatomy no C controlateral across the midline and then essentially trying to learn to feel that um line that goes all the way from one's big toe that's planting back across up the leg across the the pelvis up the body and shoulder to the opposite tips of the finger 100% And it's it's if uh if I can to add to that stretch um this is something that I really love Kelly about you know he's he's so much on I need you to be in control of your body there is a way to do this but then it's up to you to find out a better way for you specifically so you've done a great job of outlining what this stretch looks like now what can I do with my body to actually make this better do I rotate to one side do I side Bend to one side do I flex the hand as well as well as doing this because this will be a better stretch than that so Palm parallel to the to the ceiling 100% of the raised hand correct if I push the knee back and try to push the heel on the ground and actually contract if I rotate my pelvis underneath me posteriorly like you know do a a pelvic tilt underneath my well will that increase it so it's always this exp exploratory process there is a right way to do things but you are an individual we're all unique snowflakes right we're all moving different ways and it's up to us to explore all of our uniqueness distant topic from the one that we're on but one that I and I think a number of people are curious about is drugs in sports um performance-enhancing drugs there's a new um potentially new sports League track League which is the enhanced games who knows if that will go through um but right now using performance-enhancing drugs most performance enhanc ing drugs is banned in track but because of the Ben Johnson thing that was 88 Olympics where he was like jaist at the eyes and you know turned out he was taking wind straw and he was stripped of his metal um and then the discussion is they're all using it some just get caught this kind of thing or they're using in the off season how common is um people usually say steroid use but Androgen enhancement right cuz performance enhancing drugs could be drugs to lower the heart rate for the by athletes they do that too right keep your heart rate lower you know there's all sorts of drugs that are banned that are not Androgen increasing but but things like um testosterone derivatives yeah in the men and women how common is it yeah uh now not common at all in fact I don't know of any Elite Sprinter that I could um definitely point to say that person is dirty none it was common 60s and 70s extremely common ' 80s very very common ' 90s when testing started becoming a bit better much less common 2000s 2010s and 20s I just don't know how much of it is getting done now or being done across the board there are Pockets so we we obviously know about Russia and what's going on with the Eastern block and all of the drugs that they've taken that's been state sponsored all of that is out there we know that for sure if you were an elite Russian athlete almost certainly you were taking drugs you didn't have a choice true now you didn't have a choice no one really knows now because Russia's been banned from All Sports so you don't see Russian athletes almost anywhere um I think there's a few few sports that you do but most of them now you don't see Russian athletes but it's so hard like that's a part of the culture and has been part of the culture for you know since the 50s that's what we do because everyone else is cheating so this is what we do so it's a state sponsored system and I feel like there's you know there's 50 or 160 something like that positive drug uh cases come out of Kenya over the course of the last decade so you think okay there's something going on with in with Kenyans is that distance running distance running and there I should say because some people might not be uh familiar with this um with distance running or cycling Triathlon it's probably not increasing androgens like testosterone dihydro testosterone Etc probably um things that increase red blood cell count right ability to deliver more oxygen and fuel sources to the cells kind of epo these and things like that yeah but but and and this one in Kenya like I understand it I understand the Russian thing as well like if you're a Kenyan kid you're 18 years old you've got some Talent an agent comes to you and says I'm going to give you $50,000 and I'm going to support you for the first two years of your career and this is what everyone does anyway and you know we'll take the risk a little bit but we can you know you can actually make something of yourself become a star get a house feed your family do this do that that's a hard calculation for a kid to make as it was in the steroid ERA in baseball it's almost logical to take drugs at that point these guys aren't testing me at all so why wouldn't I why wouldn't Barry Bonds take drugs now that's a different calculation for most of the rest of the world where there isn't these practices going on in Kenya with a lot of a lot of shady people to be honest with you and and I honestly I do not see drugs at all in the sport anymore there will be pockets of people for sure there will be some dirt there will be a few dirty coaches there will be a few dirty managers there'll be a few people doing some dirty things but I'm very very confident that the top people in all of the events are doing it clean very confident that's great to hear it and I I would not know the first like I've been in this sport for a long time I wouldn't know what to do what to take who to get it from so when I look at you know I look at uh you know choose your athlete I won't name any names and you look at their who they're surrounded by I know those people well how would they do it I had no idea like no one really knows right because I mean the the drug testing is pretty stringent now it's really it's hard it's really really hard that's um encouraging to hear um especially for young people who are watching Olympics and you know it's a terrible thing to if they were to think oh you know they're all they're all using um and I think one good Trend in the last few years is there's a lot more openness now in the kind of Fitness world because when I was growing up of course those like veiny bodybuilder people were they were all Juiced to the gills and they'd say they weren't but they absolutely were and nowadays you know the if people are doing trt or something they say it right you know I've talked about it micro DOA every other day since I was 45 never before then mhm but I've relied on other things to keep testosterone in range and I take HCG maintain fertility that's all checked out but I'm very clear about exactly how much the internet has it wrong it's 25 milligrams every other day by the way I'm staggered with 600 IUS of HCG every other day I said that early on because I was like I'm not a competitive athlete I got nothing to hide right and I'll say that was it trt I'll say not really because my testosterone was in mid sevens but I was getting fatigued a lot and bumping it up a little bit higher which is what this is done has been great for me but it's the people that lie like the liver King situation where he looked at the camera unfortunately and filmed himself saying I that he doesn't and then he gets caught it's like duh and then you've got people that are juicing really hard and um and It's tricky in sports because or in movies right like when an actor suddenly is like big and shredded and you're just like oh you know the telltale signs it's probably not testosterone it's probably oxandrolone or something a little bit quote unquote lighter but there's not nothing light about oxandrolone on your liver or your hairline folks so um but this is a bigger discussion but I think it's important to just be open about it yeah you know because um we want to see people run faster than ever before we want to see people jump higher than ever before we want to see people run marathons faster than ever before and it sucks when we find out that they were enhanced and that was breaking the rules what what sucks more is the reputational damage that those things do for the people who are actually doing this well and clean right the 99.9% of the people who are trying to do this the right way that are being colored with the same brush right and that's what really frustrates me it was really frustr I've coached one athlete in my career who tested positive 2001 Olympic trials in Bob his name was pav javanovich he was um at the time the best Bob set on the planet so tested positive for nandon so decad durabolin um later it was shown that it came from his supplement if you remember this was 2001 oh yeah you could you could buy GHB late 90s at GNC at that time correct late 90s up until the the early 2000s there were supplement companies purposefully lacing their protein with steroids to try to sell more supplements goodness gracious and there's studies that show this and they ended up there was a group of athletes that all tested positive that sued this one company that uh and you know the the company ended up just you know declaring bankruptcy and nobody got ascent and long story short ruined his career ruined his reputation ended up taking his own life so I've seen and this is you know this is just people from the outside just look at that say just another druggy Bob Setter just another druggy football player just another druggy Sprinter they're all on drugs and they're not they're not 99.9% of people are trying to do this right like they're good people not making any money in this sport especially in track and field it's a different calculation as you said in Hollywood or in the NFL or in baseball where the testing is significant L more laxed than it is in track and field or significantly more laxed than what it is in almost all amateur sports amateur sports is almost impossible to be dirty these days it really is and if you just think about this Trayvon brl ran 997 as a high school kid he was 5 foot7 135 PBS think that kid was taking drugs of course he wasn't so if you can run 997 as a 17-year-old at that age why can't you run 97 6 seven eight years later after actually training and being an elite program of course you can you say bolt ran 1984 when he was 18 years old he ran sub 10 when he was 19 years old world class just a kid just a kid yeah like these these you know you see high school kids now running ridiculously Fast Times in the mile as well in in every single event right every event across the and they're not assisted this is one thing where I I hear we're cutting between Sport and we're talking about Fitness and you know I the reason I mentioned the age when I started trt is that a um never never occurred to me didn't need it I felt like I got great results uh till then um and and I think the biggest thing is recovery I think it helps I do think it helps you recover uh better no question actually um but a real shame nowadays is that because of Instagram and people showing their bodies and this desire for people to get results more quickly a lot of guys in their teens 20s and 30s are taking testosterone when they don't need it it does shut down sperm production unless they're offsetting that with HCG or something like that and um they may think they don't want kids now but they may want them later and some permanent damage can be done in addition to that I mean puberty is a very protracted thing for a lot of people it's not like oh you you know you start puberty at 14 it ends at 16 your brain's still developing so we we don't really really understand how all that works not this Olympics but prior to that one uh there was a female athlete who tested positive for Deca um the DECA burrito she blamed it on a burrito meat and I remember hearing that and I sort of factiously said and I'll say it again not factiously like if she got caught for Deca I hope she took Deca because to knowingly take a banned substance and get caught and then banned from the sport is one thing but to inadvertently take a band substance as did this Bob sleder and then get banned from your sport that's a real tragedy for multiple reasons yeah that and that's what happened Dreadful it is it's absolutely Dreadful she just she just started competing again like last month Rob and I were actually talking about this yesterday at the track she's she's made the the world indoor team for usatf uh starting next week I think it definitely happens you we we look at that and there's yeah they're blaming the burrito they're blaming meat or whatever but 100% why would you you run 5k why you taking Deca why you taking nelon it doesn't make sense no it makes zero sense you're not doing that yeah like that is from the meat well I get contacted a lot um probably not as much as other people do uh by athletes at different levels professional amateur Etc asking about ways to improve testosterone Etc I got great results all through my um mid-30s until mid-40s and and still with like Tonga Ali freeing some testosterone up my blood charts told me that worked for me may not work for everybody great fogia things like that things like that subtle effects but meaningful subtle but meaningful um and then athletes will ask me well is it allowed I said you have to check with your organization you you just can't take something you have to check with your organization the thing I am well aware of now is all the peptide use MH right peptides are really really big and they're in use in the general population more and more and it'll be interesting to see how those impact sport I'm not aware of any athletes at least not I've come to me saying they take these peptides but um it's going to be interesting to see how that shapes sport I think people overestimate how much these drugs contribute to success at the elite level yeah I I because I mean what you're talking about with these athletes you work with are just the you know hundreds and hundreds of hours of work to get a 1% Improvement in some Metric or 0.1% 0.1% it's just you know I think people really overestimate it sure if people just want to be big with a bunch of acne yeah you can do that big acne sterile like there you know they you can get that in the locker room almost any gym nowadays um please don't do it um but to get you know half a second off your time it's no drug thousands thousands of hours of work it is sleeping really well it's eating really well he's having a good proper life you know it's there's no shortcut to that there really isn't you've got to get really really fast to be fast and this is even back in the drug era you didn't take drugs to be fast you got fast first and then you took drugs and that made you faster that's how people did it you don't take drugs to get fast you don't go for 102 to 10 flat or 103 to 10 flat or 102 to 98 doesn't happen that way so it's now it's it's for me it's like the most important one for me is are you training well is it organized properly are you sleeping well are you eating well are you taking whatever the the good clean supplements that you can take and we take very very few by the way and do you have a good social life and then all of these things come together and interact in a way that feeds your purpose of run fast you know that's that's it honestly it's as I said with with Andre I spoke I started working with Andre in 2015 he could not squat his body weight basically you know three Olympic medals 18 months after starting the sport it can be done which shows yeah okay this is being done that's awesome and it it points to the fact that more muscle isn't always the solution no the things that keep coming to mind are the ability to put away uh self-consciousness to use the body to express to find oneself yeah um and it's so interesting because I thought we were going to sit down and talk about running yeah me too um but I think these are much larger and if I may uh more important themes although people should definitely Skip and stride and uh dly metrics I I'd be interested to hear your thoughts asked you this question earlier like do you feel like there is a single metric that is a better determinant for overall health or Vitality than the ability to maximally Sprint now not be fast but to go out and actually Sprint maximally think about all of the things that come along with the ride with that think about V2 Max like VO2 max in and of itself isn't important it's a proxy for all of these other things that are important the ability to Sprint maximally isn't necessarily important but it's a proxy for everything else I can't think of anything else and you're talking about somebody who's now working on grip strength uh because I was challenged publicly by Paul saladino okay um the carnivore MD who Now talks about animal diet and people are starting to take him more seriously by the way because at first it was all meat then it was meat and fruit there meat fruit and some Dairy yeah um I do this and I also eat vegetables guy has salad in his name for God's sake uh he's a friend I'm friends with him I'm friends with Lane I'm friends with AA I I get along with all those guys but some of them don't get along with each other I'll tell you that um but he challenged me to a grip strength contest which actually was not grip strength and he said this is the marker of longevity um and he hone bastard hung from a bar switching hands y for 12 plus minutes y in the rain now he someone toweling off the bar but that is a very impressive grip strength/ endurance score sure um as long as we're on this I mean this has become like kind of an online thing people want to um challenge each other with here my Biometrics you asked what are the markers of longevity Brian Johnson is big on these are my markers those have become controversial lately because it's unclear the markers were all collected at the same date uh you know there's questions about uh for instance um it's weird that testosterone would be elevated but not showing LH means you're probably enhanced and that if he is cool but people need to be very open the nice thing about what Paul showed is he showed the full length video right you have to show the full length video folks Brian I'm calling you out specifically you can't post F2 Max and not show the actual ride and the read off the off the the you have to show video people don't trust it anymore and so the point here is is grip strength is it V2 Max is it your testosterone relative to free test it's all these things like you said if I were to step back and say is there a single physical metric I I think you got me I think that the ability to run fast without blowing a gasket yeah or injuring yourself in some way um run fast for you it would be it and and I did not think about that or and I certainly wouldn't have said that at the beginning of uh this conversation so I think it's a very important insight and that if nothing else should motivate everybody to get better at it and they can check out the video that we did what you said earlier has become to me and will remain my goal I think that well-being physical well-being mental well-being is the ability to exert Express pressure mentally and physically like sit down like you know to actually generate pressure around doing something hard that's you know takes an organization of Mind and Body it could be a physical Pursuit and then to feel peace from the better expression of that cognitive or physical or creative Endeavor I think this um this pressure piece thing is is more than non-trivial I think I think it's the essence of what I've been seeking my whole life the ability to exert pressure and to create things that are meaningful and then the ability to feel peace uh I is um well it's it's yours you came up with it just um yeah but I was applying it to specifically a task 100 meter sprint task and you've taken it in yeah that makes a lot of sense I love that because you got to sleep at night you got to train hard 100% you got to do your if you're me you know formal education and then you got to also relax and have a good time and can you do them all at the same time that's the that's the key yeah can you structure your days in a way where the first two-thirds is just pure pressure and be okay with that because you know there's peace coming because of some of the things that you pressured upon yourself love it well I love it and it's all it's all yours do and um I have to say I it's been years I've been wanting to sit down and talk with you for a very long time we run into each other at track meets we do and um it's a real honor and pleasure you've taught us so much and and there's much more so I hope you'll come back at some point and we'll um talk about other things as things evolve but talk about sprinting talk about sprinting and um I'll do a dangerous thing uh which is to say if folks want to go to a track meet I'll be at the track meets um and I'll probably be letting people know when I'll be at track meets I go as a fan um I'm not looking for uh attention there I'm actually there to just enjoy the the incredible expression of the athletes both physical and emotional expression it's it's a real it's a real beautiful thing it really is no I appreciate you I appreciate you showing up to those meats and talking about those meats it's important for our our uh possibly dying sport so it's uh it's important that we get more people people out to these meets and and support track and field the the foundation of human movement well you're a legend as everyone says in the sport and outside of it too thanks so much for your time it's been it's been a real pleasure and an honor thanks Andrew appreciate you thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Stu McMillan to learn more about his work and to find links to resources that Stu provides please see the show note captions if you're learning from Andor enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zero Crossway to support us in addition please follow the podcast by clicking the follow button on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review and you can now leave us comments at both Spotify and apple please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments for those of you that haven't heard I have a new book coming out it's my very first book it's entitled protocols an operating manual for the human body this is a book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and experience and it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to Stress Control protocols related to focus and motivation and of course I provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included the book is now available by pre-sale at protocols book there you can find links to various vendors you can pick the one that you like best again the book is called protocols an operating manual for the human body and if you're not already following me on social media I am hubman lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram X threads Facebook and Linkedin and on all those platforms I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the information on the huberman Lab podcast again it's huberman lab on on all social media platforms and if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a zeroc cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep how to optimize dopamine deliberate cold exposure we have a foundational Fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training all of that is available completely zero cost you simply go to hubman lab.com go to the menu tab in the top right corner scroll down to newsletter and enter your email and I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Stu McMillan and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 23 ---
Video ID: wFucddupQlk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wFucddupQlk
Title: Boost Your Energy & Immune System with Cortisol & Adrenaline | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-03-13 12:01:31 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I explain how specific hormones influence both energy levels and the immune system and discuss practical tools for increasing energy throughout the day and managing stress.

I discuss the mechanism through which cortisol and epinephrine (adrenaline) impact the brain and body and why it’s important to regulate their levels, considering factors like time of day or stress levels. I also cover the positive benefits of short-term stress and behavioral protocols to increase energy and enhance stress resilience. Additionally, I explain how to optimize hormone levels through tools like sunlight exposure, meal timing, and supplements such as ashwagandha.

Huberman Lab Essentials episodes are approximately 30 minutes long and focus on key science and protocol takeaways from past Huberman Lab episodes. Essentials will be released every Thursday, and our full-length episodes will continue to be released every Monday.

Read the full episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/IcLrgLk

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
X: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Immunity & Energy
00:01:34 Cortisol, Epinephrine (Adrenaline)
00:03:32 Cortisol & Epinephrine Biology
00:05:20 Timing Cortisol Release, Tool: Morning Sunlight Exposure
00:07:36 Daytime Stress, Learning & Cortisol
00:08:59 Tool: Increase Energy, Ice Baths, Cyclic Breathing, HIIT
00:13:52 Tool: Building Resilience; Cortisol vs. Epinephrine Effects, Immune System
00:17:55 Brief Stressors & Immune System
00:21:37 Chronic Stress, Cortisol, Hunger & Food Choice
00:23:56 Stress & Gray Hair?
00:24:33 Reduce Cortisol & Supplements, Ashwagandha, Apigenin
00:26:18 Optimizing Cortisol & Epinephrine, Tool: Meals, Circadian Eating, Fasting
00:28:54 Recap & Key Takeaways

#HubermanLab #Science #ImmuneSystem

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to hubman Labb Essentials where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health physical health and performance I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public today we're going to focus on how particular hormones influence our energy levels and our immune system we're going to talk about the hormones cortisol and epinephrine also called adrenaline if you're somebody who has challenges with sleep or you're somebody who has challenges getting your energy level up throughout the day and getting your energy level down when you want to sleep today's episode is also for you and we are going to talk about the immune system and how to enhance the function of your immune system I think it's fair to say that most people would like to have a lot of energy during the day if you work during the day and they'd like their energy to taper off at night and I think it's fair to say that most people don't enjoy being sick and it turns out that the two hormones that dominate those processes of having enough energy and having a healthy immune system are cortisol and epinephrine I just want to cover a little bit about what cortisol and epinephrine are where they are released in the body and brain because if you can understand understand that you will understand better how to control them first of all cortisol is a steroid hormone much like estrogen and testosterone in that it is derived from cholesterol so understand that cholesterol is a precursor molecule meaning it's the substrate from which a lot of things like testosterone and estrogen are made please also understand that cholesterol can be made into estrogen or testosterone or cortisol and that cortisol is sort of the competitive partner to estrogen and testosterone what this means is no matter how much cholesterol you're eating or you produce whether not it's low or it's high if you are stressed more of that cholesterol is going to be devoted toward creating cortisol which is indeed a stress hormone however the word stress shouldn't stress you out because you need cortisol cortisol is vit you don't want your cortisol levels to be too low it's very important for immune system function for memory for not getting depressed you just don't want your cortisol levels to be too high and you don't want them to be elevated even to normal levels at the wrong time of day epinephrine or adrenaline has also been demonized a bit we think of it as this stress hormone this thing that makes us anxious fight or flight the fact of the matter is that epinephrine is your best friend when it comes to your immunity when it comes to protecting you from infection and epinephrine adrenaline is your best friend when it comes to remembering things and learning and activating neuroplasticity we're going to talk about that as well once again it's a question of how much and how long and the specific timing of release of cortisol and epinephrine as opposed to cortisol and adrenaline being good or bad they're terrific when they're regulated they are terrible when they're misregulated and we will give you lots of tools to regulate them better cortisol biology 101 in less than 2 minutes your brain makes what we call releasing hormones and in this case there's corticotropin releasing hormone CR is made by neurons in your brain it causes the pituitary this gland that sits about an inch in front of the roof of your mouth and the base of your brain to release act act then goes and causes your adrenals which sit above your kidneys and your lower back to release cortisol a so-called stress hormone but I would like you to think about cortisol not as a stress hormone but as a hormone of energy it produces a situation in the brain and body whereby you want to move and whereby you don't want to rest and whereby you don't want to eat at least at first epinephrine or adrenaline 101 in less than 2 minutes when you sense a stressor with your mind or your body senses a stress stressor excuse me from a wound or something of that sort a signal is sent to neurons that are in the middle of your body they called the sympathetic chain ganglia the name doesn't necessarily matter they release norepinephrine very quickly it's almost like a a sprinkler system that Just Hoses your body with epinephrine that will increase heart rate will increase Brea breathing rate it will also increase the size of vessels and arteries that are giving blood flow to your vital organs you also release adrenaline from your adrenals again s riding at top your kidneys and you release it from an area of your brain called Locus cerus and that creates alertness in your brain okay so we have cortisol and we have epinephrine and their net effect is to increase energy so the first tool is to make sure that your highest levels of cortisol are first thing in the morning when you wake up one way or another every 24 hours you will get an increase in cortisol it's to stimulate movement from being sleep presumably horizontal to getting up and starting to move about your day the best way to stimulate that increasing cortisol at the appropriate time is that very soon after waking within 30 minutes or so after waking get outside view some sunlight even if it's overcast get outside view some some sunlight no sunglasses do that because in the early part of the day you have the opportunity to time that cortisol release to the early part of the day it will will improve your focus it will impr improve your energy levels and it will improve your learning throughout the day so here's how it works on a sunny day so no cloud cover provided that the sun is not yet overhead it's somewhere low in the sky could have just crossed the horizon or if you wake up a little bit later it could be somewhat low in the Sky basically the intensity of light the brightness is somewhere around 100,000 Lux Lux is just a measurement of brightness on a cloudy day it's about 10,000 luxs okay so tenfold reduction but bright artificial light very bright artificial light is somewhere around a thousand luxs and ordinary room light is somewhere around 100 to 200 lucks so even if you have a very bright bulb sitting right next to you that's not going to do the job your phone will not do the job not early in the day to get the cortisol released at the appropriate time you need to get outside so let's just set a couple General parameters if it's bright outside and no cloud cover get outside for 10 minutes if it's a cloudy day dense overcast you're probably going to need about 30 minutes if it's light Cloud broken cloud cover it's probably going to be somewhere between 10 and 20 minutes this is why it's vital to get this light on a regular basis to get that cortisol released early in the day that sets you up for optimal levels of energy now throughout the day you're going to experience different things most of you are not spending your entire day trying to optimize your health you know some of you might be but most of you have jobs and you have families and you have commitments life enters the picture and provides you stressors those will cause increases in cortisol and epinephrine the key is these blips and cortisol and epinephrine need to be brief you can't have them so often or lasting so long that you are in a state of chronic cortisol elevation or chronic epinephrine elevation this system of stress was designed to increase your alertness and mobilize you towards things get you frustrated and provide the opportunity to change Behavior and the reason it works is that cortisol when it's released into the bloodstream it actually can bind to receptors in the brain it can bind receptors in the amydala fear centers and threat detection centers but also areas of the brain that are involved in learning and memory and neuroplasticity and this is why I say that neuroplasticity the brain's ability to change itself in response to experience is first stimulated by attention and focus and often a low-level state of agitation so understand that and you won't be quite so troubled about the little stress increases that you experience throughout the day now there are ways to leverage stress epinephrine and cortisol in ways that serve you and to do it in a deliberate way there are also ways to do that that increase your level of stress threshold meaning they make it less likely that epinephrine and cortisol will be released so I want to talk about the science of those practices because I get asked about these practices a lot things like Wim Hoff breathing which is also called Tumo breathing things like ice baths things like high-intensity interval training all of those things have utility the question is how you use them and how often you use them those tools just like stress from a life event can either enhance your immunity or deplete it that's right those same practices of ice baths Tumo breathing high-intensity interval training or training of any kind can deplete your immune system or it can improve them excuse me they can improve it meaning they can improve your immune system the key is how often you use them and when and so I want to review that now in light of the scientific literature because in doing that you can build practices into your daily or maybe every other day routine that can really help buffer you against unhealthy levels of cortisol and epinephrine meaning cortisol increases that are much too great or that last much too long epinephrine increases that are much too great or that last much too long let's say somebody tells you something very troubling or you look at your phone and you see a text message that's really upsetting to you that will cause an immediate increase in epinephrine adrenaline in your brain and body and chances are it's going to increase your levels of cortisol as well let's say you get into an ice bath or a cold shower that will cause an equivalent increase in epinephrine and cortisol let's say you go out for high-intensity interval training you decide you're going to run some Sprints you do some repeats or you're going to do some weightlifting in the gym or you decide that you want to do some hot yoga you're going to increase your epinephrine and cortisol levels and guess what they increase your levels of energy and alertness so if you're somebody who struggles with energy and alertness it can be beneficial provided you get clearance from your doctor to have some sort of protocol built into your day where you deliberately increase your levels of epinephrine and your levels of cortisol so it's really important to understand that the body doesn't distinguish between a troubling text message ICE Tumo breathing or high-intensity interval training or any other kind of exercise it's all stress cognitively reframing that and telling yourself I like this I enjoy it is not going to change the way that that molecule impacts your body and brain I sort of chuckle because people would love to tell you that all you have to do is say oh this is good for me no what it does to tell yourself that it's good for you or that you enjoy it is it that it liberates other molecules like dopam dopamine and serotonin that help buffer the epinephrine response now the way that it does that I've talked about previous episode but I'll just mention that dopamine is the precursor to epinephrine epinephrine is made from dopamine and that's why if you tell yourself you're enjoying something and because dopamine is so subjective that you can in some ways as long as you're not completely lying to yourself you can get more epinephrine you get more or more ability to push through something and you can sort of reframe it but it's not really cognitive reframing the cognitive part is the trigger but the it's a chemical substance that's actually occurring there it's dopamine giving you more epinephrine a bigger amplitude epinephrine release and it gives you some sense of control so here's a protocol that anyone can use if you want to increase levels of energy if you suffer from low energy during the daytime or whenever it is you'd like to be alert pick a practice that you can do fairly consistently maybe every day but maybe every third day or every fourth day maybe it's an ice bath or a cold bath maybe it's a cold shower maybe it's the cyclic in inhale exhale breathing protocol I described if that wasn't clear and people always ask for a demo I'm not going to do the whole thing right now but I'm willing to do a few rounds of this or a few Cycles I should say so it's inhale I would do that more deeply more like like you do that 25 30 times repeatedly you will start to feel warm people in the yoga Community they say you're generating heat you're not generating heat you're releasing adrenaline inhale exhale inhale exhale 25 or 30 times you will feel agitated and stressed that's because you're releasing adrenaline in your body and that's because you're releasing norepinephrine in your brain and you'll be more alert so if all these protocols all these activities are just equivalent they're just stress then how do we make them good for us how do we actually benefit from them now of course the cold itself can have some health promoting effects it can increase Brown fat thermogenesis and Metabolism high-intensity interval training or other forms of exercise of course has cardiovascular effects that can be good for us as does weight training Etc but what we're talking about here are ways to increase energy and to teach our brain and body to teach ourselves how to regulate the stress response so in addition to the benefits of the actual practices what we're talking about is building a system so that when you experience increases in epinephrine and cortisol from Life events you're able to better buffer those and we are also talking about ways that you can increase energy overall because that's what today's episode is all about energy in the immune system there's a biological mechanism that's very important if you want to do those things increase energy and your immune system on demand learn learn to buffer stress on demand in real time and it means taking these protocols these practices whether or not it's cold water or ice bath or exercise or any of those and making one small but very powerful adjustment in how you perform them but in order to make that adjustment I can't just tell you the adjustment I have to tell you the mechanism so that you know if you're doing it correctly or not this is really a case where if you can understand a little bit of mechanis M you will be far better off than just adopting protocols cortisol as I mentioned is released from the adrenals it can have action both in the body and in the brain cortisol can cross the blood brain barrier epinephrine cannot that's one of the reasons why it's released both from the adrenals in your body and released from this brain stem area the locus culus in your brain that's a powerful thing because what it means is that the body can enter states of Readiness and alertness while the Mind remains calm so I'm presuming at this point that you're getting your morning light to time your cortisol increase I'm presuming that you want more energy or that you want to increase your immune system's function and its ability to combat infections of various kinds now the simplest way to describe how to do that would be in the context of cold water or a breathing protocol let's presume cold water so let's say you decide you're going to take a cold shower you get into the cold shower and if it's cold enough that will be stressful you will experience an increase in epinephrine it will increase your alertness now you're using this as a practice as a tool to build you could call it resilience but the ability to stay calm in the mind while being stressed in the body epinephrine in the body and you do that by subjectively trying to calm yourself now you can do that by telling yourself it's good for you by emphasizing your exhales anything that you can do to try and stay calm despite the fact that you are in a heightened state of alertness you do this with exercise you could do this with music pretty much anything that will give you a really heightened state of alertness offers you the opportunity to try and stay calm in the mind what you're trying to do at a mechanistic level is to have adrenaline released from the adrenals but not have adrenaline epinephrine released from the brain stem to the same degree so you're not just trying to buffer this you're not trying to say oh this is good for me this is good for me I'm going to grind this out you're not trying to grind it out you're trying to move through this calmly while maintaining alertness in the immediate period following that practice your system your entire brain and body are different your body is actually primed to resist infection when you have high levels of epinephrine in it for short periods of time so the scientific study that explored how increasing adrenaline in the body can improve immune resistance is grounded in a well-known phenomenon that increases in stress actually protect you against infection in the short term so I want to look at the classic data first describe what was done and then I want to talk about the more recent study which is immediately actionable there are a classic set of studies that are really based mainly on the work of somebody named Bruce mckuin who was at the Rockefeller University in New York I'm not going to go through all the details of the study but essentially what they were doing was exposing subjects to some sort of infection either bacterial or viral infection and inducing stress sounds like a double whammy right you'd think that maybe getting a little electric foot shock or cold water exposure or something to increase your levels of stress and adrenaline would just make the effects of the infection worse but no quite the opposite brief bouts of stress which now you should be thinking about in terms of cortisol and epinephrine release we actually able to increase immune system function the duration here is really important because if stress stayed too high for too long then yes indeed stress can hinder the immune response but for a period of about 1 to 4 days it actually can protect you by way of increasing the immune response there's a human study that I definitely want to point out to you because it it was published more recently than the mchan work the title of the paper is voluntary activation of the sympathetic nervous system that's the system that causes figh ORF flight and AKA stress this is Cox Kox at all PN proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2014 and they incorporate the ever famous Wim Hoff breathing here's what they did they injected people with eoli and they had groups that either did the sorts of breathing I've been described ring that increase adrenaline release although I should say I don't think you need that breathing to get adrenaline release you could do it with cold exposure you could do it with other things high-intensity interval training as well and what they found was that the response to the ecoli was quite different in the people that had a protocol in this case breathing to increase adrenaline so this is a remarkable study because what they found was that The Fever The vomiting all the negative effects of eoli many of them and some cases all of them were greatly attenuated by way of engaging the adrenaline system the point is you can control your immune system by finding a way that you can increase adrenaline and this runs counter to what we always hear which is don't get too stressed or you will get sick learn to control adrenaline turn it on and turn it off learn to control cortisol turn it on with light in the morning try and turn it off and then when it spikes because of Life events learn to turn it off learning to turn on and off adrenaline AKA epinephrine and learning to turn on and off cortisol affords you the ability to turn on energy and focus and your immune system that's the most important point from today's podcast and understanding that it doesn't matter what protocol you use maybe it's a cup of coffee and running up a Hill five or six times that will improve your immune system function if you get adrenaline in your system you can use a ice bath you can use a cold bath it really doesn't matter so up until now we've been talking about increasing energy and increasing the immune system by way of cortisol and epinephrine but I'd be totally remiss if I didn't cover how cortisol and epinephrine if chronically elevated or if elevated too high can have a lot of detrimental effects your immune system over time will get battered and you won't be able to fight infection off as well right you can start laying down the sort of classic pattern of cortisol induced body fat why do we seek high fat Andor high sugar foods when we are stressed for a while why would that be and the reason is that the so-call glucocorticoids of which cortisol is a glucocorticoid it's caused as we've mentioned before by releasing hormones from the brain and AC th from the pituitary Etc but normally high levels of glucocorticoid shut off the releasing hormones in the brain and in the pituitary they shut down in a so-called negative feedback loop chronic stress however stress that lasts more than four to seven days causes changes in the feedback loop between the adrenals and the brain and the pituitary such that now the brain and the tary respond to high levels of glucocorticoids cortisol by releasing more of them it becomes a positive feedback loop and that's bad it's a Cascade of stress equals more stress equals more stress so this is why it's very important to learn to turn off the stress response so there's one study that doin her colleagues did where they stimulate chronic stress by increasing corticosterone but cortisol and they found that subjects would in increase their consumption of sugar and fat in fact they would even eat lard and that led to all sorts of things like type 2 diabetes um that led to dysfunction in the adrenal output Etc and so the real key is to learn to shut off the stress response and you should uh watch yourself next time you experience stress if it's a short-term bow of stress typically it blocks hunger if it's a longer bow of stress typically it triggers hunger in particular for these so-called Comfort Foods sugary and fatty foods other bad effects of stress is that yes indeed stress can make you go gray pigmentation of hair just like pigmentation of skin is controlled by melanocytes well it turns out that activation of the so-called sympathetic nervous system which is really just another name for the system that liberates adrenaline from the adrenals and epinephrine in the brain drives depletion of melanocytes in hair stem cells so indeed there's a rate of age that we will undergo based on our genetics but stress will make us go great how do I know the difference between chronic and AC acute stress and how do I keep chronic stress at Bay once again getting your light and your feeding and your exercise and your sleep on a consistent schedule or consistent is is going to be the most powerful thing you can do in order to buffer yourself against negative effects on Mental Health and phys physical health for that matter there are things that one can take supplements prescription drugs Etc all supplements of course have to be checked out for their safety margins for you because it's going to differ from person to person you're responsible for making sure they're safe for you if you decide to use them one of the most common ones is ashwagandha it has a very strong effect on cortisol itself how strong the decrease in cortisol noted in humans is 14.5 to 27.9 9% reduction in otherwise healthy but stressed humans the other compound that I think deserves attention is appenine a p i GE n i n appenine which is what's found in chamomile I take it before bedtime 50 milligrams the major source of action is to calm the nervous system and it does that primarily by adjusting things like Gaba and chloride channels but also has a mild effect in reducing cortisol so asoag gandha and Aenon together sort of uh I would consider the most potent commercial compounds that are in supplement non-prescription form that one could use if they were interested in reducing chronic stress especially late in the day by way of reducing cortisol late in the day so you're probably getting the impression that cortisol and epinephrine are a bit of a double-edged sword you want them elevated but not for too long or too much you don't want them up for days and days and days but you do want to have a practice in order to increase them in the short term so we should talk about protocols that can set a foundation of of cortisol and epinephrine that is headed towards optimal optimization is always going to be a series of regular practices that you do every day so sleeping at certain times light at specific times food at specific times certain foods Etc and that's highly individual but there are some universals and we've covered a number of those in the discussion today meal timing meal schedules has a profound effect on energy levels and as I mentioned before the energy I'm referring to is not glucose energy so what I'm talking about is neural energy epinephrine and cortisol fasting and timing ones eating are two sides of the same coin when our blood glucose is low cortisol and epinephrine are going to go up anytime we hav't eaten for 4 to 6 hours levels of epinephrine and cortisol are going to go up pretty substantially one thing that many people do to great benefit is they follow a so-called circadian eating schedule they eat only when the Sun is up they stop when the sun is down more or less the other way to think about this is they stop eating a couple hours before sleep and they eat more or less upon waking assuming that they're waking up more or less around the time the sun rises maybe plus or minus 2 hours now let's say you decide to do what I do which is I skip breakfast I drink water I delay my caffeine for 90 minutes to 2 hours and then I drink my caffeine and then my first meal is typically around lunchtime 11:30 or 12 so I've got a cortisol increase I've got my sunlight in the morning so I'm getting a big pulse in energy early in the day and yes there's a little bit of agitation I am hungry sometimes early in the day sometimes no but my grillin system is used to kicking in right around noon at the point where I eat as long as I don't eat carbohydrate in my case I know that my epinephrine levels are going to stay stay pretty high so for me it's usually meat and salad or something of that sort or fish and salad so fasting is a tool for many reasons can increase growth hormone Etc but today I'm talking about fasting as a tool to bias your system toward more epinephrine adrenaline release and toward more cortisol release but still low enough that it's not chronic stress that it's not causing negative health effects one has to learn how to regulate these hormones with behavior with nutrition perhaps with supplementation I also want to mention again that I think there's great benefit to having a practice that perhaps you do every other day but if you can't maybe every third day or every other day of deliberately increasing your adrenaline in your body while learning to stay calm in the mind so that you learn to separate the brain body experience the idea is to stay calm in your mind so that then you can regulate your action so once again we've covered a ton of material I hope right now you're thinking okay am I in a state of chronic stress am I under activated or could I afford to increase my levels of adrenaline cortisol to improve my relationship to my immune system and to energy neural energy and I hope that you'll think about some of the ways in which cortisol and adrenaline are not good or bad that stress isn't good or bad but short-term stress is healthy alertness and energy is healthy even if it puts you at the edge of agitation that's an opportunity to learn how to control these hormones better and I hope hope that if you're in a state of chronic stress that you'll do things to start tamping down some of that stress and that you realize that your nervous system and your hormone system are linked but they're linked in ways that you can control that we don't have to be slaves to our hormones and certainly not the hormones that cause us stress we can learn to control those both to the benefit of our body and benefit of mind thank you for joining me for what I hope was an informative discussion and an actionable discussion about how to increase energy and the immune system by way of cortisol and adrenaline epinephrine I really appreciate your willingness to learn new topics as well as to embrace and think about new tools and whether or not they're right for you and as always thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 24 ---
Video ID: ZizbA-MtjAs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZizbA-MtjAs
Title: The Best Career Path if You Have ADHD
Published: 2025-03-10 19:25:48 UTC
Description:
Dr. John Kruse discusses the idea that individuals with ADHD may benefit more from pursuing multiple shorter-term careers rather than a single long-term career, highlighting the value of varied experiences in a fragmented work world.

Transcript Language: English
So, for many people with ADHD, the best career is actually not one 50-year career. It's 10 five-year careers or five 10-year careers. And part of it is the whole work world has become more fragmented, and we're accepting more that many career trajectories are going to look not like just one beautiful arc. But I think there's a sort of a normo-centric bias to that is what you should strive for, and if you are changing careers, that's a bad thing. And yet lots of people who do worthwhile things in life, and often because of their more varied experience are bringing more to what they're doing. So I think we need to value that and embrace that as an option and accept that maybe for some people that is an optimal career path.

========================================

--- Video 25 ---
Video ID: NtQ-kdLlQiU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NtQ-kdLlQiU
Title: Improve Focus with Behavioral Tools & Medication for ADHD | Dr. John Kruse
Published: 2025-03-10 12:00:35 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. John Kruse, M.D., Ph.D., a psychiatrist specializing in treating people with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). We discuss the many stimulant and nonstimulant ADHD medications available, covering both their potential benefits and risks. We also explore behavioral approaches to managing ADHD, the key role of maintaining a consistent sleep-wake schedule, and the impact of exercise, fish oil supplementation, and video games on ADHD. Additionally, we examine the genetic and environmental factors contributing to the rise in adult and child ADHD diagnoses and offer various options to consider if you or someone you know is struggling with focus.

Read the full episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/wJDhOoO

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
Joovv: https://joovv.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman
Mateina: https://drinkmateina.com/huberman

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
X: https://x.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Dr. John Kruse*
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/@DrJohnKruse 
Medium: https://dockruse.medium.com 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/DrJohnKruse 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/john-kruse-40554018a 

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Dr. John Kruse
00:02:11 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
00:05:37 Genetics & Environment; COVID Pandemic & ADHD Diagnoses
00:11:43 Sponsors: Eight Sleep & Joovv
00:14:26 ADHD, Interest & Careers
00:20:40 Social Media & Distractibility; ADHD & Lifespan Effect
00:27:39 Hyperfocus, Flow States
00:33:45 Tools: 4 Essential Behaviors for ADHD; Regular Meal Schedule
00:41:06 Sponsor: AG1
00:42:21 Tool: Regular Sleep Timing; Stimulants & Sleep
00:48:06 Insomnia; Tools: Bedtime Structure, Exercise, Phones, Breathing
00:52:30 Nighttime Waking Up; Cyclic Sighing
00:56:35 Exercise; Addiction, Risk, Kids & Stimulants; Catecholamines & Focus
01:04:32 Ritalin, Stimulants, Amphetamines; Amphetamine-Induced Psychosis & Risks
01:16:46 Sponsor: LMNT
01:18:03 Adult ADHD & Medications; Stimulants & Cardiovascular Risk?
01:26:06 Adult ADHD Medication Choices, Psychosis, Cannabis
01:33:49 ADHD Symptoms, Nicotine; Caffeine, Energy Drinks, L-Theanine 
01:43:28 Fish Oil, Cardiac Effects & ADHD, Tool: Fish Oil Dose, EPA vs DHA
01:49:38 Sponsor: Mateina
01:51:04 Gut Microbiome
01:52:56 ADHD & Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), Tool: Task List System
01:57:52 Video Games, Neurofeedback, ADHD Benefit?, Tool: Technology Restriction
02:02:26 Guanfacine, Clonidine, Hypertension, Effects & Timeframe
02:10:13 Modafinil, History & Forms, Dependence
02:19:02 Drug Holidays; Short- vs Long-Acting Drugs, Addiction, Vyvanse
02:28:56 Time Perception, ADHD, Circadian Rhythm Disruption, Phototherapy
02:35:39 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Follow & Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Protocols Book, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science #Health #ADHD 

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Dr John Cruz Dr John Cruz is an mdphd and practicing psychiatrist who specializes in the treatment of ADHD in both kids and in adults as you'll see during today's episode Dr Cruz is among the world's top experts in understanding the various treatments for ADHD and tools for helping to overcome non-clinical issues with focus and attention we of course discuss the drug treatments for ADHD so those include Aderall rlin viance modafanil Wellbutrin basically all the drugs that are used to treat ADHD and we cover their relative advantages and disadvantages we also talk about the use of caffeine for focus and how caffeine can interact with those various drugs Dr Cruz also educates us on how specific behaviors like our sleep timing so not just the amount of sleep we get but when we sleep as well as our meals our exercise how all that can shape our levels of attention and focus and that of course is relevant not just to people struggling with attention and focus or who have ADHD but to everybody Dr Cruz isn't just a psychiatrist he also has a background in circadian biology research and he offers the intriguing idea that ADHD and other deficits in Focus May in many cases be the consequence of a misregulated circadian rhythm he tells us how to test that idea and potentially how to fix it by the end of today's episode you'll understand what stimulants do the possible origins of ADHD in both kids and adults and both the behavioral and drug treatments and non-prescription approaches to overcoming brain fog and focus challenges so by the end of today's episode you'll be armed with a ton of new knowledge and you'll have a lot of practical tools you can apply before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme this episode does include sponsors and now for my discussion with Dr John Cruz Dr John Cruz welcome I'm glad to be here today let's talk about ADHD and probably best if we start off by just kind of laying out what it is is the H is the hyperactivity component always in there uh childhood ADHD adult ADHD maybe if you would just give us the top Contour of this and then we can get into ways to combat ADHD depending on different circumstances different needs this sort of thing I'll just start out by saying that like most things in neuroscience and Psychiatry we we have some definitions and we have lots of different thoughts and Frameworks to approach things so I'll start with our diagnostic category or how we how we diagnose ADHD and that is there are 18 different different symptoms nine of them are hyperactive impulsive nine of them are inattentive so the inattentive ones are things like forgetting to follow through on things losing items um being easily distracted the impulsive and hyperactive ones are cutting people off in conversations blurting things out running around um fidgeting the definitions themselves were designed with a child population in mind because until roughly the mid90s it was Dogma that this was a dis neurodevelopmental disease of childhood and that every child who had it outgrew it that is dramatically wrong um some kids do most kids don't the latest work suggests that most adults fluctuate in time with the severity of their ADHD symptoms so jumping back to the definition so we have these 18 different symptoms as an adult you need to have at least five of them and when we say have them all of these are things that normal people can display at any time so any of us might interrupt someone might have trouble sitting might have trouble attending to a task but to meet the criteria these have to be displayed in excessive amount of time in or to an excessive degree to the extent that they're causing some dysfunction or distress and that they have to be displayed in multiple Realms of life so if it's only at work that you have trouble completing your task you know that might have something to do with your boss or uncomfortable chair or something so these have to be um traits that are displayed in multiple Realms of life um they have to cause again distress or dysfunction they have to be to an extent that's beyond what a normal person does and what's strange is often DD has a stigma it's not a real diagnosis partly because there isn't some the fancy word is pathon neonic you know some classic symptom that's characteristic exactly of that so with schizophrenia we have hallucinations most people aren't having hallucinations if you have those you know you might have schizophrenia or a drug effect but but that's unusual again with ADHD they're all usual behaviors it's just to an unusual extent so the diagnosis comes under a lot of stigma stigma and questioning you know isn't this just normal behavior carried to an a ridiculous extent so you mentioned that there can be a lot of environmental dependence one thing that I and I know a lot of people wonder about is with the Advent of more people working at home and certainly during lockdowns kids were at home for school as well but is it the case that when somebody with ADHD is in their home environment where there typically you know more options of things to do that the symptoms get worse as opposed to when they go to say a restaurant or to school or to uh play a sport or to work where sure there are multiple things you can do in those environments but they're more constrained in terms of the the different sides of oneself the different activities that one tends to um engage in is that is that common yeah so I'll back up a little bit that like of our other mental health or psychiatric conditions there's clearly both a biological component ADHD and clearly a social environment or the nature and nurture question isn't which is it it's always both so at ADHD we know there's a very strong genetic component the heritability factor is around 08 which is about as strong as the heritability factor for height or for schizophrenia so does that mean that if you're an identical twin and your twin has ADHD that there's a sort of essentially a point8 probability that you'll have it as well or is this through I mean heritability is a little more technically sophisticated and it's about the variance due to sure but it's high likelihood so this tends to run in families but but again it has a social it it's you're not just a brain in the world you're a brain interacting with the world and with ADHD we like to frame it as both structure is important and demands are important so one of the aspects of ADHD separate from the the official how we categorize it in term or diagnose it in terms of symptoms we most often are understanding at this day and age as a problem with executive functions of the brain how the brain's working memory Works how selective attention works or doesn't work how emotional regulation is working or not how impulse control is working and essentially the ADHD brain is less able to provide the structure it needs so it's more reliant on an optimal structure in the outside world so getting the home versus um working in a work office environment part of the problem is if you're in a in a traditional office environment you know you're starting a specific time everyone else is doing their work at a certain time you know when you go to lunch is clear you may have people checking in or seeing you hallway you know Larry is your how far along are you on this cating project are you going to be ready for it on time when you're home you don't get any of that reinforcement you don't have any of that structure so I mean structure is a Goldilocks issue it's not just more structure is always good because if you put or impose too much structure on someone so most people with ADHD are really lousy assembly line workers they don't want to be just picking up one bolt screwing it on the side of Lexus or whatever and watching the car move down the line that's too stultifying too limiting too structured so you need the optimal amount of structure and with covid and working from home and kids being at the home so one thing it created is less structure for the day but it also increased the demand side of the equation so the cognitive demand not only did you have to manage your own time and schedule now in addition to doing your work you had to schedule it but you might have had screaming kids in the other room or you might have had your partner who wants to use that room for you know their quiet meetings some the time when you're trying to do it so the demands increased for many people and the structure decreased and that was sort of a um what's a perfect storm for creating more ADHD and what's really interesting from a mental health perspective at the very start of the covid epidemic mental health figure said you know we know if this is a massive epidemic and we're going to have to do quarantine and people we know depression's going to go up we know anxiety is going to go up we know alcohol and substance abuse is going to go up we know PTSD and domestic violence is going to go up they claimed suicide would go up that was incorrect and we can get into that but I think there's an ADHD reason why it didn't go up nobody that I heard was mentioning that ADHD would go up and part of it is because partly to hold on to its legitimacy as a real psychiatric diagnosis both many patients and many researchers in the field hold so strongly to this is a biological condition why would it change you know I mean we can understand why PTSD more people are being traumatized Uncle Joe just died from coughing his lungs out from Co you know PTSD it's easy to see or depression you've just lost your job and whole industry you know you're a restaurant worker that's not coming back so we could easily relate stories as to why these other conditions were going to go up but there was no prediction again mostly because I think the the defensiveness of the ADHD community and not wanting to acknowledge as much that there's a real nurture component and not just a nature component and yet what we've seen just looking at prescriptions and and you know this the media has jumped all over this not only have ADHD diagnosis gone up considerably but also um prescription stimulant have shot up dramatically in the last few years I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity now I've spoken before on this podcast about the critical need for us to get adequate amounts of quality sleep each night now one of the best ways to ensure a great night's sleep is to ensure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct and that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3° and in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized your body temperature actually has to increase about 1 to 3 degrees eight sleep makes it very easy to control the temperature of your sleeping environment by allowing you to program the temperature of your mattress cover at the beginning middle and end of the night I've been sleeping on an eight Sleep mattress cover for nearly 4 years now and it has completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep eight sleep recently launched their newest generation of the Pod cover called the Pod 4 ultra the Pod 4 ultra has improved cooling and heating capacity I find that very useful because I like to make the bed really cool at the beginning of the night even colder in the middle of the night and warm as I wake up that's what gives me the most slow wave sleep and rapid eye movement sleep it also has snoring detection that will automatically lift your head a few degrees to improve your air flow and stop your snoring if you'd like to try an eight Sleep mattress cover go to 8sleep.com huberman to save up to $350 off their pod 4 ultra eight sleep currently ships in the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again that's 8sleep.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by ju juv makes medical grade red light therapy devices now if there's one thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast it is the incredible impact that light can have on our biology now in addition to sunlight red light and near infrared light sources have been shown to have positive effects on improving numerous aspects of Cellar and organ Health including faster Muscle Recovery improved skin health and wound healing improvements in acne reduced pain and inflammation even mitochondrial function and improving Vision itself what sets Tu lights apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy device is that they use clinically proven wavelengths meaning specific wavelengths of red light and near infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal seller adaptation personally I use the ju whole body panel about three to four times a week and I use the ju handheld light both at home and when I travel if you'd like to try juv you can go to juv spelled jv.com huberman juv is offering an exclusive discount to all hubman lab listeners with up to $400 off ju products again that's ju spell jv.com huberman to get up to $400 off I'm fascinated by this relationship between of optimal structure and difficulty or at least optimal structure versus having some um margins for exploration at one's job I realize it's very difficult to throw out uh kind of pan statements about what sorts of work and professions are going to be best for people with ADHD but um in your clinical observation can you perhaps point us to kind of clusters of professions where people with ADH h d tend to gravitate toward because they they have sufficient or even hyper uh proficiency there like would we say like the creative arts where you know as long as they can get themselves to to uh to the theater um they tend to do well when um improv I'm I'm using extreme kind of almost silly examples but those are professions indeed versus um a job where people have quote unquote Banker hours where it's you know 9 to5 I could see that being an advantage also being very difficult and of course or accounting where you know literally uh decimal points matter and and every every digit counts so are there sort of clusters I'm going to step back and answer I'll get to your answer but I'm going to to frame it two different ways first one is and I didn't come up with this but I think it's one of the most insightful quips about ADHD is that non-adhd brains are importance driven you know if you know you have to move your car because you get a parking ticket you go out and move it if you know taxes need to be paid in April you know it's a boring thankless job nobody en well maybe a few people enjoy it but most of us aren't CPA is Art you take care of it the ADHD brain in contrast is an interest driven brain so they know yeah yeah yeah I should be doing my taxes but hey look at how the Warriors are doing in their basketball playoff game look at this cool cat video oh I'd rather do something else so regarding career work I think the most important thing is that it's that's interesting to you so I we can talk about Realms of work or certain um career paths but if it's not compelling to you if it's not interesting to you it's it's going to be hard to work at it even if it's structurally maybe a better support for you does that carry over to other domains of life do you see for instance that people with ADHD are um have a harder time with parenting um not that um kids aren't super interesting but you know some of their activities might be less interesting to parents than others versus people who are just um I think of this word importance driven is just kind of like really dutiful like it's it's it you do it because you're supposed to do it part of how the field like actually in the 90s started becoming aware that adults could have ADHD is that all these clinicians who were having ADHD clinics for kids were starting to notice wait a minute this parent is showing up 20 minutes late to pick up his kid wait a minute the parent didn't fill the prescription so the kid went for two weeks without the medication they started becoming more aware of ADHD and adults by seeing that the adults who were parents of these kids and again there's a strong genetic connection had ADHD so there are certainly wonderful loving supportive nurturing parents with ADHD but studies that have looked at you know trying to find some objective measures are things more likely to be forgotten misplaced mislaid go off track with an ADHD family absolutely and one of the more powerful sets of interventions for kids with ADHD separate from medications is family-based training that helps get the whole family one to understand how the kids's brain is working differently but actually it might not be that differently it might be exactly dad or mom's brain is working but to help them function as more consistent parents so the other bias I'd say again before spec identifying specific careers is it is a society we've long cherished or valued the guy who worked 50 years for Eastman Kodak company and got the gold watch at the end was sort of the epitome of what you should strive for in a career but if you're interest driven and your interest change so for many people with ADHD the best career is actually not one 50-year career it's 10 fiveyear careers or five 10e careers and part of it is as the whole work world has become more fragmented and you know upheaval is the name of the game and break things quickly is the motto of Silicon Valley not I didn't phrase that quite right but the message I think is still there we're accepting more that many career trajectories are going to look not like just one beautiful Arc but I think there's a sort of a normos Centric bias to that is what you should strive for and if you are changing careers you that's a bad thing and yet lots of people who do worthwhile things in life and often because of their more varied experience they're bringing more to their what they're doing so I think we need to value that and embrace that as an option and accept that maybe for some people that is an optimal career path I can relate I mean I spent 20 plus years training to become a bench scientist and run a lab and then now I still teach and hold my appointment still involved in a bit of research but I'm in a second career now is MH um and I imagine there'll be a third um we can talk later if you think I have ADHD or not um I certainly consume a lot caffeine and we'll come back to the idea the relationship between um uh levels of caffeine consumption and uh Poss possible ADHD we'll see we're seeding the discussion for later on that we hear pretty often that social media and scrolling um X or scrolling Instagram or Tik Tok is quote unquote giving people ADHD um are there any data either clinical or otherwise that suggests that the mere practice of look looking at you know 10,000 different contexts or even you know you know 15 videos in for a minute while standing at the bus stop is somehow creating um more a distractability in other domains of life yeah so I'd say there's a lot of good Neuroscience research or neuros pychological data that the more time you spend immersed in social media and it's the constant it's the barrage of information and and not just the volume of information but that you are constantly being interrupted and that most of these interruptions are intentionally designed to attract your attention and that the more people practice thinking that way or being in the world that way yes it's harder to sustain attention for long periods of time that you are you train yourself to overreact to any new distraction so so the core elements of some of the executive functions that are impaired in ADHD we are all becoming more ADHD like so that that's the thesis of the book that I've been working on that's still several months from going anywhere but I call it attention deficit world and one of the things that's been frustrating is that there's been this huge disconnect there have been people writing about you know the question you're asking that the Neuroscience are brains getting more distracted are we becoming you know it's not just distracted you know immersion in this media world or social media cell phone however you want to break it down it's not all bad it's not just that concentration is worse so you know detecting visual items in the environment being there's some things that people become more Adept at whether that's actually a good thing to be more Adept at um people do multitask more quickly or switch in and out of it they're still not doing as well on that task if they had no distractions and just focus solely but they're multitasking better than people who don't immerse themselves a lot in the internet so there's a whole literature and popular books and attention we know everyone's getting a little more distracted and but all the books that talk about that say well this is just sort of everyday stuff this has nothing to do with ADHD and there's lots of wonderful ADHD books out there and they say ADHD is this discret condition even if they acknowledge it's on a spectrum of severity but that it's really serious stuff and we don't you know just because you forgot your homework or you left your car keys or you can't remember where you parked your car everyone does that and we want to make sure that you respect that ADHD is a serious and potentially disruptive condition and and when I say serious and I'm going to go on this tangent for a little bit the caricatures of ADHD is you know oh there's the squirrel you know it's silly it's people are distracted ditsy late doing things that we make fun of in society and we ignore that many of these things can have a more serious repercussions inside to it so a kid who has ADHD their life expectancy is about 10 years shorter than their non-adhd peers that is the same extent of cutting off life is having diabetes or having major depression is that because of um accidents addiction injury almost all of it is two factors and they're almost equally one is accidents so motor vehicle accidents you know if you're driving distracted you're more likely to be involved in accidents but it's also you know the kid who's probably being more daring with the tractor on the farm or daring the bull or I mean also sorts of accidents not just motor vehicle accidents and the other is suicide and some of the suicide is because there is an overlap with depression and anxiety and other factors but I'm convinced and not many people are looking at this angle some are with suicide we focus so much on the despair the misery that someone hates her life I mean but there's lots and lots of depressed people who don't kill themselves the other really important element to suicide is impulsivity is lots of people feel really bad but we know having guns and households increases the right of likelihood someone's going to shoot them accessibility to tools that you can quickly use to kill yourself which shows if you slow down the thinking process if you give people more time if they are less impulsive they are less likely to kill them they still might be miserable um and that's that's my explanation for why even though during covid lockdowns and we did see increases in depression we did see increases of PTSD we did see increases in domestic abuse and battering and we saw actually a decrease in suicide during that time how does that make any sense and it wasn't huge but since suicides been going up every year prior to that it's pretty clear and blatant in the data and remarkable and my claim is so many more people were at home you know your kids not around to play with the gun or find the gun or you know you know what's going on or poison or hanging themselves from the door or whatever else they might do very interesting I I didn't realize that ADH carried this um lifespan liability um and 10 years is certainly significant there's also the middle ground so I I sort of mentioned that the caricature is sort of the silliness and the trivial of being late for your friends at the restaurant or forgetting your car keys and the extreme is death but in between we know ADHD measurably derails education disrupts social relationships impacts your likelihood your earning potential I mean ADHD isn't just an academic cognitive problem it isn't just who's going to jump through the hoops and get through school it isn't just who's turning in their reports or um doing their work on time in the work it's also having social implications and in all those areas it's having measurable detrimental significant impacts on people's lives my understanding and and you'll see how this weaves into the previous uh question in a moment my understanding is that people with ADHD have the ability to focus quite intensely on things that really capture their interest um I I don't know if I have ADHD or not I I suspect if I it's rather mild or I just feel lucky that I uh went through the educational system at a time when there were no smartphones I'm really grateful for that I actually used to unplug the phone in the laboratory where I was a PhD student so that I could just do experiments from 5pm on because that was the only way people could reach me and I certainly am familiar with the it's it's almost a druglike effect of dropping into an activity sometimes people call it flow but for me it just is dropping into an activity did some early morning writing this morning and gosh the the feeling of pleasure just everywhere from head to toe after doing 20 minutes of focused work or 30 minutes of focused work is is so striking to me and yet I like I think most people find it difficult sometimes to just get rid of all the distractions unless there's a deadline which is one of the reasons I love deadlines so the question is this is it true that people with ADHD can in fact Focus but that somehow whatever neural or neurochemical thresholds are there to allow them to drop into Focus um they're just much higher thresholds it just takes more fear of a deadline or fear of a consequence or excitement about the activity uh is is that true yeah so I'll back up a little bit and I maybe should have said this when we were talking about diagnosis and what is ADHD and many people think it's a horrible title because it focus on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and it's very clear as your enumerating here it's not a deficit of attention if it's a deficit at all it's a deficit of control over attention and with attention there's at least three different Realms where we're controlling it I mean one is we direct attention so if something's important going on over there there so we have to be able to shift it two you have to be able to sustain it so if if it's a situation that's appropriate to be sustaining it and three is you need to shift out of it if it's inappropriate to stay in it and in all three of those Realms people with ADHD have less volitional control over their attention so many people in the ADHD who experience it describe hyperfocus as one of their superpowers and that is where they're getting so absorbed in their work that they are you know so busy coding that actually everyone else in the office is left and it's only when the janitor is coming and emptying the garbage cans at 11:00 p.m. that oh my God I'm where is everyone I'm still here because I was so intently working on the project some people strongly resist the idea that Flo and I'm going to butcher the CH chck uh CHS Mah yeah no one can pronounce his name even fewer can spell it so we're okay yeah my reading of when I sort of delved into this I think hyperfocus is exactly a flow State because people are describing the same lack of awareness of time lack of and it's always I mean it's a task that's somewhat challenging and engaging and interesting it's not just that you know if it were just about enjoyment or Bliss you could hyperfocus looking at us beautiful flower people don't describe that so it it needs the right amount of challenge it can't be too easy it can't be too hard has to be something important and interesting to you um and involves you know Oblivion not just to time but also to lots of space going around you um so I think they are pretty close if not the same phenomena flow in hyperfocus and some people with ADHD and I think some who are ones who learn what situational factors or what internal factors can help get them into that state but but many of them still struggle with it showing up when they don't want to be hyperfocused on something or or have trouble engaging it when it would be useful to I sometimes use the absent-minded Professor excuse um but only uh half jokingly there there's a photograph that I love of the great Oliver Sachs the neurologist turn writer man who mistook his wife for his hat Awakenings and so forth um people may be familiar with Oliver's work and and it's a photograph of Oliver at a train station lots of bodies moving around um him some blurry so there's motion there and he's standing there with um I think he's got his pipe in his mouth um and he's writing outside the train station his bag has fallen to the floor some items are coming out and he's he was a known and self-professed um meth methamphetamine addict for a great portion of his uh medical and um writing career um and you know sort of alluded to the idea that he had these Tendencies and I I raised this as an example because I see that photo and I see somebody who's in hyperfocus in a very dis um busy environment but he wrote I spent a lot of time with his work and his autobiography Etc and talk to people who knew him and it seemed that he was constantly seeking novel environments where there was a lot of stimulation and somehow that allowed him to drop into these tunnels of focus whereas when he spent a lot of time alone there were bouts of focus but the quiet actually became a distraction it was as if somebody in here was speculating um uh about diagnosis but that there's something about external anchors and internal anchors and that you know finding that sweet spot is really about knowing ourselves and where we work best at particular times and this is something I'd like to transition into here is talking about the fact that there isn't just one environment that works for somebody it seems like it's often the case that it's certain environments for morning certain environments for afternoon certain environments having returned from vacation you can probably see where I'm going with this what are your thoughts on people trying to with ADHD or not trying to um identify sort of best conditions for them and how important is circadian uh time here I know you have and of course I mentioned in the introduction that you a lot of background in in circadian biology which I think brings in a a really additional and unique Dynamic to to your understanding of ADHD so many people come to me as a psychiatrist for ADHD are primarily focused on medications and we still know that the stimulants are the single most powerful I mean in terms of extent of symptom reduction overall and in terms of the percentage of people they help they're our most potent tool I mean the medicine's not going to change everything and you need to be focusing on your life as well and I always start with scheduling and many people with ADHD find scheduling anathema that that's you know like the slaves on the galley ship being told you have to row stroke stroke stroke and what I tell them is that the part of you that's going to help make the schedule that works for you isn't some evil Taskmaster trying to make you do what you don't want to do it's actually the wisest smartest nicest kindest part of you that's identified what are your lifetime what are your bigger goals how are going to match what you're doing in the minute to line up with those bigger goals so and this analogy isn't perfect but the best one I've come up with so rather than the guy in the Viking ship the person you the part of you that's making your schedule is a mother hen who's sort of counting all the chicks and making things aligned and nestling down and hunkering around you and taking care of you and nurturing you and with scheduling what I tell people is before you slot in your work or your homework or your school or or externally derived tasks I tell people you need to have the four basics and sleep is Far and Away the biggest basic particularly for a it's it's intial for all of us but it's particularly critical for ADHD and there's particular reasons why it's a particular challenge for people with ADHD but I'm trying to think if I can imagine a counter example I would say all the successful people I know with ADHD have found some way to try to regularize their sleep compared to what it would be if if they were just so the four Essentials I say are sleep eating exercise or some amount of movement because again with the hyperactivity there's there's people who can sit at a desk for 12 hours not even getting up to for a bathroom break or to eat or anything that's not just bad I mean that's bad for your brain bad for your body and then the fourth thing I put in is a miscellaneous category of me time relaxation meditation I I put all those in the same slot maybe they shouldn't and all those need to be in place um we can talk more about sleep but I'll just say a little bit more about the eating component one of my so we have our diagnostic criteria for ADHD but I had over the years two different real life tests um the office I had was an old Victorian home so was a home office office itself was at the entrance was at the end of a short but very steep driveway so it's a separate door and I would always explain to every new patient the exact same thing you know there's a house at 45 Hartford the office is at 45a the entrance is at the end of the driveway and I actually did the data on it um the only people who ever showed up at the front door the home door were the people with ADHD now everyone it wasn't um it was specific for ADHD it wasn't completely sensitive so some of the ADHD people got it right but never did anyone who was coming in for OCD or depression or PTSD show up at the front door and I gave the instructions at the same time and sometimes I didn't know beforehand that the person was coming in for ADHD because they didn't know but if they showed up at the front door that always made me you know uh oh I better make sure I asks specific detailed questions about the ADHD possible component so the other sort of real life diagnostic test I had if someone during the evaluation would say something like or in a subsequent session oh it was 4:00 yesterday and I just realized I hadn't eaten all day ding ding ding ding ding that's I mean I have people who died I have people who have you know fasting regimens or others but they're not forgetting to eat and and it's not that everyone at the ADHD does that but either either not getting the right interos receptive cues from your body or not paying attention to them is something that's been measurable in people with ADHD so having a regular meal schedule so having a regular meal schedule and again getting back to the covid in workplace if you're you know I had lots of people in Tac who really lamented now I have to work for home they were giving me lunch a healthy nice lunch each day at work they're scrambling to to even use the home you know meal Delivery Systems because getting that organized and set up is just too overwhelming for them and again these are bright people who are succeeding in most parts of their life are these people with ADHD sometimes also starting a meal taking a few bites and then going back to work and then like the meal never really um never really ends it just sort of uh sort of fragments into the rest of the day that can be one variation mhm but it's it's often just completely forgetting or being oblivious to or I mean the other ways ADHD is canl a role is I was meaning to have breakfast before I left the house but always when it's time to leave the house you forget that you hadn't done this and the kids shoes need to be tied and oh do I need a new toothbrush I better go check upstairs before I go out because I'm going to the CVS store I mean time management is a problem with ADHD you know an executive function problem interestingly it's not one of the 18 symptoms in our official checklist so official checklist is sort of a crude clinical attempt to map out a lot of the aspects of ADHD but it misses a lot so there's emotional regulation problems we know something like 60% of people with ADHD acknowledge having that emotions explode or come up bigger stronger and are harder to regulate and that's nowhere acknowledged in our official diagnostic symptomatology I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor ag1 ag1 is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink with adaptogens I've been taking ag1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring this podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still take ag1 is because it is the highest quality and most complete foundational nutritional supplement what that means is that ag1 ensures that you're getting all the necessary vitamins minerals and other micronutrients to form a strong foundation for your daily Health ag1 also has probiotics and prebiotics that support a healthy gut microbiome your gut microbiome consists of trillions of microorganisms that line your digestive tract and impact things such as your immune system status your metabolic Health your hormone health and much more so I've consistently found that when I take ag1 daily my digestion is improved my immune system is more robust and my my mood and mental focus are at their best in fact if I could take Just One supplement that supplement would be ag1 if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 with your order of ag1 again go to drink a1.com huberman to claim this special offer so we've got sleep eating exercise or movement and relaxation maybe um before we start talking about some medications and some other factors that modulate ADHD if we could maybe step through each of those and um you could share with us some of your favorite tools that you um give your patients um and that you teach online um realizing of course that each one of those is a vast topic that could we could do entire we have done entire podcasts on but um I'm curious about your um favorite go-to tools we were talking about a few of these before we started so sleep um Regular to bed in wakeup times Matthew Walker in his great book on sleep one of my favorite things about it is he really emphasizes this point that quality sleep isn't just about eight hours it isn't just duration it's getting quality sleep and the timing of your sleep is every bit as important as the duration so if you're used to sleeping midnight to 8:00 a.m. and you're staying up dancing or partying till 4:00 a.m. and you say oh it's a weekend I can sleep until noon you may still get those eight hours but they're not restorative to the same extent as if you had slept at your regular time and it's I mean my my PhD research was on circadian rhythms we had Realms of data back then so this was 40 30 plus years ago we had every bit as much data then that that the timing of sleep was as important as a duration and yet every Public Service Announcement just says get your eight hours s you know why are we leaving out this other piece we've known for decades that people with ADHD have a strong propensity to being night owls to have a different Chon chronotype where they're maybe more effective or functional later in the day a tendency to stay up um for many years now we've actually known that there's a this is strongly genetically controlled so we do have you know there are genetic markers affecting sleep timing that are over represented strongly in the ADHD community so some of it is you are pushed that way but some of it is the nature of ADHD that if you you know procastinating is part of ADHD if you procastinate you're going to push things off till the end of the day um some people the end of the day is better time to work because there's fewer distractions you know if everyone else is asleep finally no one's going to come in and interrupt your work or ask what your thoughts on this project are but again getting regular sleep and regular and sufficient doesn't mean it has to be what I'd say normal you know if it works for you if you can build your career and your social life around sleeping from 2: a.m. till 10:00 a.m. every day I'd say go for it if you can be consistent with it um so what are the things that help with getting regular sleep one thing paradoxically for many people is actually being on stimulant medications MH so stimulants do have as a side effect some people have insomnia some people stay up later but more people with ADHD tend to either because it's the drug is wearing off at the end of the day and there's some crash and alertness or energy or because they're being more productively ener expending energy and are more tired at the end of the day or it's just helping synchronize circadian Clocks by getting a consistent start early in the day we don't know the mechanism by which it works there's there's lots of plausible and overlapping ones but again daytime alertness medications can help can I run something by you in that context before we jump back um I don't consistently take stimulants except caffeine and I limit my caffeine intake to prior to 2 p.m. and I stack it pretty heavy in the early part of the day but on occasion I'll take 25 to 50 milligrams of Wellbutrin which uh you know better than I is um slightly dopaminergic but certainly triggers uh noradrenergic release so um epinephrine norepinephrine stim it's a stimulant on the days when I take that which again is very rare and I track my sleep every night I notice a significant Improvement in my sleep and significant increase in my rapid eye movement sleep it's extremely consistent so from that I um sort of uh reverse engineered the major effect being norepinephrine epinephrine I decided Well I would do something else that I know raises epinephrine which is I'll do a cold plunge first thing in the morning of 1 to 3 minutes long and the effect isn't quite as strong but on those same days when I do that clearly adrenaline raising activity I also see a uh for me a significant increase in my rapid eye movement sleep and the quality of sleep later that night so I think there really is something to this epinephrine obviously going you know H and with stimulants um epinephrine Spike early and throughout the day um with better rapid eye movement sleep at night does that logically hold for you it's just a story but you know I was going to say both those have some science background so I'd say I'm glad it works and what's hard to sorting out is why it's working is one is you know potential placebo effect you're doing it because you're thinking or hoping it works good and two I'd say maybe even more importantly than the placebo effect is the days that you're deciding to do this there's something different about those days to begin with because you're not doing it every day so those potential issues aside I I'll jump into insomnia and Matthew Walker talks about some of this to me maybe the biggest finding in insomnia sleep medicine in the last 20 years is that almost everyone who has a problem with insomnia doesn't have a problem with sleep huh what that does sound like I'm contradicting myself what I mean is the Sleep systems intact it's there it's waiting to arrive and put you to sleep each night what the problem and this is from the Sleep researchers with at least 90% probably more of people who have insomnia problems is a failure of the daytime arousal system to shut off properly so normally we have these two mutually inhibitory systems wakefulness arousal system and a sleep sedation system and usually when one turns on the other turns off the and with most people's problem with insomnia it isn't that sleep is weak or insufficient or not there it's sitting it's waiting there it just can't land on the landing pad because you're too aroused or too awake I mean maybe that helps the arousal system to turn off better at the end of the day if it's gotten more fully engaged during the day I don't know but it it feeds back more into some of the non-medication approaches to helping with sleep and that is doing everything you can again not just to force sleep or push it because that doesn't work very well it's getting rid of arousal it's dampening arousal so for people with ADHD one is you know deciding on what's a reasonable bedtime you know having thinking about this ahead of time and two eliminating any stimulate I mean one so exercise I'm a big fan of I'm a marathon runner I know you're heavily into exercise as well um exercising too late in the evening can Elevate body temperature disrupt falling asleep so physical arousal we don't want to be doing a lot of late in the day and emotional intellectual cognitive arousal too so the biggest single tool in Modern Life is do not have your phone in your bedroom and that's hard for lots of people to do but if it's there you're going to be checking it I mean Studies have been shown even if you're not checking it if it's there you're thinking about it or looking at it just having it away out of sight is better than having it visible and turned off two is using if you have someone you're sharing a bed with or family members using them to help reinforce yes it and it's really helpful to talk about this ahead of time because the exact same words can either be sounding like a nag or someone trying to exert their power over you rather than with people with ADHD we know need reminders they know they need some of that external structure and if you are on the same page and can have a partner or kid or someone else present hey Dad shouldn't you be turning off the computer and heading to bed right now that can be helpful again it can be destructive if it's not done in a framework where both people are on board and it's not fair to make the other person responsible for your own behavior but lots of people are usually happy to help the person with ADHD be more organized in their life so we were also talking a little bit before one of my favorite tools for falling asleep is actually cyli S I mean there are other box breathing and other techniques that help someone relax so we know cylic sing engages a parasympathetic nervous system our rest and digest system I mean one of the things that happens normally in the transition every night when you fall asleep is you're going from primarily sympathetic tone to primarily parasympathetic tone so anything that is strengthening or putting you there already makes it easier um I know you have videos about cyclic sing and I do too I mean my own experience which I was sharing with you before we started talking was not only does cylic sing help me f asleep better it actually help me stay asleep throughout the night better that's a remarkable thing because many people including myself have very little trouble falling asleep especially given how I stack caffeine in the early part of the day and then stop in the afternoon it allows me to fall asleep within seconds um somewhere for me typically around 10: p.m. somewhere between 10: and 11:00 p.m. is my typical bed time but then I consistently wake up uh at uh you know 3: in the morning usually get up use the restroom and then go back to sleep most of the time without too much trouble provided there isn't a lot of stress in my external life and provided the phone is not in in the bedroom um but as we were also talking about before we uh turned on the microphones um this idea that our bladders get smaller as we age is is complete nonsense right so that can't be the explanation why people wake up uh more in the middle of the night as as they get older yeah I mean some might I mean some it may be a prostate issue you know clearly that isn't accounting for half the population but I think it's much more the neurologic interation of our bladder you know all our nerves start functioning not quite as well and they're just getting the signal that I really need to urinate right now when pretty clearly most of those people don't they could wait but the signal is arriving that says you have to and it's believable and you don't want to deal with it if it's you know you don't want to not listen to it if it is right so so how much cyclic sighing are you doing before sleep and how long before sleep is the cyclic sighing done so when I read your paper with spel and others January for years I've said I don't have a meditation practice most people think I'm sort of so chill or relax that I do I you seem like a pretty mellow dude I I haven't ever taken the time to do it which I'm embarrassed by so I said read the paper I can do 5 minutes a day of cyclic sighing and I tried and it was some days I was getting it in and many days I wasn't getting it in till bedtime which is the again I slept really well till I was around 40 and not so well the next 20 years both the mostly with the trouble falling asleep even though I knew relaxation techniques and others so I wound up just consistently doing it to do it more for the General Health and I do have slightly elevated blood pressure and relaxation and to see what effect would have and it was clear so I do about 5 minutes and much more than 5 minutes I tell people and I might be doing it a little slower than most count out about 20 or 25 reps of it and if you lose track doesn't matter just go back to the lowest number because again everything we're trying to do is decrease arousal if you have a timer on it and you do it for 5 minutes and then you're woken up you're reversing or mitigating some of the benefit benef of doing it so I my recommendation is do it for five minutes about but do it by counting reps and don't Focus or you know if it's six minutes if it's four I mean there's so many aspects of this and we know the exhalation has to be longer I was trying to find is you know is anyone systematically you know is a 4-second exhalation better than 10 versus 6 and those studies would be so simplistic and easy to do but you know there's lot lot of variables that we can play with to see what's optimal I don't think we know at all what's optimal but we know what's good enough to work oh delighted to hear that it's worked so well for you I I'm as people know I'm a huge fan of the physiological sigh and I take no credit for having discovered it it was discovered by physiologist in the 19 data point that I I shared with you is that prior to trying cyclic sighing at night time I was waking up virtually every single night once a night to urinate and in the 18 months 20 months since I've been doing it I think it's been a total four times that I've woken up during the night to urinate fantastic so we're talking about sleep you mentioned earlier um encouraging people with ADHD or who think they might have ADHD to keep a somewhat regular eating schedule or at least to make sure that they're eating yeah um and to not let their meals get fragmented into starting a meal then finishing it later like have for some people it's breakfast lunch and dinner for some people like myself it's lunch snack dinner whatever it is keeping a regular schedule um exercise aside from encouraging people to not exercise too late in the day um certainly not um caffeine and exercise late in the day are there any data about specific types of exercise being better for um ADHD independent of effects on sleep I realize they're hard to tease apart yeah there's a few studies looking acute aerobic exercise part of it is that it's hard to study people when they're exercising during many exercise I mean you're not going to wire someone up when they're swimming for example so there's not a lot of studies in anyone approach and there's so much diversity that often it just gets lumped together so there do seem to be some acute effects of measurably improving some of the executive functions associated with better attention from acute exercise and there seem to be some more general or longer term benefits from people who are consistently actively exercising having you know being able to concentrate longer being able to switch of attention more appropriately or effectively and there's a huge body of sort of clinical literature of patients reporting you know I know I feel much more alert today I get my workout in the gym in or I feel better or that you know the week I took off from that was a big mistake but I would say identifying at what's the most valuable or what's the best duration I've ran through the data about a year or two ago and it's I would say that we can't make any conclusions and I would say at some level try it and see what works for you and that's what's important it isn't what works for everyone is there a relationship between ADHD and addiction because of the impulsivity component yes and and so the answer is and these are really rough statistics I actually one of my pet peeves is people who quote Oh the rate of this is 27.4 3% well it might have been in that study but that's looking at one population at one said it so I use ballpark figures the ballpark figure is Americans in the last 20 years more than that about 20% of Americans run into some addiction substance addiction problem either alcohol drugs people with ADHD have a rate that's almost double and it's higher in men than in women double almost double almost 40% risk and that's for substance abuse not behavioral addictions yeah that's substance abuse and that's looking at abuse and we can get into the related topic of what's misuse and versus abuse and I have pet peeves there however kids who are put on stimulant medications when they're young and and I should say the stimulant themselves do have a small potential for addiction but putting kids on stimulants pretty much normalizes their rate of addiction problems so half it protects them this is a really important point that I think maybe we just hover on for a second um because I think many people including myself assume that well if you we're you know putting these kids on amphetamines of which you know many of the medications for ADHD are that were creating kids that are addicted to amphetamines or to a hypers stimulation period but you're telling me it's actually protective to put kids with real ADHD on medication for ADHD I can say not absolutely every study has found this but several large metaanalyses have gone back and most of them have found this fairly dramatic benefit to being on stimulant as a kid in terms of specifically reducing substance abuse risk and some of them that have looked at this when I said it was a yes and um it seems to be that it's not just the impulsivity traits but some of the inattentive ones too you know if your teachers lecturing about the risks of alcohol or this and this and you're zoning out at the window and looking at the plane flying by you have less pertinent information on the topics you may be less attentive to the negative effects that other kids are seeing among the classmates who are stoners at this age or XY or so it seems that both inattentive sets of ADHD symptoms and the impulsive you know thrill seeking not weighing the consequences as heavily are all contributing to this heightened risk I have this model in my head that is um perhaps completely wrong maybe partially wrong um and it goes something like this that we know that the neural circuits involved in executive control and directing attention and maintaining attention and avoiding distraction this kind of thing um use dopamine and epinephrine and norepinephrine um at least to some extent and we know that people with ADH are capable of focus as you said it's a it's a failure to direct that Focus maintain Etc so I've heard from you before this discussion that you know people that you know tend to drink lots and lots of caffeine or who can drop into an activity but have a lot of distractability that you know they might have ad DHD so what I'm imagining here is that the threshold to get dopamine epinephrine and norepinephrine released is either much higher or more complicated um for people with ADHD and so what they're seeking is these catacol amines these three chemicals dopamine epinephrine norepinephrine and that if they're given a a medication that puts them in that range where they're getting it then they're good they can stop seeking it so to speak um and I'm raising this now because we're talking about addiction addiction is a you know pursuit of things essentially and I guess what I'm saying is it it seems to me that the model of ADHD that we hear about is that you know people can't focus um you know their dopamine circuits are all out of whack and then you put them on this dopaminergic drug and you know basically you get them addicted to that tunnel vision or something but I I have this model in mind now that what we are all seeking is to have portions of our day where we are directing our Focus towards meaningful Bill the things that are you know generative in our life work school relationships Etc and that whether or not it's pharmacology or exercise or or what have you that it's it's just about getting into this plane of of Consciousness and I say that in no woo or abstract terms is is that right I mean are what we really talking about here is a failure to access enough of these neuromodulators and and these medications which we're about to talk about are really about putting us in the realm where those neuromodulators are just more accessible I'll just say I can go with that okay well you're the expert I mean I mean I'm I'm putting this together based on kind of what we're talking about like getting enough sleep to me is a way of being able to have enough arousal during the day um you know exercise or these medications just different ways of being able to access arousal like if you don't sleep you can't access arousal during the day so okay well that I'm going to hold that model in mind and I'm going to keep testing it to try and destroy it as we go forward um let's talk about the medications since uh you raised those um and you know the first one I ever heard about was Rin MH um let's start with Rin um how often is rlin used nowadays and what is rlin doing um neurochemically and what are your thoughts on rlin as a a useful drug for childhood and adult ADHD and I'm happy to repeat those questions so rlin is or generic methylphenidate and there's dozens now of slow release versions and there's even a patch a skin patch instead of an oral version our definition of what a stimulant is is really squishy and vague in its broadest sense it's any drug that has an effect in the body like the sympathetic nervous system which is a neopine phrine driven fight or flight arousal system so by the loosest criteria caffeine's a stimulant um albin's a stimulant even though we classify it as an anti-depressant um some of the decongestants are stimulants but more often when we're talking ADHD medicines we're using stimulant more specifically for amphetamine based products like Aderall and viance and again there's a host now of newer branded extended release forms and methylphenidate and we lump the two together probably most ADHD experts agree with and this is where I'm going to be disagreeing with most of them I don't consider rlin a full stimulant so the neurop pharmacologists differ a little bit but amphetamine is a strong dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake blocker so it prevents what's already been released from being taken back up so more is available longer but in addition to that amphetamine is a pretty potent to a vesicle manipulator so it's actually forcing a bigger release from the vesicles when they're synaptically released so it's not just that the signal lasts longer and is stronger because of that it's a bigger signal depending on what study you look at most of the studies suggest that methylphenidate is actually a pretty weak vesicular manipulator and some studies don't find any impact there at all which means if methylphenidate is basically a norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake inhibitor that's what well buttin is that's one of the comp you know it's and so so why I would further say if you look at the efficacy data how well do these work in resolving ADHD symptoms all the metaanalyses lump Aderall products amphetamine and methylphenidate products here and say you know they're here CU they work better this is you know success in reducing ADHD symptoms and allar stratera at motine Wellbutrin I use symol toot mfil guanosine all these other things are down here as less effective but if you actually look at any of the plots that I've looked at and separate out methyl fenity is actually closer to the pack below it's that amphetamine products are Head and Shoulders above everything else methylphenidates usually at the top the rest of the crowd but if you just looking at the the data objectively there's a clear decision point so in terms of efficacy amphetamine products are stronger um but in terms of some of the side that you know the the side effect that I worry most about it's not at all common but it's one of the horrible ones is amphetamine induced psychosis now that we're finally looking at that a little more closely because for years the ADHD experts have said yeah it's really rare let's not look at it at all let's not pay attention move along you know don't look um with amphetamine adderal products and that's probably dose dependent but it's close to one out of 500 people and what's I'm going off on a tangent here but I'll keep following it because it's an important tangent it's only one out of 500 people that's uncommon but this is a really bad condition because so amphetamine induced psychosis is a schizophrenic like picture usually someone is really paranoid really worried that their friends are manipulating them or police are spying on them I mean if you drink too much alcohol you can be bat crazy as that's a highly technical term there you can be out of touch with reality you can be hallucinating you can be saying all sorts of nasty things but if it's alcohol induced you fall asleep at the end of that night you wake up the next morning you may feel horrible at The Hangover you're not hallucinating you're not psychotic anymore hopefully you're regretting what you did probably not remembering much of what you did people will let you know with empet iine induced psychosis on the other hand classically and characteristically in what I've seen clinically it continues for days weeks or months after stopping the medication which means we are we've changed someone's brain and we don't have lots and lots of data and it's actually only come to us because people are concerned about marijuana causing a similar picture so now we're studying this a little more but with amphetamine induc psychosis about and these are again rounding from different studies about 20% if you look 20 years out about 20% of those people are in a permanent psychotic State still so again it's uncommon but it's such a bad outcome that we really should be alerting people to it and I've been I saw much higher higher risk of this for I can get into it if we need to reasons in my population in in San Francisco but I've had people coming from all the most prominent ADHD clinics over the years who just moved to the area and when I'd say this give this as my introduction to you know I'm happy to continue on this but are you aware to a person they said no one ever told me that now maybe they have ADHD and weren't listening but it's so uniformly consistent that they didn't hear or know that that was a side effect and one in 500 isn't a trivially small number no it's not trivial and I mean why I got alerted to it is my rate in San Francisco is actually higher than one out of 100 um and so I'll go into I think a couple different reasons one is I worked with a lot of HIV positive men and we know HIV particularly in the days before we had effective antivirals is a virus that goes to the brain and effect you know there's a HIV induced dementia so probably some of these people had brains that were compromised because of that and were vulnerable two a high incidence of methamphetamine so methamphetamine Street speed is a chemically different molecule than amphetamine has an extra methyl group and an extra methyl group can mean a lot um so it's a cousin but methampetamine we know has higher rates of psychosis higher rates of addiction um is tends to be more re wording but again in that population and many of them would hide that history from me but I think that the very first person I had with them phetamine IND psychosis a guy in his 40s HIV positive for years this was back in early mid 90s was able to finish school in his mid-40s get a good paying job in two years on stimulant and then had a full-blown psychotic episode where he his data died of a heart attack 10 years earlier he was threatening his mom because he believed his mom had poisoned her he flew over to Rhode Island where she was living he was making threats from a pay phone and because Rhode Island's so small he was actually calling from out of States so was a federal crime he got thrown in federal prison for this and and he stayed psychotic for months after he wasn't using any but it later turned out he had had a psychotic episode 10 years earlier on Street meth which she lied about when I did the evaluation so the other high-risk group I had was I was known in San Francisco as someone who worked with adults with ADHD at the early stages of recognizing ADHD so and I was comfortable with the broader range of stimulant dosages and many providers are so I had people who had and they were all young white males straight males who had history and I don't know how many how many of those demographics are relevant but who had histories of taking stimulants having a psychotic episode again being really paranoid all and again the numbers aren't huge but at least five people with this General profile but even though they were paranoid even though they were severely impaired enough that each of them wound up in a psychiatric inpatient Hospital which is pretty hard to get into in this day and age or even 20 years ago they all liked something about the experience enough that they all wanted to get back on and and all of them knew enough to lie about this past so they didn't tell me about you know they don't they presented all of them also had ADHD you know they presented with ADHD they'd say I'd been on stimulus before and you know I'm not working with that doctor because my insurance changed or they had moved to the area so they they gave plausible histories and most of those within a month or two of restarting it wound up back in the psychiatric hospital I had one guy bright computer programmer late 20s calling me from inside the psychiatric hospital to try to get me to prescribe more adoral to him and not only that he had convinced his impatient psychiatrist that this was a good idea that this was important to treating his ADHD and helping him retain his job wow so these are as you said um straight white males who have psychotic episodes on their ADHD meds and continue to seek those meds because they quote unquote like the experience it it feels like a manic High the dopamin high dopaminergic State yeah and and I and you th you put the word Mania in there Manic and lots of people Define this as amphetamine induced Mania rather than psychosis I don't because one is uniformly and maybe other people are seeing more that these people were paranoid they were worried they were anxious they were delusional but they weren't overtly enjoying it they weren't having a great time they weren't saying I'm going to party with all you friends and I'm only worried about the people there and yes they were talking more loudly they were sleeping less which is could be characteristic of mania but there was no positive affect that I or police reports or often families give you extensive history of everything was going on that there was nothing euphoric they were describing about it I mean I think the second piece is how much of they it's unclear how much they actually remember or recall or either through you know psychological suppression of it or physiologic they're in a different enough state it didn't register properly it's not clear but they tend not to recall the paranoia and by paranoia it's persecutory delusions you know I have people who assaulted family members thinking that they were being spied on manipulated when they were the parents trying to take care of their kids I'd like to take a quick break and thank one of our sponsors element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't that means the electrolytes sodium magnesium and potassium in the correct ratios but no sugar we should all know that proper hydration is critical for optimal brain and body function in fact even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish your cognitive and physical performance to a considerable degree it's also important that you're not just hydrated but that you get adequate amounts of electrolytes in the right ratios drinking a packet of element dissolved in water makes it very easy to ensure that you're getting adequate amounts of hydration and electrolytes to make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of both I dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up in the morning and I drink that basically first thing in the morning I'll also drink a packet of element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and losing water and electrolytes there are a bunch of different great tasting flavors of element I like the watermelon I like the raspberry I like the Citrus basically I like all of them if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element.com huberman to claim an element sample pack with the purchase of any element drink mix again that's drink element spelled l MNT so it's drink element.com huberman to claim a free sample pack what are the options for people that think that they may have ADHD let let me phrase it differently someone comes in and you they have you know let's say an adult they have five of the 18 um what uh criteria um they they meet the criteria for ADHD do you tend to well after telling them about sleep food exercise and relaxation after that's squared away if the decision is to medicate do you just and assuming they're not on any other medications which cluster in this um two sets of clusters that you described before the amphetamine type the adderal viance um Etc versus the I realize you put riddle in at the top of the bottom Cloud um well be riddlin um modafanil uh you mentioned simala which cluster do you go to first I mean some of this is just individual style rather than intellectually thinking one is better or not and my style is usually to listen as closely as I can to what the patient wants that doesn't mean agree with them but to to explain in as much detail as I can what I perceive the risks and the likelihood of those are and what I perceive the benefits to be um for years just statistically I had many more people who are on nonstimulants than stimulants compared to the general ADHD population and that's even accounting for by many variables I had I've always worked with a lot of people on disability from Medicare I also worked with people who are on Medicaid in the city's Insurance before Obamacare happened so I worked with not entirely but a skewed more dysfunctional more severely Afflicted population which again you would think would be a better match for the more powerful drugs um I I'll I'll jump back that this actually is a situation where we have more powerful drugs so often when I treat people with depression they'll try one or two or three anti-depressants and say well give me something that's more powerful and with depression maybe we can put ketamine out of the picture and I know this is a side issue but all of our anti-depressants seem to work equally well we don't have potent anti-depressants and nonent they got FDA approved it works in a certain range of likelihood but with the stimulants amphetamine based products really are more powerful and more so than with depression or many of our other conditions where it's more a categorical list will help or not as long as you're above a threshold there's a more linear relationship if you if a little bit of Wellbutrin helps a lot is likely to help more I mean you might start getting more side effect issues and there may be good reasons to not keep going up um but there's a more linear dosage results relationship do you worry about um strain on uh the heart with amphetamine products um just even if it's relatively low dose over time just you know the just the strain on the calcium channels and on the on on the heart uh you know is it true that um that stimulant based medications for ADHD can quote unquote weaken the heart when you use that term I was I was talking with Rob beforehand about running marathons and when I ran the 100th anniversary of the Boston Marathon they had some of the medical literature from the previous decades and one of the medical warnings was you know maybe you could do one or two marathons in your life but don't do more than that because your heart will wear out and you know I've run a 100 and my heart I think is still beating so we know things we thought we know at one point common cardiovascular effects of not just the stimulants but the non-stimulants that are affecting neopine so Wellbutrin simala um modafanil it's less clear and we can get into that when we talk about modafanil but clearly methylphenidate amphetamine on average increase at therapeutic doses increase heart rate a few points increased blood pressure a few points but part of that obscures that probably 80% of people don't have any change and maybe 20% have maybe a more slightly significant change so we know that there's some impact there we know there's some people with extremely rare genetic underlying conditions um usually related to the neurologic wiring of the heart who are particularly vulnerable to dropping dead from a stimul and almost every year there's you know a well-trained athlete either professional player more often a high school or college player College you know who will take cocaine take Rin take prescription stimulant and drop debt of a heart attack um the risk of that so uncommon this is 15 years ago when Aderall X came out the Canadian government was worried enough about this risk that they banned ader are for almost a year and because they have a comprehensive medical system they could look more extensively at the numbers and this is looking at kids the percentage of kids who Dro Dead with Aderall was Tiny and not just tiny it was lower than the kids who aren't on Aderall who dropped outad of a heart attack so part of it is if you're in this rare genetic condition almost always there's family member numbers or you've had some other near-death or synap episode where you passed out so history taking of the individual and family history and if you're at all worried or concerned you can do EKGs which detect most of those electrical abnormalities but the Cardiology and lots of my colleagues practice maybe a more conservative cover your ass medicine approach where everyone has to have an EKG before they're on a stimulant even the Cardiology associations have said that seems to be a waste of resources absolutely do a thorough history absolutely do a thorough family history if there's anything of concern or if the patient's anxious about it get an EKG but other than that these should be generally safe for most people's hearts so there was a metaanalysis that came out earlier this year on so most the studies looking at more serious other than just mild hypertension or mild elevation of heart rate um haven't found much but most of them only looked you know a year out or a year of treatment do we see rates of heart attacks do we see rates of Strokes do we see rates of dangerous arrhythmias and in general they're looking at a young population where these events are really uncommon anyway and most of them didn't find any evidence of problems in a year or two out the more recent study looked as long as 14 years out out and there they found measurable statistically significant increase in risk that increased during the first 3 years of being on a stimulant and increased at a much lower rate for the next 10 years sort of plateaued out but still measurably higher than people with ADHD who weren't on a stimulant but the absolute rate is still really really low so for most people it's not a risk I mean on the other hand if you start these medicines when you're 10 or 20 and maybe on them for 60 years we don't have we we don't know whether potentially more people are getting into more trouble so if somebody presents as um having ADHD as an adult and they've never touched stimulants and they're uh would you start them on rlin Wellbutrin or ader or something in theol viance Cloud thanks for bringing me back to your question sure um and and I'm going to jump it you through in the sort of qualifying phrase never been on any stimulant in their life or tried it or something not consistently well what I would say is Lots these drugs are fairly common in our society both illicitly and listly I mean we know lots of kids lots of adults with ADHD share their medication lots of people have tried these things even if it STS once or twice and that itself is valuable clinical data you know if they felt too to revved up from it you know so if they have I try to find out what dose was it what did it do for you what good things did it do for you what bad things to do for you so my presentation is is usually you know Aderall is likely to be the most strongly effective or I more often are using viance these are the other options but Aderall also has again greater R rare but risk for these bad problems what you know does that scare you some people are petrified they're not going to go anywhere near that some people say yeah that's I'm not that concerned about it and most people do come in with some friends at work family members X Y or Z you know they think they know what the drug is likely to have as an effect on them and I tend to at least as a starting point listen to that and now I mean there are C reasons I absolutely would not I mean my worry again I I saw more of it than I think most people in a higher rate with amphetamine psychosis but a friend from college was just trying to refer a friend's son who's 27 and had a psychotic episode on on marijuana and does have ADHD and is in bed depressed and not going to work and is being evaluated by two New York City doctors but the psychi rist kept him on adderal I absolutely again the the likelihood of recurrence seems so high that if you have a family history of schizophrenia or psychosis or you've had any experience of it I would not prescribe a stimulant an amphetamine based stimulant could we go so far as to say and I suspect the answer is no but because nowadays we're hearing more about the possibility I want to highlight possibility of high THC cannabis causing psychotic episodes this is something I've stressed on this podcast on social media I took a lot of heat for this um from the traditional press um and then ironically they're now putting out information that is essentially speaks to the same I'm not saying this happens in everybody but there's certainly a a possibility there would you say that if somebody is a regular high THC cannabis user that they are at greater risk to developing Psych is if they're taking these stimulant form ADHD meds yeah I mean you could actually play that both ways I mean you could claim that if they've already been on an agent without developing psychosis then maybe they're more impervious to that as a potential side effect or where you were coming more from is if we're already on One agent that's pushing them that direction why the heck would you ever add another that could also I mean my Approach clinically would be more what do you think the marijuana is doing for you and might it be more helpful to just clear that out of the picture before we add anything new onto it but depending on what they say or don't say so my reading of the data is very clear that there is some I mean there's even at low THC there's some risk is it you know Reaper Madness at everyone who Puffs a joint is freaking out clearly not but again it's much more potent than it was 10 years or that was 70 years ago I guess yeah especially as I understand we had an expert from the Cannabis research community on in in edible form in particular it's harder for people to control the dosage whereas um when people use inhalation as as a means to deliver it seems like they they kind of find the right plane without going overboard more often than with Edibles in any case one other big factor is that CBD actually seems in some studies to have an anticho effect so you know maybe strains of marijuana 50 years ago that had a whatever nature thought was a more balanced view had less of a risk but now that you can get pure THC products and and I'm sure you've highlighted that a big problem with this whole industry is even in Colorado which three years ago is the state with the most close regulation and inspection and almost a majority of what the label say don't correlate with what you're really getting so um this is not a well-regulated industry even though states are trying to regulate their Industries so you may not know what you're getting CBD again may have some protective effects so getting pure and higher potency THC may be particularly undesirable so in my own um YouTube podcast series I've researched lots of subjects and most of them I wind up saying we don't have a lot of data on it and and there's not a lot of data on marijuana it's the one I've actually changed my mind from reading what was out there and for years I would tell people because being in San Francisco even before the wave of legalization lots of people were using it lots of people felt it help them and what I would tell them is the data we have and these are from everyday users is that there are measurable you know the the characteristic of the classic Stoner has a grain of truth to it so measurably lower motivation poorer organiz ation of thought lower energy are strongly correlated with daily marijuana use why would anyone with ADHD want any of that going on that seems like a perfect Misfit or accentuating what's not working right over the years so I had a handful of people would swear it worked better for them than stimulants it worked better them than the non-stimulant Alternatives clearly not everybody and when I looked at the data there is actually some tiny studies you know there are some that are funded by marijuana organizations so that doesn't mean they're wrong but it's harder to evaluate how objective they were but there's some research that suggests there is some sub segment and I don't think it's a people with ADHD in general but some subset of that population who may actually do better and most of the time they were looking at marijuana rather than pure THC and and what I was going to say is there's probably at least 7 or 80 other psychoactive components to marijuana not most of them as in high a concentration as the THC or CBD but they're out there maybe they are more important even at lower concentrations I've heard this that for some people uh cannabis can help them focus and um I'm certainly not one of those but uh it it certainly is interesting um as long as we're on cannabis um excuse me as long as we're discussing cannabis neither of us are on cannabis to my knowledge um maybe I could just ping you for kind of the relationship between um various compounds that people use that are available over the counter um or with you know sort of online um access to these compounds and ADHD symptoms specifically and then at some point I'd like to return to the uh the amphetamine based uh drugs so let's just start with nicotine so these days there's increased use of nicotine pouches gums not just smoking vaping dipping and snuffing um and it's certainly a stimulant um and certainly a lot of people in particular young males are using it more often this the traditional media is now trying to create this kind of picture of nicotine being part of the kind of wellness and fitness Community but in my observation many many more people outside of the that uh category um are using it so what in your experience happens when somebody with ADHD let's assume they're not medicating in any other way starts dabbling in nicotine use and let's assume they're going to do this in ways that do not cause cancer because the smoking dipping vaping snuffing part is what causes the cancer let's just talk about the compound nicotine yeah so there's some well done research showing nicotine is helpful for improving some of the executive functions sustained detention and I'm not sure which which the executive functions but they help people focus be sharper do better there was actually a major pharmaceutical company who was developing a nicotine receptor product specifically for ADHD and they abandoned that several years ago and I haven't been able to find word as to why that was abandoned whether there was some other side effect it's worth throwing out there that although nicotine in many ways acts like a stimulant that actually is moderately unique and and I hate people who unique means one of a kind so I can't say I can't modify it in any way unusual maybe not the only one unusual in that it both arouses people and reduces anxiety simultaneously not too many most of our stimulants are again banging away at the sympathetic nervous system and that's banging away on good arousal and bad arousal so anxi so nicotine again seems to be both calming and helping alert or Focus people um and as you know as long as they're taking it in a way that's not clearly detrimental to their health which smoking and vaping and probably chewing are well not probably definitely are and if if it's affordable because some of these products are pretty pricey at least the chewing gums or the Nicorette that was used for helping people with smoking sensation I have some people who feel that it's been a important and useful part of their regimen um I have some people small numbers who prefer it to any other medications and almost no again other than sort of the basic neurophysiology showing that it can have beneficial effects on executive functions there's no research at least as of a year or two ago whenever I did my di my toe not my anything else into the snuff um looked into it there's no you know clinical research showing does this help or not help what about caffeine and in particular energy drinks these days there's just seems to be an explosion of drinks that include caffeine but also fairly High dosages of things like torine Alpha GPC theanine you know so tyrosine so you know things that are thought to generally amplify the production or release of neuromodulators like dopamine aoine and so forth and so the epidemiologists say that the most widely used psychoactive substance on this planet and I thought it was alcohol for years but it's actually caffeine because lots of groups outlaw alcohol who won't Outlaw caffeine so lots and lots of people use it and this is a gross oversimplification but this is what I tell people even though it's most widely used if you used it as an equivalent dose to our stimulants I mean essentially we're using it at a lower dose level it's a pretty lousy stimulant I mean separate from that it's working primarily on adenosine and indirectly working on dopamine but associated with higher levels of Angy higher levels of jitteriness higher levels of cardiac toxicity if you were to use it at a equivalent dose but most people are using at a substantially lower dose and the ADHD experts sort of historically have fallen into two different camps some of them have said it's going to interact with the stimulant or other medications it's complicated we don't want it messing up the picture stay off of it and the other half say it's a stimulant you know lots of people are using it with these other stimulants you know both full-blown stimulant and non-stimulant ADHD medications and as long as you know it's part of the picture and trying to be constant with your dosage or aware of it then fine and maybe it helps you get away with the lower dose of the prescription the one little piece I'd add in there is that often you don't know what dose you're getting so people have the common exper as I was saying earlier I've only had three cups of coffee in my whole life so this is all anecdotal or research not personal experience data but lots of people have the experience go to their local Starbucks or something and say whoa that's feels way stronger than usual and then invariably they say oh that must just be me I'm more anxious already I'm jacked up or because they think Starbucks you know 7 billion stores around the country everything's automated and precise they must be Starbucks isn't you know they control for the aromaticity they how many minutes each Bean is cooked which side it gets flipped over on they're not controlling for caffeine intake which is wild to you and me so a University of Florida study and this is several years ago now went into a Florida Starbucks bought the same drink every day for three weeks and compared the caffeine content the highest day compared to lowest days was a three-fold difference wow and that's Starbucks who knows what smaller so so one is you may think you know what you're and maybe you know the the bane of coffee Drinkers and maybe Sanka in a teaspoon that you're dissolving may be the most consistent there or but one of the risks with caffeine and with pretty much any over-the-counter drug is you may not know what dose you're getting very interesting I mean I um as I've said several times in this podcast I think caffeine is a wonderful drug mostly because I love the things that comes in yamate being my you know preferred source of of caffeine but also coffee and it certainly increases my focus it's a narrow plane though you know two sips too many and I can start feeling myself Veer toward more lack of focus it it doesn't seem to um have a very um pervasive effect and and dosing it on an empty stomach versus after eating it's it I mean I'm not that precise about it but I don't see it as a very um reliable stimulant it's more to get to a plane of just normaly for me given how much I've been drinking it since I was a teen really I think most people are similar they drink it to feel yeah there's lots of well and there's also lots of cultural and habitual you know if it makes gives you your warm fuzzies or puts you in the right mode or you're sure you think you're more alert or you're listening your favorite newscast in the morning as you're drinking it that all is adding to its effect in terms of combining with other over-the-counter things there is some study looking at caffeine and theanine together and having some at least in a tiny handful of studies some measurable beneficial effect on I think it's mostly kids that have been looked at and nothing dangerous found across a pretty broad range of alanine dosages but it's I'm not aware of any good research done with adding all the other things that are currently being added to it and some logically may be doing something some may be irrelevant some maybe more detrimental eleanine certainly is being added to a lot of caffeine containing drinks because it seems to take the Jitters of and um the Assumption being that people can consume more of that um that drink as a consequence there's a tiny bit of evidence so suggest it it may both you know dampen down you know help with anxiety but it may directly have some beneficial cognitive executive function benefits itself yeah this is um in keeping with the green tea hypo hesis which I believe green tea is enriched for theanine um you are somebody who uh quite refreshingly to me has talked not just about prescription drugs and behavioral tools for ADHD but also um actually I think years ago you were the first person to First share with me the data about fish oil and the EPA Omega-3s for um depression you those studies were starting to come out we were talking about those studies um and nowadays I think while there's still a little bit of controversy out there about fish oils I think most everybody believes that getting high quality Omega-3s um from good clean sources including fish oil um is mostly beneficial or beneficial um what about fish oil um for ADHD in particular and what threshold dosages are um are relevant here so just as with the the fish oil for cardiac benefits you know there was a time period where the first few large and they were pretty large well done studies showed benefits for cardiovascular health the more recent studies with fish oil haven't shown an effect or benefit and strangely to me and not very scientifically the Cardiology Community sort of looks at the more recent ones and say okay that's what it is well you have to reconcile all the data in the pool the ADHD fish oil story is a little the opposite and it's been it's almost everything with ADHD it's been kids that have been most strongly looked at the first few studies with fish oil and kids didn't show any benefits at all and then subsequently there have been several studies that looked at benefits and again in the field jumps to the second set without reconciling well how do we you know do a good meta analysis with everything in there or so and I haven't looked closely enough to know you know where their methodological differences dosage differences population differences that matter I'd say unless you're taking so big a dose that you're probably at risk for heavy metal poisoning which is a possible issue with big big big doses of fish oil I mean most of the recommendations are in the range that that it seem and I'd say that depression has been the most consistent field and not that doesn't mean every study there has been positive either but the most consistent field for a mental health benefit for or a health benefit um and there the recommendation is usually Target about a th000 milligrams of EPA of eicosapentanoic acid a day um if you're seeing some benefit but it feels like that there's more room for improvement so this is my mod I tell people then you could probably double it reasonably I mean some of the dramatic there were dramatic stud looking at fish oil for Mania people hospitalized with it but and they use dosages as high as 7,000 milligrams a day to treat Mania yeah and it I that study I think it was a Harvard area um Clinic that was doing it the results were so dramatic that they ethically had to stop the study before its intended completion because the the benefits seem to be so robust in the fish oil group compared to the UN that it was unethical to not put everyone on fish oil that's a lot of fish oil that's a lot of yeah you probably need to get it in liquid form to make it um you know so it wasn't so expensive but I I find this recency effect incredible that you me you know which you mentioned a few moments ago that um and I think this is helpful for people to hear certainly it is for me you know we hear um you know studies over the years have explored fish oil for cardiac benefits and then more recently as I understand you know these are not sh have not been demonstrated and there seems to be a focus on the recent studies as if the old ones don't exist that's essentially what you described for both um cardiac and ADHD I think it's really important um we hear this with alcohol too I've been involved in this debate I you know I I don't care if people drink one way or the other provide they take care of themselves and others and if you're an alcoholic adult don't drink and if you're a kid don't drink but you know people want to drink a few drinks a week like I don't have a problem with it but it's remarkable that every time a study comes out showing a mild benefit of moderate Al alcohol use that seems to be the highlight and then everything else is forgotten and the inverse is also true um one would think that the meta analyses would include all as many good studies as possible but I think it's important to that people hear that that's not always the case just because there's a metaanalysis doesn't mean that it included all the relevant studies so I'm just restating thank you um I make it a point to try and get 1 to two grams of EPA per day just as a general mood you know I'm not clinically depressed but just to support my mood to support Focus to support well-being um including cardiac function so the other thing that I think is understudied with the fish oil issue is that and it's a Harvard guy who has a proprietary brand of purified EPA that pushes it so in nature whether you're a whale or a human or a butterfly or a maybe not insects I'm not sure that cost the mammal bird Reptile Kingdom the Omega-3s are found in about a 2:1 ratio of EPA to DHA iOS pentanoic acid toosa hexanoic acid and what I tell people is I think Mother Nature is probably smarter than any Harvard Professor if and the Brain particularly is high in brain membranes of DHA so I don't see some people seek out EPA purified or sole you know only EPA Brands um that to me doesn't make a lot of sense so I would I would say we can still count or do the numbering based on about a th milligrams of EPA but don't worry that you're getting about 300 400 milligrams of DHA and probably that's better for you I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors matina matina makes loose leaf and ready to drink yerbamate now I've often discussed yate's benefits such as regulating blood sugar its high antioxidant content the ways it can improve dig digestion and its possible neuroprotective effects it's for all those reasons that yerbamate is my preferred source of caffeine I also drink yerbamate because I simply love the taste and while there are a lot of different choices out there of yerbamate drinks my personal favorite far and away is matina it's made of the highest quality ingredients which gives it a really rich but also a really clean taste so none of that tanic aftertaste in fact given how absolutely amazing matina taste and their commitment to Quality I decided to become a part owner in the company last year in particular I love the taste Mina's canned zero sugar cold brew year bate which I personally help develop I drink at least three cans of those a day now I also love their loose leaf matina which I drink every morning from the gourd so I add hot water and sip on that thing and I'll have some cold brw throughout the morning and early afternoon I find it gives me terrific energy all day long and I'm able to fall asleep perfectly well at night no problems if you'd like to try matina you can go to drink maa.com huberman right now matina is offering a free one PB bag of loose leaf yamon tea te and free shipping with the purchase of two cases of their cold brew yerbamate again that's drink maa.com huberman to get a free bag of yamate loose leaf tea and free shipping you're one of the first people that I ever heard discuss the gut microbiome and ADHD um this is me giving you credit for being way ahead of your time I I don't know how you are receiving praise especially on camera and with microphones but I just want to say that you know it was over a decade ago that I heard from you about EPA and fish oil for depression and other things about circadian rhythms an area that I'm familiar with and just the the critical importance of circadian health for everything that we're talking about today and more and on and on and so you know again thank you for raising these points even if they turn out to be minor effects MH I I think nowadays we hear about the gut microbiome I may have actually heard the words got microbiome first from you um gosh yeah that would be well over that would be almost 20 years ago remarkable um so gut microbiome what do we know about the gut microbiome and supporting it in ADHD I'm going to kind of pass on that by just saying it's complicated and probably important and so many variables that it's hard to know what's really valuable in a day-to-day real human living perspective do you do anything to support your gut microbiome just in with your knowledge of of a of the relationship between gut and mental health does it impact your behavior at all in terms of choices yeah only to the extent of trying to have a varied diet and eating at somewhat regular interval intervals but not not more specifically great right um if that's where we're at that's where we're at um before we go back to some drugs um I want to ask about behavioral tools for ADHD um I've seen some of the literature claiming that um certain video games might actually be useful for training Focus um I've managed to find a few papers that talk about um focus and meditation tasks that kids in particular but adults may be able to get better at I mean are any of these brain training games to get people better at focusing are any of them known to be worthwhile according to like real data or clinical observation so I'll start for by stepping back a little bit and broading it broadening it I I'll get to the video game things but one of the effective approaches that helps with symptomatic reduction with ADHD is cognitive behavioral therapy so that's a form of talking therapy and my quick overview of it is that it focuses on actions thoughts and feelings and that humans can have Direct Control of their actions and thoughts not too much over their feelings but all three are affecting each other and the traditional CBT was developed by Aaron Beck to treat depression probably 50 years ago um maybe longer 60s I think late anyway on the surface it's a horrible match for 8 HD because we know it requires lots of repetitive boring homework doing the same thing of it it involves introspection of being aware of what you're doing already looking at those patterns looking at what the triggers you know to see if you can see triggers for them and then doing lots and lots of repetitive homework which and and when it's successful for depression or PTSD or other venues we know it actually changes brain wiring and brain chemistry so lots of people still think talking therapies are sort of up here doing something and chemicals and medications are really changing the brain if your thoughts are changing if your behaviors changing your brain has changed that that's only place that thoughts and behaviors come from but there have been at least two groups Mary Santos at in New York and um the Harvard Group by blanking on as for saffron and and some other Ramsay at Pennsylvania developed approaches using CBT techniques specifically designed for people with ADHD to help overcome some of those hurdles and barriers and both of them encourage actually the use of medications in combination with it so because many people with ADHD are too unfocused too unable to sit down and do it but these are approaches and both approaches are amazingly similar although devised completely independently at the core of both of those approaches is having a system of scheduling each day that doesn't mean micromanaging each minute but it's having the essentials in place having blocks of time that you know what you're going to do um and having a task list in combination with that and ways of learning to prioritize and move things up or down and again with ADHD being interest driven rather importance driven you may have a task I mean you probably have 17 task lists one's new your coffee one's at the grocery store one you of one it's having one Consolidated list because if it's everywhere then it's nowhere and two is the simplest um triaging or or organizing approach is having the things that are both urgent and um important so they have to happen today those get in the a category the things that are important but aren't as urgent are the B category and all the other things are the C and one of the temptation that people with ADHD have is I need to be productive uh uh you know it's fun to go buy shoelaces and that's on my list so I'll go to buy shoelaces because then I can cross something off my list but I didn't move the car I didn't do my taxes I haven't done my homework you know all the important things remain undone so it's a system for getting done what's really needed to be done and you know eventually if if your shoes don't work the shoelaces will move up to that a category but for most people they're not really there and it's not a good use of your time to do them first so that and and there's much more to it so that CBT approach can work with um decreasing procrastination it can re help with structuring your own workspace given that you probably have much more trouble doing that and not doing it spontaneously it's how to eliminate distractions and um modules on even extending your concentration time so so the answer with the video games there is one product that's actually been FDA approved for use in ADHD and the really important thing to remember there is the fda's system for addressing medications is much more rigorous much more thorough you have to demonstrate it really works and does something when the FDA approves devices basically they're saying it's not going to kill anyone it might help I mean it might help tremendously but it's having the FDA in premature for that doesn't guarantee that or mean that at all do you recall if the study of that device uh or the study that video game has a conflict of interest was it run by the company yeah yeah yeah so almost all of them have been run by the company I mean it's good people at UCSF who are at least partly involved in it oh is this Adam gazelle's group I think so yeah he's I should just say that I've um followed his work for some years he he's he's a neuroscientist I know people who have been in his lab um he's known for doing very very high quality and stringent work their product and some of the others can clearly show you get better at their product and you get better at tests that look exactly like their product but in terms of real world how much is this really helping ADHD symptoms on a day-to-day basis not a lot of data at all so again that doesn't mean it doesn't work and I'm going to go sideways and talking about neuro feedback because there's lots and lots of neuro feedback companies across the country that are making lots and lots of money and there's a article in the American Journal of psychiatry in the last year I'm not remembering which group did it and it was another non a failure to find a significant impact from neuro feedback and again I'm not saying it doesn't have an effect but I've had lots of people saying writing me should I keep spending hundreds of dollars each week because my insurance isn't covering this and the doctor's saying oh maybe 20 more episodes will retrain your brain so this gets back to a topic you brought up earlier how much are we retraining our brains with immersion in social media and the evidence is we are rewiring our brains so maybe anything pushing an opposite direction or maybe this is reinforcing some of the bad things we don't want it's we're in a messy world without clear answers yet I've made it a point to put social media on a old phone um so those apps are only on that phone I don't even know the number to that phone if I need to post something I air drop it onto that phone and this has helped tremendously in segregating that activity and limiting it um it also means that if people send me something which would otherwise Direct me to social media it's much more difficult for me to go look it up it's helped tremendously I just pass that on because it's one of the things that's really allowed me to restrict my social media time um and yet still be you know in keeping with the fact that I think social media has its uses I post there Etc um yes so getting back to the scheduling I mean what I recommend to people and one of my weak I don't know the specific apps but there are apps that will help shut you out of Facebook or Discord or Tik Tok or whatever it is if if you can't exert your own willpower which again is harder to do if you have ADHD and if the app approach doesn't work the next level up is there are all sorts of companies making lock boxes and physical devices where you can lock yourself out of your device for certain hours of the day and I think that's a good idea for lots of people I do too and I think it also helps at least in my experience to do things that are very different than social media as well well um but still consuming content so I make it a point to read from an actual physical book a bit each day or night um also because I was raised doing that and writing by hand is just sort of in keeping with the way that my brain was um was wired so maybe that's more specific to me and my generation but um I find that when I'm doing those other activities when I go on to social media it feels more like a departure from the rest of life as opposed to the other way around um but that's a good sign for preserving I'd like to talk about some compounds that are not so typical meaning um some people may have heard of these but most people probably haven't and they are somewhat novel to me um the first one is uh guanosine um what is guanfacine and and why is it sometimes used for ADHD so guanosine and a related drug called clodine which can be confused with clopin and others so clonidine and guanosine are both Alpha 2 agonists so they work on a subset of the neopine phrine system they're both originally anti-hypertensive for lowering blood pressure and it was actually studies first in clonidine that suggested this could be helpful with people with ADHD and I think it was just a serendipitous initial Discovery it wasn't seeking out its mode of action to see if that really worked one difference between the two of them is Clonidine jumps off the neopine phrine Alpha 2 receptor really quickly and for people who Skip a dose with their blood pressure medication or stop abruptly it's not uncommon to have um rebound hypertension and not just mild but way higher than what you're being originally treated for to dangerous levels guanosine leaves The receptors more slowly and there have been formal studies trying to see if this is a problem or issue there and particularly given that people with ADHD forget their medication or run out and don't fill it in time or just don't remember to take it um the rebound hypertension does not seem to be nearly as common with Gant facine and that's part of why the research has moved more towards the guant vine um so there's extensive work by I'm going to blank on her Amy ardan AR that's she's a Yale oh um arston arston thank you yeah and her lab and related Labs have shown that quanin effects seem to deal with strengthening synaptic Connections in prefrontal circuitry so unlike most of our drugs which are just boosting norepinephrine Andor dopamine and work quickly and I'll throw in this because we didn't really touch this most of the ADHD experts still say stimulants amphetamine rlin work quickly immediately because I boost dopamine right away and our drugs like stratera which is atomoxetine or syala or Wellbutrin Works slowly for ADHD because they're anti-depressants and anti-depressants work slowly there's still people saying this and for 25 years I've been saying this is just wrong from one a basic Neuroscience point of view and wrong from don't you ever talk or listen to patients so Neuroscience view how quickly is dopamine get reuptake get blocked by will buin or by adom oxidine stratera or by simala within minutes to hours of taking it so you would expect if you're boosting norrine or dopamine availability right away you should see effects right away and if you ask patients who these drugs work for and they don't work for anybody all the ones I've worked with say you know work just like the St you I could tell I took it and I walked out of your office and I mean one guy I have who love simola said I took it in your office and I wasn't sure it was working and I got downtown to work 15 20 maybe half hour later and there was this guy coming at me on with this on a skateboard on the sidewalk and I know in my normal add State I would have just been flooded and not be able to process and I could just step out of the way so you know it worked that quickly and dramatically so that's the aside um so jumping back to Guan facine seems to work slowly so the synaptic strengthening building and it seems to be the nor the alpha receptors that are on um neurons that receive glutamate is our primary input the Alpha 2 receptor is modulating how glutamate is actually working and it's actually a an MDA glutamate receptors not the more common in the brain ample glutamate receptors no that's an important point I'll just quickly throw in if I may that the um nmda the N methylaspartate um glutamate receptors are the ones that typically are associated with synaptic plasticity um although you know so are you know the ampa receptors can do that too but what um Dr Cruz is referring to is the fact that guanosine you know indirectly modulates those Pathways so um the longer duration to get the effect it sounds like could be at least partially explained by a real um change in in neural wiring as opposed to with uh you use simbala and Wellbutrin as examples of a fast changes in neur neurotransmitters neurom modulators that led to this um very quick effect in this patient that left your office got downtown and was already experiencing effect um put differently sounds like guanosine um and clonidine not to be confused with clopin clonidine um could help ADHD but might take longer for the effects to manifest than the other drugs that y we typically hear about yeah so most often it takes 2 3 four weeks be and because it I mean with the stimulants you see effects right away it's reinforcing it and stimulant often in addition to having effects on concentration attention other you know do Boost energy for most people do boost mood for most people and can improve sleep if they're not taken too close to sleep yeah Guan Fine's most common side effect tends to be sedating so most people take it at nighttime which is like why are you taking a s ating nighttime medication for your ADHD it's because it helps it works slowly indirectly so in tun of the the brand name extended release guanosine was approved in kids because again most of the research on ADHD is still in kids um for treating ADHD as a solo agent it clearly works in adults as well and even before intun was approved there were a handful of studies with either immediate release guanosine or extended release guanosine in the studies so far the the um results aren't distinguishable you know they both seem to work so clinically because it's much cheaper I actually use immediately release form and all bedtime and again because it's my impression and it probably don't have a and that's big enough to do a rigorous study is the sedating effects are Rel to the night time and people are feeling okay during the daytime I mean some of the rationale with the extended release is you're sort of smearing it over a longer time so it should be less sedating but depending on the time curve and how it works you could actually wind up with being more uniformly sedated day and night with the extended release so I've seen good results in some people I've had many who either didn't work or they didn't perceive result because again some part for some people of the stimulant benefit is I can feel it I know it's working so the majority at least in terms of prescription searches and and what clinics tend to it looks like most people who are on Guan facine are on it in combination with either a stimulant or a norepinephrine or dopamine promoting agent let's talk about modafanil and our modafanil by extension uh we hear about modafanil a lot in communities like the tech community and communities where people are trying to quote unquote cognitively enhance what is modafanil what does it do what doesn't it do how might it be useful for ADHD so we're going to jump back to your issue with the recency in science and how to incorporate things when so mno was a drug developed by a French company and approved there and used for decades for maybe a decade before it came to the US 205 maybe 35 years ago and at the time all the research showed that it was an orexin receptor antagonist wait antagonist Agonist um works on the orexin the hyperr orexin system right so boosting activity but not working like all our stimulant alerting drugs which are working on primarily norepinephrine systems so it was called the non-stimulant stimulant now most of the pharmacology literature refers to it as a dopamine acting drug and there's some people are debating whether it's orexin that it's working via or dopamine I haven't seen anything that to me means gives a clear consensus you know so I stick with the orexin because that's where I was taught so orexin getting back to the the sleep wake in the brain and arousal as I describe it there's two ways to wake up in the morning morning one way is the normal way that you just wake up and the other is being alarmed by an alarm clock your neighbor starting their lawn mower someone snoring an earthquake if you're in LA or Hawaii being startled out of sleep that wakefulness system is a sympathetic nervous system the orexin system is the more natural normal waking system and it isn't arousing you isn't it's waking you but it's not agitating you again the claims originally was that this is how maao worked it was waking you up but not overstimulating over Revenue so that the other than being developed by this French company The Entity that spent most research funds looking into what this does or doesn't do was the US military because they have a big investment and wanting people to be alert and ready to kill 247 but not being hyperactive trigger happy jittery like stimulants can do and this you know particularly in the early days this is really dating me of the Afghan war we Dro bombs on Canadian troops by accident you know Friendly Fire scenario things and the investigation the pilot and the crew there blamed their trigger happiness on being revved up by methylphenidate so for years the military has relied on traditional stimulants to keep people people able to fight around the clock and they wanted an agent that would keep you alert awake but not revved up not agitated and I'd say there's some good evidence that that's really sort of how modao works or performs so mno was called provigil for pro vigilance and then when they were using losing their US Patent like many drugs the provil is a Ric mixture of left and right-handed versions of the same mol molecule they found that the our modol the right-handed version was the one that's doing most of the good stuff and has a longer halflife than the combined version so they got a new patent for armaano which is new vigil um so that's that's the only difference between the two they're the same active ingredients as far as we can tell so and when it got approval in the US it was approved for narcolepsy where people are falling abruptly asleep during the day so it keeps them alert and awake there it also got approval for circadian sleep shift work disorder where because you're on a shift schedule you're sleeping weirdly and it got approval for daytime sleepiness from sleep apnea but even at that time when it was approved there were dozens of studies that showed regardless of why you're were sleepy whether it was sedating medication whether you had lupus or Ms whether you had some other condition it works pretty well for keeping people alert and awake so more than keeping alert and awake there does seem to be evidence that it helps with some of the executive functions of attention concentration my clinical experience with it it tends to be again with the amphetamine on top many fewer people describe it as being helpful or as as helpful um on the other hand there's one study and I'm forgetting the principal investigators it was at Brown University where they used some very clever sophisticated approach to try to sort out motivation versus pure cognitive functioning and their claim and and it was a very well done study they were comparing it directly to an amphetamine product their claim was that modafanil was the one that was actually boosting cognitive functions and not just boosting motivation whereas it most of amphetamines benefit for ADHD when we say it helps me concentrate it helps me sustain focus it makes me less distracted their feeling their analysis was that the stimulant was mostly working on motivation it's a controlled substance but not nearly not the same schedule as amphetamine and Ridin so it's easier for some prescribers to prescribe even though it's the non-stimulant stimulant and I'd say most people do experience you know I feel more alert or awake or better but I don't feel revved up about 10 to 15% of people that I've worked with and others have written about it so I don't think it's Unique will feel revved up when they take it the first few times and invariably the people I've worked with have said this feels like bad speed including people who haven't too who never even took speed so I don't know why they came up I mean it's just weird that people come up with the same terms but it's I mean my interpretation is that for some people this novel substance primarily maybe attacking into the orexin system is serving as a signal kind of like a panic attack does that there's something weird something different or being revved up and it that it's I think secondarily triggering the sympathetic system because for most of those people within a few trials within a few days they no longer had that overr you effect and again the important piece for alerting people to that is if they're expecting taking this I'm not going to feel over roused and over agitated and they do then they're even less prepared and more freaked out even though I've never tried modafanil provigil that people that I know who have and I know one who has for treatment of um real narcolepsy so he's narcoleptic um but others who have uh Tak it for ADHD and for work focus and cognitive enhancement um people who take modafanil and arodo really like it they I don't know if it has any reinforcing property but today is the first that I've heard that has this dopaminergic aspect but they seem to really like it and rely on it have you seen a a kind of a dependence form I mean it is a cont controlled substance because some people are worried about the potential and there was a woman Olympic 20 15 years ago who is ADM and said she had narcolepsy I don't know the but was disqualified from the Olympics because of it whether it has any real performance enhancing effects is not clear you know it was available in France for decade at least before it came to the US and they didn't see any rates of substance abuse or problems I mean it's clearly does not have the on any tests or animal studies the propensity that the amphetamines do and I'd say it's to me not the concluded subject whether there's any potential for addiction with it what about within the category of adderal viance and the stimulant type treatments for ADHD I don't want to say what are your go-to favorites because that's that makes it sound um very non-clinical um but you know what are the general trends that you've observed and that others have observed clinically or in any studies about preference for long long acting drugs versus shorter acting drugs and maybe this is also a good opportunity uh for you to be able to chime in about um like drug holidays you know taking weekends off or U and things of that sort maybe I'll start with that so for decades particularly starting with kids the the Dogma has been taking breaks from stimulants is a good idea because it will decrease the likelihood of developing addictions it will decrease tolerance and not a lot of rigorous research but one of the known side effects of stimulants for kids is growth suppression so height winds up being about 2 cm not big but measurably and consistently found there for kids who are routinely on the stimulants for their growth years um and taking breaks that last for several months like taking it off during the summer result in overcoming that decrement and height I looked and I still haven't whether there's any lower rate of addiction whether there's any lower rate of developing tolerance there's nothing that shows clinically I mean it may be true the other recommendation when I started out was and this is before the internet before constant plugged into everything and before kids had soccer practice and violin lessons and 400 activities is that kids should take it during the work days and not take it during the weekends and not take it during the Summers and now and for many years we've lived in a world where little Johnny has soccer practice and ballet and piano and has 42 things to get to where he's supposed to be performing and focused and behaving so the sort of excuse you could have down time has diminished in many communities and again whether there's actual benefits to that or not other than for the the height decrement which again there is evidence that taking long breaks but probably not short breaks mitigates that I haven't seen any evidence clearly showing a benefit that doesn't mean it's not there nobody has really studied it rigorously sort of related to that you as the question about short acting versus is long acting and there's differences in the realm of what's clinically helpful or useful and then there's the issue of risks or side effects so again one of the claims is that part of what makes a drug more addictive is not just the level it reaches but how quickly it's going in and out and that the short acting drugs May predispose someone to higher rates of addiction there are at least occasionally some people arguing on the other side that saturating The receptors for longer periods of time with high doses with a long you know extended release version that may actually be more of a risk but but I'd say there's more concern I think in the basic science Community from the immediate realis and there's a tiny bit of data but part of it overall is that a we talked earlier about global rates of addiction to any substance that we have fairly good data on because of CDC track it but in terms of very specifically who gets addicted to Aderall who gets addicted to ridin there's so little data and most people just sort the same numbers that oh maybe two to 3% of kids run into trouble and it's not common and that's it or they study a much broader question and that's the issue of misuse combined with abuse and misuse by the research definitions means anyone who did use their drug exactly as prescribed which means if you're taking a short acting rlin and it says take it one every or six hours apart during the day and you acknowledge taking it on one day eight hours difference you're classified as a misuser by those studies I mean it's a I'm I'm being maybe a little ridiculous because most of the exceptions aren't that narrow but there's a big blurring in the research particularly coming from the people who are worried about add I mean we should be worried about addiction but we shouldn't be overreacting or creating pretending it's a problem and among those where that I would say is not addiction that's not abuse that's not using it as directed but people with ADHD by their very nature are not going to use things as directed either because they forgot or weren't organized enough to get it on time or forgot what you said in the office even though you wrote it down because they lost a sheet of paper it's written down on so getting back to patients experience of it so the advantages of the immediate release is they tend to work quickly you can feel it going in it's easily most people there's a lot of individual variability but let's say in the 6 to 8 Hour range we'll get benefit some shorter some an immediate release lasts all day but you know when it's on you know when it's off if you forget to take your medicines in the morning but you know you have a presentation at 3: that afternoon you could take it at 2: and still be able to sleep that night so it allows more flexibility it allows more pinpointing of optimizing it for points the day you want to be using it um some people philosophically say that in itself is wrong or bad that you should be absolutely steady and constant because what we're trying to do is be consistent and reproducible and others would say we're trying to treat individuals who have different demands on them and have different patterns during their day so there are different philosophies about what's better or worse one of the big downsides of the immediate release though is not only does it go in quickly it tends to go off quickly and most people not all but most experience some withdrawal as it's going off and although when we're using this for ADHD we focus on the cognitive executive function benefits the focus the attention the concentration and people can experience that many people who weren't even aware of it increasing their energy feel my energy crashing as I go off of it or many people who wen't aware that it was actually elevating mood to any extent feel oh my God I'm crashing and I'm crying and cranking and miserable now and with the extended release versions most of them go in more gradually so it can be harder to detect they last a longer period of the day and and most of them go out much more gradually at the end of the day the one I like the most or for a long acting amphetamine product is viance and viance was designed as a slow release product it was designed specifically to be unattractive to drug abusers so viance chemically links a dexamine molecule to line one of the amino acids it's a basic component of proteins and 20 essential amino acids and if you snort it or inject it you have an inactive prod drug you have the listex amphetamine your red blood cells actually need have an enzyme that Cleaves cine and leaves you with free active dexamphetamine and that's the slow release mechanism is how quickly your red blood cells can do it and they have limited capacity to do that so although they designed it to be a anti-drug abuse drug it actually turns out to be one of the sort of most consistently evenly entering the body for some people it goes in so slowly that they say I don't feel it um and also towards the end of the day one of the the best in terms of not falling off abruptly um the potential downside is again that the capacity of the red blood cells is limited so at some point for most people because that's a rate limiting step when you're adding more and more you're actually extending the duration of time more than you're getting a bigger Peak because your your red blood cells just aren't cleaving it fast enough to make more Dexter amphetamine available almost invariably when I'll ask you know how did this compar to your Aderall xar or tohan or they'll say smooth smooth they're getting it they're not feeling too Jarred too ruged up yeah we don't really have a language for these things right um hence the uh uh bad speed um language before cracked out bad speed smooth um because what we're talking about here is the Gestalt of the subjective experience of all these uh neural and and uh chemical mechanisms um very interesting thank you for sharing that I know that there are a lot of listeners and and viewers who have tried these things or are considering or you know at one point use them and um a lot has evolved D in in this uh realm of chemistry for ADHD but that's very helpful before we wrap up I I want to make sure that I ask you about something that's been on my mind a lot in general but in particular as it relates to ADHD which is time perception and I'm basically obsessed with time perception I've long been fascinated by the fact that we can find slice time when our arousal is high that's what presumably gives people the kind of slow motion effect in you know High very stressful environments versus when we're relaxed our frame rate on Life Goes Down And um it's all very Dynamic it's important our brains are able to do that but someone recently told me the following her partner has ADHD and she said that the big rescue to their relationship came when uh they together read read a book about ADHD and something in there read something like this that people without ADHD keep track of time whereas people with ad DHD don't but they do know the difference between now and not now but they're not tracking time they know that what they're doing in the moment is not what they're going to be doing later or what they did in the past but they're not tracking time the same way and I think this ties back to this interest based attention system what do we know about time perception in ADHD and by extension do you think that these drugs are working in part to change time perception good question um so I'd say there's two different angles and I think I me the one that's easier to objectively measure is putting people in a lab and I mean there's a simple test a time perception test and you interrupt them after certain period I mean say you're going to be estimating how long you're you're left without interruption and people with ADHD measurably are they're inconsistently inconsistent or consist sorry consistently inconsistent so it's not that they perpetually under estimate or overestimate but they are estimating incorrectly much more often than people without ADHD so there's something at a basic time processing level that's abent there but there's also getting you know the real world aspect of not paying attention to cues or not noticing other people who left the room or not regist you know being distracted which compounds the situation and I mean it's also interesting to the extent to which many people aren't so I often ask even though it's not one of the 18 symptoms are you chronically late to them and particularly people who show up late to my office time after time so one of my favorite quotes was this person who the session before we had been talking that her boss was giving her threatening notices CU she had come in two hours late one day and she had all sorts of good excuses of why she could could get out the door and I we were talking you know are you regularly late no no no and I said well why was the boss so upset I said and then I asked well when do you act when is the expectation this is pre-co pre-working from when is the expectation you're there when do you usually show up oh well office starts at 9: and I'm usually there by 9:15 9:20 that's not late and her mind it wasn't late so you know and so when you ask a question are you routinely late you're going to get meaningless information on your little checklist unless you know what that means to the individual so the second part of the question I'm sure it's been done and I don't have the answer whether stimulants or other drugs measurably improve time perception in that you know laboratory situation of just Can you estimate how much time has elapsed I I should know that but I don't have that on top of my and the more Global question of how Central that's sort of the time aspect of organization of thoughts and attention is to the content of disorganization I there are some research groups um I think it's mainly a Danish group who's feeling that ADHD is primarily a circadian rhythm disruption that that's the central neurologic issue at play and there's interesting I got to do work in the ' 80s on bright light therapy for winter depression which has a me measurable impact as strong as medication but there is one or two studies done on individuals with ADHD without any seasonal depression without any depression at all and just those same Bright Lights showing them you know a dose of Bright Lights early in the morning measurably improved a broad range of ADHD symptoms and the claim was that that was working because it was helping re synchronize internal rhythms which are out of sync in ADHD whether that's exactly the same thing you were getting at but certainly if you have I mean even though we have a sort of Master Clock in the Supra asmatic nucleus we also have clocks throughout our body and they're talking and interacting and ostensibly synchronized and working with each other but it could well be that for many people they're not and that getting that to work is essential thank you for those reflection ctions and really I want to say thank you on behalf of myself and everyone listening and watching for doing the work you do you were invited here today because you have an absolutely encyclopedic understanding and knowledge of ADHD and the clinical treatments and I've watched your YouTube channel and we'll provide links to all your various resources I'm I'm looking forward to your upcoming book however long it takes um I'm sure it'll be spectacular you know when you talk about ADHD you're able to do it from so many um different angles behavioral supplement based nutrition life and organizational life organizational um aspects and of course the medication the pharmacology the neuroscience and the ways that those different nodes um interact with one another because of course they do so I just want to be um absolutely clear how grateful we are for you for sharing all this knowledge a lot of people struggle with attention issues regardless of whether or not they have a full-blown ADHD or not a lot of people have been treated for it some people are still wondering if they should be or not and so today's discussion was nothing short of spectacular so on behalf of everybody I want to just thank you for doing what you do and for coming here to educate us thank you so much thanks I'm Gob smacked so thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr John Cruz to learn more about his work please see the links in the show note captions if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please click follow for the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a fstar review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics you'd like me to consider for the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast for those of you that haven't heard I have a new book coming out it's my very first book it's entitled protocols an operating manual for the human body this is a book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and experience and it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to Stress Control protocols related to focus and motivation and of course I provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included the book is now available by pre-sale at protocols book.com there you can find links to various vendors you can pick the one that you like best again the book is called protocols an operating manual for the human body if you're not already following me on social media I am hubman lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram X formerly known as Twitter Facebook LinkedIn and threads and on all those platforms I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content on the hubman Lab podcast again that's huberman lab on all social media platforms and and if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a zero cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to three page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep how to optimize dopamine deliberate cold exposure we have a foundational Fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training all of that is available completely zero cost you simply go to hubman lab.com go to the menu tab in the top right corner scroll down to newsletter and enter your email and I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr John Cruz and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 26 ---
Video ID: Nmo4bxfFzM0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nmo4bxfFzM0
Title: How to Control Your Metabolism by Thyroid & Growth Hormone | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-03-06 13:00:36 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I explain how two key hormones control metabolism and discuss tools to enhance their levels to improve metabolic health. 

I discuss the pathways through which the brain and body interact to produce thyroid hormone and growth hormone, and how these hormones influence essential processes like tissue growth and repair, body composition, and energy production. I explain how thyroid hormone levels are influenced by key nutrients, such as iodine, selenium, and L-tyrosine. I also explain how practices such as exercise, sleep, meditation and sauna can offset age-related declines in growth hormone, to optimize overall hormone health and metabolism. 

Huberman Lab Essentials are short episodes (approximately 30 minutes) focused on essential science and protocol takeaways from past Huberman Lab episodes. Essentials will be released every Thursday, and our full-length episodes will still be released every Monday.

Read the full episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/NiHUHED

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Hormones & Metabolism
00:01:41 Hypothalamus, Pituitary, Thyroid
00:03:22 Thyroid Hormone Functions, Tools: Iodine, Selenium, L-Tyrosine
00:07:55 Thyroid Hormone, Glucose & Metabolism; Thyroid Hormone Disorders
00:10:14 Growth Hormone Functions, Prescription Growth Hormone
00:13:10 Growth Hormone Release, Tools: Sleep & Bedtime Fasting
00:14:35 Growth Hormone Release, Tools: Meditation; Exercise, Warm-Up, Glucose, Cool Down
00:19:30 Growth Hormone Supplements, Arginine
00:21:31 Offsetting Age-Related Growth Hormone Decline
00:22:30 Temperature & Growth Hormone, Tool: Sauna Protocol
00:26:49 Peptides, Sermorelin, Secretagogues, Risk
00:29:37 Recap & Key Takeaways

#HubermanLab #Science #Metabolism #Hormones

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to hubman Labb Essentials where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health physical health and performance I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public today we are going to talk about two hormones thyroid hormone and its related Pathways and growth hormone and its related Pathways which arguably are the two hormones and two systems in the body that are most significant for setting your overall level of metabolism so metabolism is the consumption of energy not necessarily eating but it's the use of energy in the cells of the Body for growth of tissues for repair of tissues and also just for day-to-day maintenance of function these two hormones thyroid hormone and growth hormone we think of as related to metabolism of things in the body keeping body fat low and keeping muscles strong and tendons strong and repairing themselves Etc but they are also key for brain function for the ability to maintain cognitive function throughout the lifespan so the big theme I'd like to introduce is that metabolism isn't just about losing weight but having a high metabolism provided it's not too high is great it means that you will have more lean tissue more bone and muscle and less adapost tissue fat and we know that that's healthy there are neurons in your brain in an area called the hypothalamus which is just means it's below the thalamus hypo it sits at the base of your brain in the front it's part of the forebrain so it's more or less above the roof of your mouth maybe about a centimeter or so and then about a centimeter forward in most people and neurons in the hypothalamus release hormones that are called releasing hormones so anytime you hear releasing chances are those are neurons that are in your brain and they extend little wires we call axons into your pituitary and the pituitary releases a bunch of hormones into the bloodstream and the pituitary releases things that most often have the name of stimulating hormone because they stimulate or organs so in keeping with the theme of thyroid hormone you have thyroid releasing hor hormone in the brain tells the pituitary to release thyroid stimulating hormone and then the thyroid which we'll talk about in a moment releases thyroid hormones the thyroid is a little butterfly shaped gland that's right around the atoms apple and it's got four little bumps behind it called the parathyroid gland and it releases two hormones into the blood to stimulate different tissues and their metabolism and those hormones are called T4 and T3 so if this is already sounding like a lot of information it's really easy I promise releasing hormone comes from the brain stimulating hormone comes from the pituitary and in this case we're talking about the thyroid binding up that stimulating hormone and saying oh I need to release something and it releases T4 and T3 and guess what you can basically forget about T4 T4 it's not completely inactive it has some roles but T3 is the one that's more or less active now what does thyroid hormone do the main role of thyroid hormone of T3 is is to promote metabolism and that doesn't just mean the consumption of energy it means the utilization of energy including the buildup of tissues so it acts on all sorts of Target tissues in the body it acts on muscle it acts on the liver it acts on the cartilage it acts on the bone it's involved in taking fats and breaking them down into fatty acids and converting those into ATP which is an important thing for cells to use energy it's also involved in taking sugars and turning those into energy and yes it goes to atopos tissue to Fat we have different kinds of fat that we'll talk about today but it goes to white fat and it liberates or helps liberate some of the fats from those fat cells and use them for energy and this is why higher thyroid is associated with leaner bodies lower thyroid is associated with llean bodies one thing that's absolutely key and is actionable we're right there already in discussing tools is iodine iodine is most common in sea salt in kelp and in seaweed and most people can get enough iodine from the food they eat Andor the table salt they consume almost all table salt from all over the world regardless of where you are contains iodine the thyroid needs iodine in order to produce thyroid hormone iodine combines with an amino acid that we've talked about before called el tyrosine el tyrosine comes from meat from nuts there are some plant-based sources as well it is the precursor to dopamine but in the thyroid iodine combines or works with El tyrosine to produce T3 and T4 the thyroid hormone so you absolutely need sufficient iodine you need sufficient El tyrosine and then you also need something else which is called selenium selenium is important in order for thyroid hormone to be made because of the way that it allows El tyrosine and iodine to interact and the thing is most people aren't getting enough selenium because they don't eat foods that are high in selenium now the how much selenium you need will depend on where you live it actually varies country by country some countries I found uh say that you should get 100 microgram some say 200 some say 155 the average was about about 155 micrograms the countries I looked at people who are trying to increase thyroid levels might want to uh consume more selenium and if you consume a vitamin of course you want to make sure um if it has selenium that you're not overdoing it by consuming a lot of selenium rich foods either Brazil nuts are the heavyweight champion of foods to get selenium from it has very high concentrations of selenium in just six or eight uh Brazil nuts contain something like 550 micrograms of selenium it's also present in fish ham of all things um contains a lot of selenium uh for whatever reason pork does I'm not a big consumer of pork um beef has some selenium but what's interesting if you look at the sources you know pork beef turkey chicken cottage cheese eggs brown rice they what you want to understand is that they they have something like 30 to 50 micrograms of selenium so if you're not eating Brazil nuts and I'm guessing most people aren't then and you're not eating a lot of uh animal-based foods which I know many of you aren't then you're probably not getting enough selenium and again you can have these uh levels measured or you can just check what you're consuming um and figure out whether or not you're re meeting the ration that you need in order to get healthy levels of thyroid I also want to mention that for children the daily requirements of selenium are much lower as low as you know 30 or 40 micrograms for kids uh 14 years or younger and again that's micrograms not milligrams so again look into what you need but if you're somebody who's interested in keeping thyroid function healthy and productive then you certainly want to make sure you're getting enough iodine you're getting enough selenium and you're getting enough L tyrosine and it's interesting when you start looking at the various Foods especially highly processed foods then you start to realize that perhaps many people maybe you are not if you're curious how thyroid actually increases metabolism allows you to eat more Etc it relates to something we covered last issue which is glucose remember when you eat something blood sugar goes up insulin is secreted from the pancreas and it makes sure that blood glucose doesn't go too high which can damage tissues or too low which can make you hypoglycemic thyroid increases glucose uptake by various tissues in particular muscle and bone it actually can increase bone mineral density which is a really good thing as you get older when I say older I mean basically 30 and older you the the reason you can recover more quickly from injuries if you have a healthy thyroid and healthy thyroid Pathways is because you can consume energy that energy is diverted toward bone repair and muscle repair and cartilage repair and so the way it does this again is by increasing ATP but the whole idea here is that iodine selenium El tyrosine allow thyroid to be a healthy level so that thyroid then can take glucose in the blood and divert it to tissues for it to be used used in particular your brain and that's why the ability of your brain to use glucose or ketones for that matter is going to be aided by having healthy thyroid so do the things take the things eat the things that are going to allow you to have healthy levels of thyroid hormone if you're concerned about having excessively high or excessively low levels of thyroid hormone absolutely uh look up what the symptoms are talk to your physician um and there are a number of good treatments I didn't talk about prescription drugs that can prove symptoms related to hypo or hyper thyroid of course they have synthesized thyroid um so if you don't make enough thyroid you can take thyroid it's by prescription if you take have too much thyroid sometimes they'll take out the thyroid gland or they can administer drugs that will either block receptors or will interfere with some of the pathways from the brain uh to the pituitary or from the pituitary to the thyroid in order to adjust thyroid hormone that way so there are the the big guns uh in terms of the treatments for different thyroid disorders um but we're not talking about thyroid disorders we're talking about how to get and maintain thyroid levels in healthy ranges and some straightforward ways to do that through diet and supplementation next we're going to talk about growth hormone growth hormone is a pretty straightforward one for you to understand now because it follows the exact same logic as thyroid hormone in fact their functions are so closely overlapping that you're probably going to think why do you have these two systems so just very briefly G growth hormone releasing hormone so remember releasing means it comes from the brain comes from the brain and tells the pituitary to release growth hormone and then growth hormone is released into the bloodstream where it goes and acts on a ton of tissues muscle ligaments bone fat Etc to increase metabolism it sounds just like thyroid hormone and they do work in parallel and that's why we've lumped them together in the same episode they increase metabolism and repair and growth of tissues today we're going to talk about the things that anyone can do to increase growth hormone and there are reasons why certain people would want to do that people that make normal quote unquote levels of growth hormone might want to do that as they age because during puberty and development the pituitary is churning out tons of growth hormone it's responsible for the growth not surprising of the body and all its features height just being one of those and so as we age we make less growth hormone and that is one of the reasons why we recover more slowly from injuries it's one of the reasons why we accumulate body fat and it's one of the reasons why our metabolism slows and so growth hormone replacement therapy has been tremendously popular in the last 20 years which is not to say it doesn't carry its problems it does here's one of the major problems with injecting growth hormone not saying people shouldn't do this if the doctor has approved it or it's um in keeping with their particular life goals but growth hormone if it's in levels that are too high will cause growth of all tissues so not just muscle not just reduction of in body fat by metabolizing um you know by allowing uh fatty acids to be pulled out of storage and used for ATP but it will also cause increase in growth of the heart and the lungs and the liver and the spleen and so this is the concern with abuse of growth hormone so we're not going to be talking about abuse of growth hormone we will however talk about tools that anyone can use to increase levels of growth hormones some of them are behavioral some of them are supplement based and some of them interact with behaviors and supplements and what's cool about the discussion about growth hormone is that the tools that exist out there to increase growth hormone are very actionable there are things that can increase growth hormone three four 500% or more and even though that's a short-lived increase they can have very powerful effects on metabolism and on repair of tissues so let's talk about those as always I want to emphasize talk to a doctor before you do anything including remove any treatments growth hormone is released every night when you go to sleep and it's released in the early part of sleep during so-called slow wave sleep so the two conditions that have to be met in order for growth hormone to be secreted regularly for tissue repair Etc are you need to get into slow wave sleep the so-called deep sleep and you need blood insulin and glucose to be relatively low so eating within 2 hours of going to sleep is going to suppress growth hormone release that's very clear so what is special about this early phase of sleep what in particular about slow wave deep sleep allows the pituitary to release growth hormone so the answer is it's Delta wave activity in the brain delta waves are these big giant waves of activity in the brain that correlate with slow wave sleep as opposed to faster waves of activity that associate with rapid eye movement sleep it's the delta waves of activity these sweeping big waves of activity in the neurons that stimulate the brain to stimulate the pituitary because once you understand that then you have something to Anchor to in terms of thinking what are the things I can in waking that will allow me to release more growth hormone which for most people is going to be a good thing now the Delta wave activity and the slow wave activity in the brain being very important for growth hormone release and growth hormone release being so important for metabolic functions and peeling away unwanted body fat and repairing tissues Etc forces us to ask well what other things can we do in waking in order to increase growth hormone release so let's start with the ones that have a uh potentially big effect but are a little bit harder to access and for that I want to point toward a book which is really kind of interesting it's not focused on growth hormone but the book is called altered traits this is the book um it's an excellent book um altered traits by Goldman and Davidson science reveals how meditation changes your mind brain and body very interesting book um for those of you that are interested in meditation and perhaps those of you who are not but are considering it they what they talk about in this book is the fact that meditation has two separate lines of effects one of those lines of effects are things that change your state so you're stressed you sit down you meditate and you relax and you go into a particular State the other are the changes that occur over time and those are changes in trait so personality can actually change with long bouts of of of TM meditation or repeated meditation in any case the re we're talking about altered traits today is because certain types of meditation can get people's brains into states that very closely mimic slow wave sleep so what this means is for for people that are interested in increasing growth hormone a meditation practice that allows you to get into these slow wave delta type frequency uh activity in the brain may be very beneficial because as I mentioned before that's what's gating growth hormone release it's not just a circadian phenomenon it's actually controlled by these uh brain waves now let's move to the things that one can do that have been shown to have what's let's just be honest pretty enormous effects on growth hormone release in waking and these are things that are very actionable one of the things that can have a dramatic effect on levels of growth hormone release in waking as well as in sleep the following night is ex exercise there are hundreds if not thousands of studies measuring growth hormone both during or sometimes after exercise or the following night and the conclusion that one takes away from all of these is that exercise has to be of particular duration and intensity in order to get growth hormone release so first I'm just going to tell you what I found to be the maximum amount of growth hormone release as it relates to a particular form of exercise the particular form of exercise is either weight training or it can be endurance training but the endurance training and the weight training actually have to be limited to about 60 Minutes not much longer a proper warm-up seems to accelerate the release of growth hormone once the hard work phase starts so 10 minutes of warmup or so was the number that I extracted from all these studies and when you say warm up it doesn't mean just warm up the limb and tissues that you're going to use so you don't get injured actually warm the body getting the body warm as a warmup seems to be important because temperature of the body seems to be an important condition or prerequisite for certain patterns of exercise to maximize growth hormone release so if it's weightbearing exercise it would be getting close to that um final repetitions where you can't complete them but not pushing through those or even going to failure but getting close leads to anywhere from 300 to 500% increases resting growth hormone levels and 300 to 500% increases in growth hormone the following night when you go to sleep which is incredible one of the other conditions that seemed to be important again was to have relatively low blood glucose so probably not eating too close to exercise or not ingesting a lot of sugars during the exercise that was supported by the fact that ingestion of a sport drink that contains caloric sugar immediately flatlined the growth hormone levels so really interesting relationship between insulin glucose and growth hormone and then the other interesting thing was that even after the exercise taking body temperature back down to normal levels relatively quickly seemed to be associated with these big spikes in growth hormone otherwise what would happen is you get these big spikes in growth hormone but if the exercise went too long or if body temperature remained too high for too long then you didn't get the second increase in growth hormone the following night let's talk about supplements so this has been known about for some time but um Arginine the amino acid arginine can increase growth hormone levels substantially the levels and the amounts of gr of arginine required to get big growth hormone release increases is pretty substantial so some people will take Arginine before bedtime some people will take it before exercise the prerequisite again is low blood glucose blood glucose is high it's going to quash the effect the amounts of arginine that people take are anywhere from 3 G to 10 gram or sometimes even more although this is definitely a case of more is not better there's a threshold at which growth hormone release is actually blunted by taking more than n grams of arginine now nine gram of arginine orally is a lot of pills it's at minimum nine pills and it can cause some GI disturbance right people can feel nauseous some people will throw it up what's interesting however is that whether or not it's by mouth or by vein taking Arginine can dramatically increase growth hormone release 400 to 600% above baselines these are huge increases in growth hormone now here is something really important and interesting to note which is that increasing Arginine levels with the specific goal of increasing growth hormone release can actually shortcircuit the effects of exercise on growth hormone several studies I looked at looked at the interaction of taking Arginine and the exercise or just the Arginine or just the exercise alone and so you don't uh unfortunately if growth hormone increases your goal you don't unfortunately get to increase growth hormone 800% by taking Arginine and exercising it always seems to be clamped at about 3 100 to 500% increases so hopefully that's clear one thing that's particularly interesting to me as somebody who's in his 40s is that it's actually between ages 30 and 40 that the amount of growth hormone that you release each night is reduced by two to threefold and since everybody goes through this age related decline very dramatically it seems to me that the things that we're supposed to be doing anyway like exercising like trying not to eat too close to bedtime trying to optimize sleep all of these are wonderful tools that we should um be pursuing and perhaps using and they can actually offset the two to threefold decrease right if we're talking about a two to threefold decrease for people there in their 30s and 40s and then we're talking about increases from exercise or from maybe from supplementation but certainly from exercise of 300 to 500% well then all of a sudden we're in a position to actually offset the age related decline in growth hormone completely just through behaviors and I think that's quite interesting and quite powerful now I'd like to discuss a way that anyone can increase their levels of growth hormone dramatically and when I say dramatically I mean dramatically I'll get to the numbers in a couple minutes but we have to remember how growth hormone is released in the first place remember it all starts in the brain in the hypothalamus the hypothalamus is a brain area that controls things like sexual behavior temperature regulation circadian Behavior meaning when you want to be awake when you want to be asleep aggression all of that there are other brain areas involved too but it has a rich collection of different neurons involved in all these very basic functions now as we talked about the releasing hormones the growth hormone releasing hormone comes from neurons in the hypothalamus those then communicate with the pituitary and the pituitary releases growth hormone and then the growth hormone acts on all these different tissues muscle liver cartilage Etc body fat makes them use energy that's why you lose body fat when growth hormone levels are high makes you grow muscle strengthens bones Etc now one of the things that has a profound effect on growth hormone levels growth hormone release is temperature now the data on this are very strong and the data come from both animal studies and human studies and if you're guessing which direction this is is going to go you can probably imagine that making animals or people warmer is the way to go if you want to increase growth hormone now anytime you're going to increase temperature of yourself or anyone else or an animal it is risky I want to be really clear about this not everyone should engage in the behaviors I'm about to describe but and I should just say the reason it's risky is it doesn't take much of a temperature increase in the brain to cook the brain to cook Nur neurons and after that point neurons can't come back and people can die from hyperthermia however there are really strong data pointing to the fact that sauna AKA deliberate hypothermia not too high however that sauna can increase the release of growth hormone and other hormones and what's so dramatic about this literature is the size of the effects that are reported entering environments with where it's very hot for short periods of time anywhere from 20 minutes to 30 minutes where the temperature is 80° C to 100° C has been shown to increase growth hormone release 16 fold that's right 16-fold that's 1, 1600% now there are also effects on other hormones prolactin cortisol Etc so the pattern that was described in this study there have been many studies now now um endocrine effects of repa sauna um were were done in 17 humans they actually had to do this three days in a row and the pattern was to get into the sauna for 20 minutes followed by 30 minutes of cooling followed by 20 minutes sauna again led to a five-fold increas in growth hormone and then by doing that day after day after day on the third day you would see these huge increases of like 16 fold up to 16 fold but these increases in growth hormone are tremendous and what they probably stem from are increased activity of neurons within the hypothalamus that stimulate growth hormone release from the pituitary and that's probably because the growth hormone releasing hormone neurons in the hypothalamus sit very closely and may even be intermixed with some of the neurons in the hypothalamus that regulate heat and body temperature remember metabolism is in part a heat it's like a furnace of how much energy you're consuming in using for building or for um energy usage purposes so sauna can be very very interesting and again it's 20 minutes 30 minute cooling 20 minutes again um proceed with Extreme Caution but nonetheless these are pretty extreme effects in terms of their abilities to increase growth hormone levels there's a kind of new area that's developing now that I think deserves our attention not because I'm encouraging it but because it is happening and those are peptides so these days you hear a lot about peptides I'd like to clarify a little bit about what peptides are peptides is a really huge category of biological compounds peptides are just strings of amino acids right so we've talked about Al tyrosine Arginine ornithine those are amino acids those are individual amino acids and those are put together into little small peptides or they're what they're called polypeptides which are just longer peptides turns out that for any substance like growth hormone or growth hormone releasing hormone it's made up of different amino acids and different sequences just like your genes are made up of AG A's and G's and C's and T's nucleotides in different sequences it's like a recipe peptides tend to be short sequences of amino acids that resemble a hormone enough or resemble some other peptide enough that it can lead to the similar or same effects when you inject them so for example we make growth hormon releasing hormone from our brain which stimulates growth hormone from the pituitary but people now will take things like Calin s e r m o r e l i n sermorelin which is not the entire peptide sequence of growth hormone releasing hormone but it's a subset of those then that stimulates the release of growth hormone from the pituitary so this is not taking growth hormone this is taking the stimulating hormone or what's often called a secretagogue or a mimic all right it causes a a secretion of the hormone that one wants sir Morin is prescription do they work yes do they shut down your natural production of growth hormone releasing hormone well there the answer is yes but some of these peptides actually have the effect of changing gene expression because as you recall growth hormone in big uh big increases in growth hormone that are short-lived like s or I you know I should say exercise or Arginine or sauna it seems like has these huge effects those are transient but when one is injecting over and over a constant level you can put into action gene expression programs that can be longlived and let's say you have a particular tumor in the body tumors will grow when they see growth hormone even if it that tumor is unhealthy for you right you've got growth of tissues all over the body so again not promoting their use but they're definitely out there and so now if you hear about them or someone's talking to you about them now hopefully you have a better understanding about their underlying biology and you can think rationally about whether or not they are the right decision for you okay once again covered an enormous amount of material hopefully now you understand thyroid hormone and what it does and a little bit about its mechanism or maybe a lot and growth hormone and what it does and how both of them take care of our metabolism they dictate how many nutrients we can eat and make use of they can pull from body fat stores repair muscle repair cartilage they really are incredible compounds and they are actionable they're things that we can do like getting that early phase of sleep perhaps supplementing with Arginine maybe not hopefully getting adequate exercise warming up properly not making the exercise too long or too intense will help maybe sauna or things like it you know deliberate safe hyperthermia with the emphasis on safe might be things that are of use so now hopefully you understand not just thyroid and growth hormone but logic that underlies thyroid hormone growth hormone estrogen testosterone why we eat why we stop eating chosy gin if these names don't mean anything to you then perhaps go back and listen to those episodes but regardless I hope that you come away from this with a deeper understanding about these hormones which are so powerful in controlling the way our brain functions and the interplay between the brain and hormones because it is really a bidirectional conversation the brain is telling the body what hormones to make the hormones are influencing all the tissues of the body but also telling the brain whether or not to eat more or grow more or think more Etc so I really appreciate your time and attention if you like this podcast and you're finding it useful please recommend it to other people and last but not least I thank you for your time and attention and above all for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 27 ---
Video ID: p6zNt7HUCrY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p6zNt7HUCrY
Title: How Sunlight Protects Against Flu
Published: 2025-03-03 21:24:58 UTC
Description:
Dr. Roger Seheult discuses how the 2009 H1N1 pandemic provided valuable scientific insights by occurring outside the typical winter flu season, allowing Harvard researchers to analyze data across various environmental conditions and ultimately conclude that sunlight strongly protects against getting influenza.

Transcript Language: English
The problem is we always have this influenza season, which is in the wintertime. We can talk about why that might be. I would suggest to you that it's because that's when we have the shortest day of the year. But we also have other things that happen at that time. What else is happening? We're having parties at that time. There's Thanksgiving, there's New Year's. It's cold. You know, does the temperature have anything to do with it? We're also inside because it's cold. So what is it that's actually doing it? Well, 2009 was a banner year because 2009 was the year that we had the H1N1 pandemic, and that was a boon for us. The reason is, is because... Not because of the deaths that we had, but from the scientific standpoint, this epidemic actually peaked in the summertime, and it was in areas where the humidity was sometimes high and sometimes it was low, and sometimes the temperature was high, sometimes the temperature was low, sometimes the sun was out, sometimes it was cloudy. In other words, we uncoupled the influenza virus in 2009 from it being in the wintertime and all of those things that were associated. So now we have all of these data points. And so Harvard went to work at looking at all these data points. They looked at solar radiation data at that time, and they were actually able to look specifically where that person came from and what was the solar radiation in that particular area. And what they came up with was, absolutely. They said, quote, "Sunlight strongly protects against getting influenza."

========================================

--- Video 28 ---
Video ID: KuuoLT-fq4s
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KuuoLT-fq4s
Title: How to Achieve Inner Peace & Healing | Dr. Richard Schwartz
Published: 2025-03-03 13:00:28 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. Richard Schwartz, Ph.D., therapist, author, and founder of Internal Family Systems (IFS) therapy. We discuss how IFS views the mind as a collection of parts, each shaped by different life experiences—both good and bad, including trauma. To demonstrate how IFS works, Dr. Schwartz guides Dr. Huberman and you, the listener, through an example IFS session. We also explore how IFS and body awareness can help break harmful thought and behavior patterns, promote emotional healing, and build healthier relationships.

Read the full episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/o5WihP4

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
BetterHelp: https://betterhelp.com/huberman
David Protein: https://davidprotein.com/huberman
Wealthfront**: https://wealthfront.com/huberman
Function: https://functionhealth.com/huberman

_**This experience may not be representative of the experience of other clients of Wealthfront, and there is no guarantee that all clients will have similar experiences. Cash Account is offered by Wealthfront Brokerage LLC, Member FINRA/SIPC. The Annual Percentage Yield (“APY”) on cash deposits as of December 27,‬ 2024, is representative, subject to change, and requires no minimum. Funds in the Cash Account are swept to partner banks where they earn the variable‭ APY. Promo terms and FDIC coverage conditions apply. Same-day withdrawal or instant payment transfers may be limited by destination institutions, daily transaction caps, and by participating entities such as Wells Fargo, the RTP® Network, and FedNow® Service. New Cash Account deposits are subject to a 2-4 day holding period before becoming available for transfer._

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
X: https://x.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Dr. Richard Schwartz*
IFS Institute: https://ifs-institute.com 
IFS profile: https://ifs-institute.com/about-us/richard-c-schwartz-phd 
X: https://x.com/DickSchwartzCSL 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/Dr.DickSchwartz
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/richard-schwartz-0a9a1b203 
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/@InternalFamilySystems 

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Dr. Richard Schwartz
00:02:11 Internal Family Systems (IFS), Self & Parts
00:07:23 Sponsors: BetterHelp & David Protein
00:09:44 Trauma & Parts: Exiles, Roles, Critic, Managers, Firefighters
00:15:32 Frustration & Anger, Surrender & Perspective
00:19:35 Feelings, Curiosity & Self-Exploration, Protecting Other Parts
00:29:35 Exploration of Inner Frustration, Judgement, Firefighters, Protectors
00:40:04 Titanium Teddy Bear, The Self & Curiosity, Tool: The 8 C’s & Self
00:46:41 Sponsors: AG1 & Wealthfront
00:49:24 IFS Therapy, Self-Exploration
00:53:47 Role Confusion, Conflict, Self & Clarity; Legacy Burdens
01:00:26 Cognitive vs Somatic Feelings; Tools: Localize Body Feeling, Curiosity
01:04:11 IFS & Psychedelics, Ketamine, Big Self, Journal Retractions
01:11:18 Early Morning, Breathwork, Exiles & Healing
01:13:53 Sponsor: Function
01:15:41 Shame, Racism, Protectors & Carrying Burden, Compassion
01:21:29 Unhealthy Romantic Relationships, Child-Parent Relationship
01:27:06 Therapist, Self-Exploration, Protectors & Introduction to Self
01:31:08 Tool: Questions for a Self-Exploration of Internal Protectors
01:39:30 Writing, Forming New Relationships with Parts, Leading with Self
01:42:51 Protectors, Managers, Firefighters, Suicidal & Addiction Behaviors
01:48:37 Overworking, Fear, Mortality
01:54:35 Technology & Distraction, Exiles, Worthlessness
01:58:58 Psychiatry, Medicine, New Ideas
02:02:58 Culture & Expanding Problems, Activism & Self
02:10:39 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Follow & Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Protocols Book, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Relationships

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Dr Richard Schwarz Dr Richard Schwarz is the founder of internal family systems therapy which is a unique form of therapy that's less centered on your relationship to other people but instead focuses mainly on identifying the parts of yourself and your personality that tend to emerge in different situations and that tend to create anxiety resent or depression another key feature of internal family systems therapy is that it's not just focused on fixing challenges within us it also teaches you how to grow your confidence openness and compassion now today's episode is different than any other episode of the podcast that we've done before and that's for two reasons first Dr Schwarz takes me through a brief session of ifs therapy so you can see exactly what it looks like in practice and then he takes you The Listener through it as well so as you'll soon observe and experience internal family systems therapy allows you to work through challenging sticking points basically the parts or feelings within you that you don't like to have and then it shows you how to convert those feelings into more functional aspects of yourself so as you'll soon see internal family systems therapy is both super interesting and it's an incredibly empowering practice it's also a form of therapy that's now been studied and for which there's a lot of peer-reviewed science to support its efficacy by the end of today's episode Dr dick Schwarz will have shown you that a lot of the negative reactions that we tend to have with different people and things tend to originate from a few basic patterns that once we understand we can really transmute into more positive responses it's a really interesting practice it's one that you can apply today during the episode and that you can return to in order to apply going forward in your life before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme this episode does include sponsors and now for my discussion with Dr Richard Schwarz Dr dick Schwarz welcome thank you Andrew it's a delightful to be with you yeah I've uh heard so much about you and your work and internal family systems models um I've had the opportunity to do a little bit of that work to be honest I don't know whether or not the person I did that work with um was formerly trained in it so I'd like to start off by just asking you what is internal family systems and what are the different components and as we do that I'm sure people are going to be thinking about these various components for their own life and the people in their lives corre yeah well originally I developed it as a form of psychotherapy which is probably the way it's used most now but it's also become a kind of Life practice and a just a a paradigm for understanding the human mind and to as an alternative to the cultures Paradigm so that's um saying a lot uh and it's been quite a journey I know of fraan psychoanalysis I know of you know any number of different branches of psychology that have a clinical slant to them there's cognitive behavioral therapy what are what are the core components of internal family systems yeah so one basic assumption is that the mind isn't unitary that actually it's uh we're all multiple personalities not in the diagnostic sense but we all have these what I call Parts other systems call subpersonalities ego States things like that uh and then it's the natural state of the mind to be that way that we're born with them because they're all very valuable and uh have qualities and resources to help us survive and and Thrive but trauma and what's called attachment injuries and the slings and arrows we suffer Force these little naturally valuable Parts into roles that can be destructive often they don't like it all but because they're frozen often in time in the during the trauma and they live as if it's still happening they're in these protective roles that uh can be quite extreme and interfere in your life and uh yeah so I just stumbled on the phenomena 40 now I think it's 41 years ago and it's been you know amazing ride so at the time were you already practicing as a clinical psychologist I actually have a PhD in Maryland family therapy so I was part of the movement in Family Therapy away from inas Psychic work and there was a polarization and we thought we could reorganize families and heal all these symptoms just by doing that we didn't have to muck around in the inner world and I went to prove that and this was about 1983 by getting a group of bulimic kids together in their families and tried to reorganize the families just the way the book said to and failed that the the kids didn't realize they'd been cured and they kept binging and purging so out of frustration I began asking why and they started talking this language of parts and they would say some version of when something happens bad bad happens in my life it triggers this critic who's calling me all kinds of names inside and that goes right to the heart of a part that feels empty and alone and worthless and that's so distressing to feel that the binge part comes in and takes me out takes me away from all that pain but the critic comes in and attacks me for the binge and then the criticism goes right to the heart of that that worthless part so to me as a family therapist this sounded like what I'd been studying in external families these circular sequences of interaction and so I just got curious and just started to explore are these different parts that exist within each and all of us are they represented by a clear and distinct voice from the other or do people typically experience them as just the self like my inner critic uh um you'll give us the other names and titles um or is this happening typically below people's conscious awareness some of both so most people are aware they're critic and uh but other other times you're not aware of these parts call Exiles that you've locked away because you didn't want to feel their feelings they're stuck in these bad trauma scenes and to survive in your life you had to push them away and so with those parts a lot of people aren't really consciously aware of them until these protector Parts give space and open the door to the Exiles I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor better help better help offers Professional Therapy with a license therapist carried out entirely online now I personally have been doing therapy weekly for well over 30 years in fact I consider doing regular therapy just as important as getting regular exercise which of course I also do every week there are essentially three things that great therapy provides first of all it provides a good rapport with somebody that you can trust and talk to about pretty much any issue with second of all it can provide support in the form of emotional support and directed guidance and third expert therapy can provide useful insights insights that allow you to better not just your emotional life and your relationship life but of course also the relationship to yourself and your professional life and to all sorts of goals better he help makes it very easy to find an expert therapist with whom you resonate with and that can provide you those three benefits that come from effective therapy also because better help allows for therapy to be done entirely online it's super time efficient and easy to fit into a busy schedule if you'd like to try better help you can go to betterhelp.com huberman to get 10% off your first month again that's betterhelp.com / huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by David David makes a protein bar unlike any other it has 28 gram of protein only 150 calories and 0 gram of sugar that's right 28 gram of protein and 75% of its calories come from protein this is 50% higher than the next closest protein bar David protein bars also taste amazing even the texture is amazing my favorite bar is the chocolate chip cookie dough but then again I also like the new chocolate peanut butter flavor and the chocolate brownie flavor basic basically I like all the flavors a lot they're all incredibly delicious in fact the toughest challenge is knowing which ones to eat on which days and how many times per day I limit myself to two per day but I absolutely love them with David I'm able to get 28 grams of protein in the calories of a snack which makes it easy to hit my protein goals of one gram of protein per pound of body weight per day and it allows me to do so without ingesting too many calories I'll E A David protein bar most afternoons as a snack and I always keep one with me when I'm out of the house or traveling they're incredibly delicious and given that they have 28 gram of protein they're really satisfying for having just 150 calories if you'd like to try David you can go to david.com huberman again that's david.com huberman I definitely want to go into what the various protector roles or titles are labels excuse me and the Exiles before we do that uh since you brought up the topic of trauma this is a topic that I think many many people are interested in I'm just curious you know how do you define a trauma um and why do you think it is that traumas tend to lock us into uh a state that was representative of an earlier time why is it that it's so linked to this thing of time perception yeah the why question I can't totally answer but definitely is and for me traumas aren't necessarily traumatizing so something bad happens to you and if you can access what you and Martha Beck were calling the the self capital S and you go to the part of you that got hurt by what happened instead of pushing it away and locking it up and you embrace it and you bring it closer to you which means going to your suffering which is counter to what most of us try to do but if you were to do that and you could help it on Lo the feelings it got from the trauma then you're not traumatized what's traumatizing is something bad happens these more vulnerable parts of us the most sensitive parts of us get hurt or feel worthless because of what happened or get terrified and then we lock them away because we don't want to feel that feeling anymore and everybody around us tells us to just let it go just move on Don't Look Back and so we wind up exiling our most sensitive parts simply because they got hurt and then when you have a lot of Exiles you feel more delicate the world seems more dangerous because anything could trigger that and when they get triggered they'll they'll blow up they'll take over so it's like these flames of raw motion come popping out so other parts have to are forced into these manager roles or or these protective roles and some of them are trying to manage your life so that you don't get triggered anymore so that for example nobody gets close enough to you to trigger any of that or so you you look really good so you don't get rejected or perform at a really high level to counter the worthlessness many of those become the critics because in their effort to try to get you to look good they're yelling at you to try and behave and and do what they want so you look better uh and and then there are other what we call manager protectors that are for some people particularly women have these massive caretaking parts that don't let them take care of themselves and take care of everybody else and so I could go on and on there's a lot of common manager roles and I want to make clear as I'm talking about this that these are not the essence of the parts and that's a big mistake that most of the field has made is to assume the critic is just a internalized critical parent voice instead of listening to it and hearing that it's desperately trying to protect you so none of these are what they seem that's the role they've been forced into and the analogy again is to a external family like kids in in dysfunctional families are forced into these extreme roles that aren't who they are it's the role they got forced into by the Dynamics of the family so the same is true with this internal family so most of us have a lot of what we call managers they got us here they they help us in our careers and they other systems would call them the defenses or the ego uh and and you know in spirituality they get vilified too but their whole MO is keep everything under control please everybody and you'll survive the world has a way of breaking through those defenses triggering an exile when that happens it's a big emergency because again these flames of raw motion are going to overwhelm you and make you have trouble functioning or even getting out of bed so there are other parts that immediately go into action to deal with that emergency and in contrast to these managers they're impulsive reactive Damn the Torpedoes I don't care about the collateral damage to your body to your relationships I just got to get you higher than those Flames or D them with some substance or distract you till they burn themselves out so we call those firefighters and again these are just the roles when released from these rolls they'll transform into being something very valuable so the firefighter the inner firefighter role is one of the Exiles that surfaces under conditions of of a lot of emotion maybe we could um this is a beautiful description and I'm completely on board this idea that we have multiple aspects of self or selves inside Yung said that too I think right like y had all this a long time ago yeah and I what what I like about this protectors uh Slash managers versus again not versus because they're combed but as a distinct category the Exiles is um just feels very true to me um and I like the the directness of the language so maybe we could just um like create a mental grid for people like if let's say I came to you as a patient and I said listen I you know I'm I'll just be D I'll be honest why not do not let's do it secretly I brought you here to get therapy no no um but okay so I'm somebody who uh for a very long time has been able to organize his life um I tend to have smooth interactions with my co-workers great friendships um I now have a very good relationship with my immediate family very good in fact I'm still working on a few things with a few people but I'm living in a mode of uh great uh joy and appreciation these days however um I'm I'm not going to give the details of this for sake of privacy but um you know the other day I was in a discussion with a family member and they had a grievance with me that I felt we had already addressed and it um and it became very high friction in conversation very quickly to the point where we tabled as an idea that maybe we just take some like serious space like um which was not reflective of how deeply I love this person or they love me it was just a feeling of both of us just being in this like high tension place like and um uh fortunately the conversation ended well with a path forward that involved more contact not less that I that both of us feel really good about but in that moment where I'm feeling overwhelmed MH and they're feeling overwhelmed MH what's going on there we're both adults so overwhelmed with anger at each other or frustration frustration yeah frustration like that um previous conversations I felt I hadn't um I was saying things uh they were saying things but I feel like there was so much underlying tension based on a history of poor communication nested on top of a of a of the kind of an intensity of emotion that we both tend to carry um and somehow we just like couldn't parse things from that state yeah and uh so I sat in my chair and I just told myself okay I'm going to not say anything yeah for five minutes because I know myself right it's not that I thought I would say something really barbed wire but I just thought this is not going to work like I'm I'm slamming my head against a wall they're not hearing me I'm clearly not hearing them and I the thing that helped me through that was just because it was what was taught to me I just decided to surrender MH and the word surrender used to mean to me letting go of Truth yeah and it feel really scary because when you say surrender it's almost like saying one context is surrender means you're right no matter and you're right I was just going to say that's right but I've come to realize that surrender to me is just a it surrender in the moment yeah so that I can get um better Optics yeah uh internal and external Optics so to me the the the thing of embracing surrender in those types of moments very uncomfortable uh but I now I've learned it's it's a great um a great way to get perspective um but even as I describe it the the whole situation was so heavy I came out of that call even though it ended well and was like yeah like uh that was that was like i' never run a marathon but I'd rather run a marathon than do two of those a week totally agree and yeah I had one of those with my wife a few days ago okay all right well and yeah very similar just uh caught that part and said okay let's just let it go for now and we'll talk later so I could give you my take on what happened but if you wanted to we could just go in and do a little exploring sure yeah yeah sure okay should we start with the frustrated angry part sure all right you ready I believe so yeah okay so remember that uh feeling and then focus on it and find it in your body or around your body okay where do you find it somewh between the middle of my midsection and up like right be my forehead like there's pressure it's great both places it's great you have such clarity about it so as you focus there how do you feel toward this part of you oh no it's very unpleasant so you don't like it no I don't like it yeah which makes sense because it does you know sometimes escalate things with your friend and uh doesn't leave you feeling good so I understand why you don't like it but we're going to ask the parts that don't like it to give us the space to just get curious about it and see if that's possible okay um okay so how do you feel toward it now feel a little bit of relaxation in the in the the head part of it um yeah it's it's it's funny how when you ask me to localize it it's so clear it's like this thing inside me it's like this about the size of like a teddy bear that's just like but it's not a it's not a good thing it's like pushed up there but then when you said to get curious about it um feels like it kind of drops down a little bit and kind of kind of Moves In A little maybe softens a little bit so you do feel curious toward it yeah all right so go ahead and ask it what it wants you to know about itself silently up to you either way whichever more comfortable well since this is a podcast and none of this is comfortable anyway for me to do in public uh to if I'm quite honest um yeah just ask ins sry sure um no I'll I'll do it out loud um okay so what do you want me to know about you yeah and just wait for the answer don't think I know you got a big cognitive part so we're going to ask them when to relax and just whatever comes in terms of the answer just wait for it well my answer is based on the feeling that occurred immediately after asking it which was the answer was um I I can dissipate and then I kind of felt it dissipate okay so it feels like an energy that when condensed sucks MH but when I look at it softened a little bit and then asked the question you asked and then it feels like it just kind of went into the rest of my body but not poisoning the rest of my body just kind of um mixing in with you know of course we're speaking in complet you know in in mystical terms here but um right so it it relaxed it may not have dissipated in the way we think about that it might have just relaxed more MH but just keep asking it what's it afraid would happen if in that context it didn't try to take over in the way that it did just ask that question that if it if it didn't try to take over yeah what's it afraid would happen if it hadn't tried to take over oh just wait for the answer yeah that's a good question okay so what would happen if you didn't take over my system that way condense from my St from my stomach to to my head when I'm feeling that way yeah um don't think yeah oh the answers are coming really quick um that I wouldn't be able to discern the truth okay so the truth is really important to this part of you yeah yeah because it tends to surface when I'm hearing something that I that you know wrong that I believe to be fundamentally untrue typically about my thoughts or feelings right I've come maybe with age I've come to the conclusion that two people can look at the same interaction or same thing and have two very different versions of it I'm okay with that the part that I'm very very sensitive to people in my life know this is when someone else tells me how I feel right what my motives are or how I feel that to me is like like that that's a kind of a hard um fast way to engage this thing okay so just stay with this thing just stay with it okay and let it know you get that that having people misinterpret your motives is really really hard for it and ask him more about that just again don't think but ask why that's so hard why does that bother it so much and what's it afraid would happen if it let that go yeah so what why are you afraid to why do you have to step in yeah when that happens my answer is not going to be very satisfying for the listeners but or for me um but it it's saying because if you can't hold on to your truth then nothing will make sense so there's something about making sense or not nothing making sense that it's really scared to is that right yeah I mean uh I I decided to become a a biologist um and to try and understand the meat inside our heads and body that is the nervous system because I felt and I still feel that it uh it can reveal some fundamental facts or truths as um you know understanding reality as it were is really important to me because I feel like humans including myself of course um are so prone to misinterpretation so like the truth as a thing out there I'm willing to let go of completely right like completely right the truth as it exists for knowing for certain what my motivations were or what did or didn't happen but typically it's about motivation what did or didn't happen you usually can parse with somebody yeah um that's that's something I feel I need to protect at all cost yeah so speaking of protect and so this is a protector part right ask it if it's protecting other parts of you that are vulnerable and get hurt when someone Miss Miss attunes to what your motive is just ask that question don't think that's an easy that's a fast one not easy but it's a fast one yeah the part of me that that that feels injured Yeah by that is the fact that I believe that I at least at the beginning and throughout most of a relationship and even if a relationship ends for whatever reason that my I know it's my nature to try and imagine as much goodness in the intent of the other person as possible so if I were to let go of this response the keep call in my mind I'm calling like this like it's like a titanium teddy bear shaped thing but it doesn't it's not feel like a it's like a titanium block there um I would um potentially move into a mode of judgment mhm um of them it's interesting because I there are many people from my past and maybe even a few from my present that people close to me who are pretty well qualified tell me like I should dislike them or cut them out of my life and um I don't there are a few maybe one or two instances of people I've cut out of my life but it's my inclination always to just try and see what can what can exist yeah so that and that part feels important to me I don't know why it's important now that come to think about it like um well we can ask but yeah so I'm what I'm hearing is this guy this titanium guyh is keeping it bury another part that can be very judgmental of the other person yeah I don't like feeling that yeah it it feels energetically wasteful yeah and it feels more than that it feels incredibly sad yeah it's sort of like I think to to accept that part of myself is to kind of give up on some fantasy Y which is probably an unrealistic fantasy which is why I'm calling it a fantasy I realize yeah yeah like this um because I I look at and I always have since I was a kid I look at people as we are among the animals we the curators of the Earth because we're good at technology development but aside from that and our were like just like you wouldn't I can't imagine that a raccoon you know looks at another raccoon and it's was like that's a bad raccoon it's just a ra rabid right you know and they just um i i s yearn for the same the same sensitivity to our own species I get that yeah like I don't hate anybody well there might be parts of you that do but I hate behaviors okay I hate um things that people have said or done not certainly mostly to other people not to me but I yeah being like really being angry at someone in a in a pervasive way not just in the moment yeah is is something that's very difficult for me but what I'm hearing what the what we heard from this part it's afraid if it doesn't do this it a part that judges the other probably in a you know not so nice way would be released does that sound right yeah so there is that part in there it's just that you've been able to kind of Exile it yes okay yeah I'm comfortable with the idea that you take the appropriate amount of distance could be zero or could be near infinite but that I should take the appropriate amount of distance from things and people so that I can be in the most loving stance toward them or that yeah I'm not trying to sound technical here with all the parallel constructions but I've thought this through a lot like there's some people that I um that there's no limit to the extent to which I I want to interact with them you know we have other things to do we're not g to spend all our time together and then there are other people that I love them but I I know that I have to keep a certain amount of distance in order to continue to love them this is the same thing so in that moment it's almost like but it's coming up without my conscious thing it's not like saying listen that's the kind of person I can you know talk to like once once a month or something and I'll just add you know in professional settings not now but in the distant past when I was in a very hierarchical structure of I'm still in Academia still teach but not um running research anymore um formally you know like I had a couple um senior colleagues that I really loved and respected but that they um they would say or do things that I thought were frankly unethical to other people and to me that I felt them as kind of abrasive so I might like the physical manifestation of this is I would make it a point to to like walk past their office door quickly so that they didn't say Hey cuz I don't want to interact but I I don't I'm not familiar with cutting people out of my life right I'm just not familiar with doing that I don't I sort of don't believe in it as a value let's pause for a second I'll give you a little overview where we areh so we started with this guy who came up with your friend and is trying to protect that relationship because if you continue to be Mis understood in terms of your motives it would have an impact does that sound right yeah the only thing I as a family member um yeah that not that matters but close family member got it yeah and in exploring this part asking what it's afraid would happen if it didn't do that so there's this other part that might come out that would be very judgmental of that family member and really might have a bad influence on your relationship with that person does that sound right that's correct okay so we have these two well we have you who's noticing all this which we should talk more about and then we have these two parts that are sort of polarized but uh one the judgmental one you really don't like and so you really go to lengths to keep it Bay and you're you kind of admire this guy uh and and but you also know that he can get in the way at times too does all that sound right yeah that's right because I'm describing a recent situation where the presence of this like titanium teddy bear S I don't know why that's amusing to me to say that um the shape of a teddy bear I'm not seeing a teddy bear in there but the rough roughly that size and shape um it creates a protection but a pressure internally that's super uncomfortable it's actually taking me a couple days to dissipate this yeah um and I do think somewhat counter to the way I'm describing it it doesn't prevent me from saying something it actually if it's if it's too much it's almost like that's when words start coming out and they're not kind right so it's not a real protector in the sense like it's preventing me from a course of action I don't want to take right it's more like feels like it's kind of extruding all this stuff and obviously I'm responsible for my words and actions I know that but it does feel like it it creates kind of Tak it takes over yeah that that's the way to put it so let's let's um go through that again so uh first of all I'm so grateful that you're willing to be this vulnerable and expose these parts uh so this guy actually they're both probably what we call Firefighters and very reactive there's may be some other very vulnerable part that is involved here we haven't heard about but uh if I were to be continue if we continue to work together I would work to get permission to go to the judgmental guy too and what you would find is he's a protector too he's not just a bunch of negative thoughts about people and as I was hearing earlier you spent a lot of time in your life um trying to be fair to people and to not judge them and to see them what they do is just their behaviors and not who they are which is great but in the process of doing that sometimes we wind up having to push away the parts that want to judge and want to hate and so on and what I find is if we can go there and get to know them they're just protectors too and they're young and they uh when they are able to unload the the hate they might carry the Judgment they'll transform so this is a model of transformation in that sense and it's there are no bad parts you go to everybody in there regardless of how you think they how bad they are and you get curious about them and you learn how they're trying to protect and then we help them out of their protective roles and help them trust there's a you who you talked about with Martha who can run things that they don't have to do it because most of them are young and get them to trust this you to handle your family member rather than they have to take over or try to take over in the way they did does this make any sense yeah it makes total sense I you know what you said at the beginning uh permission to go to the um judgmental part I was just um you my mind um flits when I hear that flits to um you know two possibilities one's a novel possibility one's a familiar possibility The Familiar possibility is if I were to really feel the disappointment that I'm feeling when this p in the in the other person shows up again because at least seems to I'm very familiar with the pattern right then um uh it would fundamentally like change the way that I feel about them that's right like I'm trying to hold on to the goodness relationship that's right but of course I I I want to be very clear not just for anyone listening but for myself too that um clearly the the um the protecting uh role of this Tian tanium teddy bear um it's created something where what the times when things have broken through from my side they're not kind right and or they're spoken in a way that just is not constructive right right um so yeah and then the the second possibility is that I had considered this possibility but the the second possibility is that uh where I to let myself feel that disappointment that maybe the relationship could persist MH um like I've been looking at those things as mutually exclusive exclusive yeah um and as I say all this um I also realize that well the the the honest disclaimer is like I don't want to give the impression that I don't judge people I'm human and I certainly do I'm just saying that when there's a relationship that I wish to Main contain I'll go to Great Lengths to push aside knowledge of of my own experience Andor just judgment I've made this um I've engaged in this pattern in ways that were ended up being extremely destructive to me by completely like putting the blinders onto things that were right in front of me and that's what I'm talking consciously that's what I'm talking because I adored uh the person so much in other dimensions like that you know and you know it's not a lack of a better word a holistic way to approach things but I also will say that in contrast to those types of relationships the the relationships where this is where the the titanium generator is not required feel to me so like by comparison but also in the absolute scale feel to me like the best possible relationships one could have they're like pinch me type of relationships like my friendship some of my relationships to family like my co-workers and and there are others too I've certainly had romantic relationships like that relationships my relationship to my dog as trivial as people might think that seems the the contrast of that like where there's no need for this protector part it's like the best thing because it feels completely safe and uninhibited yeah I never have to worry that I'm going to be taken over from the inside yeah nor do I ever worry that I'm going to like really screw up yeah and I hope that if I do screw up they'll tell me but like it's uh it's the complete absence of fear so let me check can and just see how this has been to discuss and and focus and so on what's it been like to do this process um it's a lot in the sense that um I don't like feeling that titanium thing ted bear teddy bear um it's very it's been very informative so it's balanced by that um and maybe that's why I I went into a little riff about the pleasant relationships and how um how outsized positive they are for me they're they're like a they're like a salv and an Elixir for me um that uh so maybe I give myself a little like washover with that because it it's pretty uncomfortable yeah um but it's been It's really informative um and it also tells me that the internal family systems worked idea of someone else was uh an attempt at this but so very different which makes sense because this is uh your Art and Science so so I'm grateful yeah so yeah it feels good what I was saying earlier is if we were to pursue it we could get to the point where the teddy bear guy could unload the feelings he carries that makes it so uncomfortable and he would transform how would I how would we go about doing that just so you you would focus on him again M we would explore more of what he's protecting either we would go to the guy he's trying to keep it Bay that would ruin a relationship or often these parts are protecting something much V vulnerable from your past some young part that's stuck somewhere in the past it has a big issue about being misunderstood in terms of motives or something yeah it's it not that I need uh Clarity on this right now but it's more that it protects the possibility of a relationship at all yeah like I think the fear is like if I were to look through my lens of Truth what's happened or is happening in the moment if I were a quote unquote better boundaried person it' be done yesterday yeah but so it's sort of like a desire to live out a fantasy got it I mean if I'm honest so so that would be the part that we would go to that it protects that has this fantasy of what a relationship should be or could be who might be stuck somewhere in the past and we would learn we would witness you know you talked with Martha about compassionate witness we would witness where he stuck and what was happening back then and then I would have you go in and get him out of that time period then we' have him unload the desire for that fantasy that uh keeps you getting hurt and then I would have you have the teddy bear see it doesn't have to protect him anymore and then we would help the teddy bear unload the feelings he carries and then he could relax and they would all start to trust you which we should talk about a little bit now who is you who's separate from these others yeah and for the record I never owned a teddy bear as a kid I had I had a stuffed frog I had a teddy bear I had a well I'm not embarrassed I had a stuffed frog that I love is Frid the Frog yeah and um uh but so I don't know where the teddy bear thing came up but it was the the shape is so very clear um but let me let me just uh elaborate on what I was just saying because when you separated from him and you found him here and I asked you how you felt toward him and you had an attitude about him at first remember and we got that to relax and got curious about him then you started to access more of what I call yourself with the capital less so it comes through curiosity comes well start often starts with curiosity MH and just to backtrack a little bit so when I would have uh these clients in the early days starting to work with these parts like the critic and so on uh and I once I got hip to the fact they weren't what they seemed and they deserve to be listened to rather than fought with so I would I would help the parts that hated step out and clients could do that pretty readily so and and when then I was say now how do you feel toward this critic and spontaneously people would say I'm just curious about why it calls me names all day or even would say I feel sorry for it that it has to do this I'm going to help it and when they were in that state and I would ask what part of you is that that's great let's keep that around they'd say that's not a part like these others that's me that's my essence or that's my self so I came to call that the self with a capital S 40 years later thousands of people doing this all over the world turns out that that self is in everybody just beneath the surface of these parts so that when they open space you can access it quickly and has all these great qualities what I call the eight C's so curious but also calm confident compassionate courageous clear creative and connected and that person knows how to heal these parts so once I get somebody in a lot of what call Self I'll just say okay what do you want to say to this part and how does how does it react and now what do you want to do with the part I can kind of get out of the way and one of the Hallmarks of ifs as opposed to a lot of other therapies is that it's not so much about me becoming that you know good attachment figure to these hurting parts of you these inner children you become that you become the good attachment figure yourself or the good inner parent or the good internal leader for these parts and they come to trust you as a leader and then you get into it with your family member and you just remind the part now I can handle this just let me let me stay and now when that happens with my wife sometimes not on a good day I can stay in the seaword qualities and have a totally different conversation with her than if that protector took over I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor ag1 ag1 is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink with adaptogens I've been taking ag1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring this podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still take ag1 is because it is the highest quality and most complete foundational nutritional supplement what that means is that ag1 ensures that you're getting all the necessary vitamins minerals and other micronutrients to form a strong foundation for your daily Health ag1 also has probiotics and prebiotics that support a healthy gut microbiome your gut microbiome consists of trillions of microorganisms that line your digestive tract and impact things such as your immune system status your metabolic Health your hormone health and much more so I've consistently found that when I take ag1 daily my digestion is improved my immune system is more robust and my mood and mental focus are at their best in fact if I could take Just One supplement that supplement would be ag1 if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 with your order of ag1 again go to drink a1.com huberman to claim this special offer today's episode is also brought To Us by wealthfront I've been using wealthfront for my savings and my investing for nearly a decade and I absolutely love it at the start of every year I set new goals and one of my goals for 2025 is to focus on saving money since I have wealthfront I'll keep that Savings in my wealthfront cash account where I'm able to earn 4% annual percentage yield on my deposits and you can as well with wealth front you can earn 4% apy on your cash from partner Banks until you're ready to either spend that money or invest it with wealth front you also get free instant withdrawal to eligible accounts every day even on weekends and holidays the 4% apy is not a promotional rate and there's no limit to what you can deposit and earn and you can even get protection for up to $8 million through FDIC Insurance provided through wealth front's partner Banks wealthfront gives you free instant withdrawals where it takes just minutes to transfer your money to eligible external accounts it also takes just minutes to transfer your cash from the cash account to any of wealth Run's automated investment accounts when you're ready to invest there are already a million people using wealth front to save more earn more and build long-term wealth earn 4% apy on your cash today if you'd like to try wealth front go to wealthfront.com huberman to receive a free $50 bonus with a $500 deposit into your first cash account that's wealthfront.com huberman to get started now this has been a PID testimonial of wealthfront wealthfront brokerage isn't a bank the apy is subject to change for more information see the episode description I'm struck by a couple of things that I think people will be um if I may wise to think about uh one is yeah in the classic psychodynamic or CBT model of therapy right the it's clear that the the client or patient sometimes it's called right patient um therapist relationship is one where it it takes on certain um components that exist in the outside world with other people and it's always um slightly really bothered me um slash concerned me that that's the structure and as you said in uh ifs internal family systems you become your own kind of therapist if if you will for lack of a better way to put it I like that because um uh there's so much discussion nowadays about you know parenting yourself and this kind of thing and um learning to Mother yourself and father and I actually think there's Great Value in that I mean I learned by living alone you know how to cook for myself and clean for myself these are I'm mapping to stereotypes here but um but also to protect myself and to you know organize myself and be very very disciplined and um actually running a laboratory was a great um teaching there because you're basically a single academic parent to to all these these people so you have to you you quickly realize where you lack maternal instincts and where you may lack or over uh overemphasize have hypertrophied paternal instincts you you so that was a good for to to see my weaknesses um and hopefully some strengths too so I like this idea that that one can play those roles for oneself um how is ifs typically done if somebody doesn't have access to a therapist who's expert in it or is that really the only proper Gateway into it no so because I'm sitting here with the master the the founder and um and I'm very grateful by the way for the work we just did so thank you feels good I I it was a privilege yeah thank you yeah likewise um but most people won't have direct one-on-one access to you so um it's very experiential um I imagine in books and courses people can learn how to do this and by the way this isn't this was not preconceived as a as a pitch for books and courses but I'm wondering like if can somebody do this on their own the very first time that that's what I want to know yeah yeah so for a long time I resisted trying to take this directly to the public because I learned the hard way that some systems particularly people with huge amounts of trauma are quite delicate and if you start going to these you know the part we talked about that's vulnerable inside that has this view of relationships this kind of idealized view of of relationships of yours uh would be what I call an exile that if we were to go to it and you know we won't today because it's requires a lot of vulnerability but if we were to a lot of EX extreme protectors might come out and then people start to get scared so uh so it took a long time to figure out how we might bring it to the public and safer way and so we just put out a a workbook for people and it doesn't involve necessarily going to those places but there's a huge amount you can do just by working the way we started to with these protectors and getting to know them and know that they're not you they're just a part trying their and know it's not anything negative that judgmental part you've got such an attitude about or fear of uh if you were get just to begin getting curious about it and getting to know it a bit you'd find out that it's very valuable part that has a lot of discernment like you said you know and wanted wants desperately to keep you from getting in these relationships where you get hurt and get so judgmental because you don't listen to it do you follow what I'm saying I do I do I in fact something pops to mind maybe I could just ask you about it I um my mind's right on what you're saying but you know something something occurred to me as you said it which is uh if I were to for instance really feel the feeling of like hey that's really screwed up or like that's not like actually feel the disappointment or judgment that this titanium teddy bear is trying to protect against um I realize it leads to a lot of role confusion and identity confusion that's right and I'll just be very blunt uh it's probably not the best thing to do on a podcast but I'm going to do it anyway which is is you know this is how I feel about modern politics I see things on the left that make sense to me and things that are to me just absolutely ludicrous inappropriate offensive and like just badly wrong I see things on the right that make a ton of sense to me and also things that are inappropriate offensive and wrong and as a consequence I'm trying to see the best the the goodness in both sides right and just kind of create this kind of uh swiss cheese model of of the world talking about politics because it's just simpler to do and I people at least know the groups we're talking about and but then it it leaves me in a place of no affiliation and I'm then between one of two stances one of just kind of standing there being like yeah well there's no real position in the middle that is an official position in the middle but it also makes me just want to put up the middle finger to both and say I'm a double hater but of course I'm going a adult and a citizen who cares about people in the country and so I feel like to being an adult I can't opt out but there's like I feel unaffiliated I feel like there's no option for me and and this Maps pretty well to I think the identity and role confusion that I feel when I um place my my again understanding the truth is a is a complicated thing but my judgment on things and people it's like well then what is my role as a son what is my role as a as a partner what is my role if this thing is true and so it's a way I'm realizing of of protecting the Simplicity of a role that's right and I did grow up in a home where like the roles were like you know you're son you do certain things like you know you do you know and um uh so but I also have a rebellious side to me so the the the role confusion is something that I imagine a lot of people are familiar with with yeah um and when one and I also believe that when you just really say well they did something bad therefore all bad therefore I'm part of the opposite team right that to me is an unlived life yeah it's like it's like it's a a but I see a lot of people do it and actually sometimes I'm envious of people that have that ability because they seem so they seem so unconflicted right um so it's a tough thing to be a thinking feeling person at the level of nuance it kind of sucks sometimes yeah I'd rather do that than than um be a double hater or um just cleanly opt in yeah does that make sense totally makes sense and what I'm hearing is that when you're looking at a person or a political party or issue in the world you'll hear from these conflicted Parts they each have perspective just like our country now hears from these conflicted parts and but there you don't have a lot of access to what I'm calling self in those context because see one of the seword is Clarity so again as I was listening to you and Martha you were talking about how there are times where you you just have the sense in your body of what's right or what's true that's what I'm calling self self has that Clarity uh and self sees Injustice and self some of those seword are um courage confidence and Clarity so there's a impulse also to act to correct imbalance to correct Injustice too so self isn't a kind of passive witness as it is in a lot of spiritual traditions in ifs it's an act of inner leader it's an AC of external leader and too often our actions are driven by these protective parts and that's true in our politics now too um so one of my goals is to try to bring more self- leadership to the world to to these conflicts uh but to do that people have to unburden they have to release these extreme beliefs and emotions they got from their traumas in the past we have a concept we call Legacy burdens so many people have inherited these extreme beliefs in emotions that came down through their ancestors and drive their their parts Drive their extremes and many conflicts in the world are driven by these Legacy burdens and we've gotten good at helping people unload these these things yeah we've seen this in the Middle East recently totally and we you know we're doing a lot we're doing a lot of work in the Middle East so we have training programs there we have and one of my Visions is to have large scale Legacy unburdening where large groups of people come together and we help them unload the Holocaust Legacy burdens on the one side and the you know the 1941 Legacy burdens on the Palestinian side and have more self accessible to each side and when like when we do couples therapy or we do other kinds of negotiated conflict if People's Parts start getting into it we'll just say timeout you sort of did this on your own with your family member just say time out want both of you to go inside find the parts that have been doing the speaking don't come back until you can speak for them but not from them and come back in in these seword qualities in that state of self if we can hold people in that it's really easy to get out of the conflict if if their protectors are going at it all the time conflicts never change so do you think that people who have the reflex or the ability to um kind of somaticize a bit like I obvious I I don't think of myself as somebody who's like psychosomatic I don't have stomach aches and headaches and stuff unless I caught a virus you know but but I can feel where certain things are in my body pretty quickly and always have um do you think that ifs lends itself better to people who you know feel things somatically versus people that are like really cognitive and in their head because I have that component too I can actually feel the switch yeah like I do it through I'll go into like a narrative and then I start to see the structure like up here yeah and um yeah that happened several times when we were were working together like I would have you stay with something and then the narrator part would kick in yeah and and then I would try to refocus you but you know I lived in Boston for 10 years so I worked with lots of cognitive people who didn't know their bodies who had you know just were in that rat race to try and get tenure and so on been there yes me too yeah tenure is nice but um one should tend to their emotional selves while while they're while they're pursuing it but just to answer your question they can do it but we first have to start with that thinking part and get it on board and get it to step out and to to stay out long enough that they can feel their bodies so yeah you know it lends itself to anybody but with people like that it takes a while for that thinking part to trust that it's safe to let them in their into their bodies so if we were to just step back for a moment and um do sort of a top Contour summary of the process um someone brings forward a uh a memory of recent or distant memory of some thing that made them feel not good and you try and localize some sensation in the body get a sense of its location PA there I'll tell you why yeah because if they find it in their body they're and they direct the question there and they wait for the answer to come from there they're less likely to be in their head so it sort of short circuits that thinking part and so many people come to therapy and that thinking part thinks it's supposed to do the therapy it's you know CBT or whatever even a lot of the more exper not experiential but a lot of the more psychodynamic therapies the thinking part is really trying to explain why they feel stuff right so this is getting them out of that and getting them to actually listen inside into what they think is their body but it's really these parts that live down there that they haven't had access to because the thinking part is running things so much got it and then one places some attention from The Stance of curiosity they were like what's there what's it what's it trying to say exactly so um and then you start to reveal the the underlying layers of what's it protecting what are the what are those things that are protective trying to say yeah it's not even you're trying to reveal it's just that you're asking these questions and the answers start coming I see oh I love this because I'm a big believer in seeding the unconscious mind and then letting things surface either in sleep or in meditative States or um has internal family systems been combined with some of the therapies that are now getting tested um still in clinical trial stage uh around um psychedelics yeah in fact two days ago we just completed a uh ifs and ketamine Retreat oh wow so we have and we're doing it more and more like I said I'm trying to bring this more out of the Psychotherapy world so we invited 32 leaders to come of various kinds and had uh three days where they would do camine and then do if the nice thing about psychedelics is it puts those manager parts to sleep somehow a lot of the time yeah I I've been open about the fact and I always have to provide the disclaimer I I I don't just say this for to protect me I say this to protect listeners that I do think um young people should avoid psychedelics the brain is already in a psychedelic State it's it's the the amount of plasticity and this is is really tremendous and this is coming from somebody who regrets it but I did psychedelics recreationally as a kid me too um and I regret it I returned to them later a clinical setting um and and derived a lot of benefit I think from them uh namely high do psilocybin and MDMA but both of those are still very much illegal uh you can get into a lot of trouble for taking them and or certainly for selling them so um that's the cautionary note there and the clinical trials are really impressive in my opinion spectacularly impressive especially for MDMA and for the treatment of PTSD but the FDA this uh last year um did not approve MDMA uh as a treatment for PTSD I think going forward in the new Administration it's likely that it will get approved but who knows there uh who knows so anyway that's a bunch of um pseudo legales jargon but but it's it's sincere if I were an 18 or 19y old person or 30-year-old person listening to a conversation about psychedelics and how they can be helpful I would want to also know that there are instances where people take them and they don't have the appropriate guidance in and through it and out of it and it leads to serious problems so is a real real thing that we're talking about that's why these caman clinics where they just hand them the drugs and yeah medicine and just leave them on their own scary to me um I'm proud to say that ifs has been adopted as one of the primary models for psychedelics now great because it's a really nice pit and as I was saying earlier that what I see happening often not always is these manager Parts go offline and that releases a lot of self so you start to uh to just feel those c-word qualities emerging and that's a big in uh invitation to all these Exile parts to come and get attention and so as people come out of the ketamine experience I can work with them for 15 minutes and do something would take maybe five sessions because they can get access to parts that they couldn't get or it would take a long time to convince their protectors to let us go to and we can unburden those Exiles and then bring back their protectors and so I love it I I you know and camine is the legal one so that's why we do it and uh and the other nice thing and I don't know as a scientist how much you you would go with this but um ketamine again because it opens the door with these protectors you can also taste what I call the big self you taste this what they call nonu state that can be quite Blissful and uh some people go God and then as you come back you have this sense of I'm much more than this little body and this little ego that there is some much bigger and that's why they're using it with end of life and why it it and sosyan has such a big impact on depression and because it sort of lifts you out of this little box your protectors have you in to know that there's something much more so interesting I've never tried ketamine um a few years ago I um and I've talked about this publicly as well I I um started um developing a a pretty deep relationship to to spirituality and God and most mostly through the path of of non of giving up control I mean there're just break breaking news folks you can't control everything you know and um uh you can control certain things but um most things know and um the way you describe ketamine is very interesting because as a dissociative anesthetic it works in such a fundamentally different way than say MDMA which is um an empathogen which makes people feel so much more I mean I I sort of half joke that that the aside from the the safety legality stuff the the the concern I have about MDMA is that if one is not in the eye mask if you don't have somebody guiding you through it and taking some notes you know if you listen to a piece of jazz or classical music or your favorite rock and roll album or you're there with yourg or cat or plants I mean you can spend the entire four hours bonding with the plant right you're not going to run off and get married to a plant you're not going to try and fornicate with a plant but um one hopes um but it's a very um precious but very labile situation totally agree because you're it's such a strong empathogen that whatever you direct your attention to internal or external is going to hypertrophy MH so just have to be really careful totally agree you know and given that the neurotoxicity issues seem worked out in that if it's actually MDMA and isn't other things by the way that the big study that showed neurotoxicity of MDMA in Prime non-human primates turned out they were injecting methampetamine what yeah that paper was retracted it was published in science we'll provide a link to the paper and the retraction that the retraction was not as publicized wow methylene dioxy methamphetamine MD ma um has not been shown to be neurotoxic provided that's what people are taking wow um and not taking some combination of other things yeah it's a real tragedy the way that um retractions don't get nearly the kind of popular press coverage that the that initial studies do uh regardless of whether or not the initial study was positive or negative um in any case I do believe there are other routes to um calming down the forbrain in the context of doing this kind of work that just like your thoughts on sure uh when I first wake up in the morning MH I'm in kind of a Lial state but the thing that I don't want to think about comes to my bra I can't avoid it it's like the the uh protectors are are not available they're still asleep so that seems valuable I've tried recently to keep my eyes closed sometimes I'll get up and use the bathroom but keep my eyes closed stay in that still State and explore the Contours of that thing um uh provided it's done safely and not anywhere near water um cyclic hyperventilation breath work done for a few minutes or Cycles you know you know we think can change the brain activity so the forbrain kind of comes off line a bit so all these things just put managers to sleep put managers to sleep like when you go to sleep your managers go to sleep and then you have these weird dreams and that's cuz your Exiles have access to your mind now and they're giving they're trying to give you signals about what they want the other thing I say about psychedelics and the breathing too is that as your your managers go to sleep and your Exile start coming in it can seem really terrifying because these parts are stuck in horrible places often with a lot of Terror and so what's called bad trips is them trying to get attention so they'll come in and they'll totally take over and you look like you're having a panic attack but what we've learned and you know this happened a few times last week is instead of thinking of it as a panic attack or a bad trip to welcome it here's a part that needs a lot of attention it's taken over entirely but if I were to say okay Andrew I see you're really scared but how do you you feel toward this really scared part that's here now and I could get you to say I feel sorry for it then I would have you start to get to know it and work with it and comfort it rather than have a panic attack you would access calm and those c-words and then it becomes a hugely useful uh healing of something that's in you that's in a stuck in a terrified place I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors function last year I became a function member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing function provides over 100 Advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily Health this snapshot offers you with insights on your heart health Hormone Health immune functioning nutrient levels and much more they've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful Plastics and tests for P fases or forever chemicals function not only provides testing of over a 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from Top Doctors who are expert in the relevant areas for example in one of my first tests with function I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood function not only helped me detect that but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels which included limiting my tuna consumption I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with Knack and acetyl cysteine both of which can support glut the thione production and detoxification and I should say by taking a second function test that approach worked comprehensive blood testing is vitally important there's so many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be detected in a blood test the problem is blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated in contrast I've been super impressed by function Simplicity and at the level of cost it is very affordable as a consequence I decided to join their scientific Advisory Board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast if you'd like to try function you can go to function health.com huberman function currently has a weight list of over 250,000 people but they're offering Early Access to huberman podcast listeners again that's function health.com huberman to get early access to function what is so striking to me is that you know and Martha taught me this practice of you know when we think about the things that um create shame for ourselves if we're able to go up and really look at those and own them not from the perspective of I'm proud of them but own them as in us and not of us you know um uh that it's incredibly freeing yeah and indeed it is so freeing right it's like the if this if there were like a secret to life like uh it would at least include that yeah um because let me rip up rip up that for a second because just as an example like I do uh I done workshops where I have people work with their racism you speaking of something very shameful and a lot of people say I don't I'm not a racist I don't have any racism but if I really convince them to look inside and check they'll find there's a little part in there that does spout racist things when they meet somebody of a different skin color has these white supremacy beliefs and they're they're really ashamed of it so if I were to have you focus on that racist voice in there we would have to get a lot of the parts that are ashamed of it to step out and then I would have you get curious about it rather than ashamed of it and ask it about where it picked up this these beliefs and it could tell you and then I would ask do you like having to carry This Racist stuff usually they say no if it's it's unloaded we can just unload it so one of the key things to know is these parts are not the burdens they carry they're all good the little guy who's got the racist rant is a part that got stuck with this beliefs but when he releases those beliefs he transforms into being a good and the mistake our culture makes the mistake that that uh most psychotherapies make is to assume assume that he is that racist rant and to try to Exile him but it's a different way of understanding even very seemingly evil people that they're dominated by these protectors and they're so afraid of their Exiles and they relate inside in the same way they relate outside so if they hate Parts themselves they'll hate people who resemble those parts of them they'll try to dominate those people do you follow what I'm saying yeah and I'd like to really go into this a bit because we hear all the time that when we're upset about something it's something in ourselves that we're really upset about um and for me that isn't always true but that's sometimes true yeah so if I'm upset about the intolerance of um good ideas from people in opposite groups of each other's good ideas um this logic would say that I'm really just disapproving of that aspect of myself that is like black and white judgmental which we already established got me then again you're the therapist so um right so is this always true not always okay but a lot of the time so if you can come to have compassion for that judgmental part of you and not being in battled with it and actually see it as desperately trying to help you be more Discerning and help it unburden and get out of this role that it's in because in the role that it's in it can be destructive we're not trying to minimize that or say you know when I say all parts are there are no bad parts they're no bad parts but they can get into very destructive roles and they can carry these burdens from the past that can drive them to be harmful but part of my work is to help that all that change and uh so if you were to start a new relationship with that judgmental part of you then you would see past the judgmental parts of other people and you could see the Exiles that drive those protectors and you would you would have compassion for them it wouldn't mean you wouldn't stop them or stand up to them but you would do it with compassion right rather than from these hateful protectors uh I think it's important that people hear that namely that if we get in touch with these parts of ourselves that are protectors um that it makes us less vulnerable not more vulnerable totally both to quote unquote attack um but that also I guess put simply that in understanding of ourselves and compassion for ourselves one develops understanding and compassion for others but that doesn't mean that you're um opening yourself up for harm that's right qu and the opposite is actually true the opposite is actually true because these protectors will generate often what they fear so by being so protective they'll create protectors in the other that will attack whereas if they could stay in self self can be very protective with those seword qual ities very forceful sometimes Pierce this idea of uh I'm definitely following that that we will sometimes create in others um you know what we uh fear because it allows us to engage in this unhealthy Dynamic it seem it seems so counterintuitive right uh maybe we take a kind of classic set of examples that I think are pretty common um a person who's codependent with somebody who's a substance abuse addict um or somebody who's very timid and always wants to pacify and somebody who's very dominant when I zoom out from the second case it actually kind of makes me chuckle how how crazy that that is because if you think about it a person who is uh very dominant uh doesn't need somebody very timate in order to feel dominant right they could they could probably uh feel whatever power it is they they need to feel with somebody who is less timid and maybe the relationship would be healthier but that's not how people tend to um other select it's kind of interesting like so it raises a perhaps a bigger question why do people select people that are fundamentally um bad for them okay so I did a book called You're the one you've been waiting for and in it I talked about this whole issue and so for a lot of people you get hurt by your parent and there are parts that want to protect you from your parent but there other parts who are desperate who took on the worthlessness from being rejected by your parent and are desperate for Redemption do you follow this and so uh as you leave and you're looking for a partner that part from a subconscious place can influence your decision to find somebody who resembles that parent in their effort to be redeemed again yeah is this anything like the uh sort of repetition compulsion yeah exactly that we that we tend to repeat a a pattern over and over again as an attempt to resolve not just a manifestation of like dysfunction that's a version of what I'm talking about and so you find somebody who does resemble that person that parent and unfortunately they do resemble that parent and so they'll hurt you in the same way mhm and then your protectors go into one of four modes they'll say I've got to change that person back into who they're supposed to be so they'll try to change the person's Behavior or they'll say I've got to change myself so they'll be who they're supposed to be or they'll say oh this wasn't the Redeemer after all and they'll go looking for the real redeemer is still out there it's always inside and yeah that's what I try to do is to help them see that that redeemer is inside of them itself and if if they if we can go to that Exile who's got this thing for this parent-like person and help it connect to self and help it unburden that whole repetition compulsion disappears because now they can take care of themselves they they trust self to do it they don't need that from some other person like that and so when we're working with couples and you always find some version of that in couples we can get each of them to become their own good attachment figure good caretaker inside that frees up the partner because when this Exile is leading the relationship your partner feels a lot of um sort of Demands or feels a lot like your partner has to take care of that young part of you and can't can't fully do it so there's always this this uh sense of oh a burden you know what I'm saying yeah yeah it's so interesting how romantic relationships are where these patterns get repeated and at the same time I I numerous examples in my life of healthy relationships is that usually the case because people have done the work before or because they had a minimum of trauma in their upbringing both yeah yeah what percentage of um kids adults as well um do you think had a minimum of trauma uh are just because of the way they're wired and the way the stuff is organized within them that they naturally attach to a a good partner and are pretty healthy is it like 25% 30% does it I really can't say because I my sample is very skewed I'm working with Psychotherapy patients who always have a lot of trauma so I really can't say I mean I I I'm very biased well half of marriages in this country and in divorce um and presumably of the ones that don't I'm guessing somewhere between a half and a quarter of those um people are really unhappy sounds so pessimistic but if you just look at the numbers and and I'm an optimist I already acknowledge that I don't like to think about bad stuff and I you know so um yeah I'm guessing that a lot of people um repeat these patterns but it seemed as if maybe 20 30 years ago because these ideas weren't um discussed really so so many fewer people were in any kind of analysis or or personal exploration work that as a society we defaulted to just sort of roll execution um you're a father and a husband so you do certain things and you don't do certain things you're a you're a wife and a mother so you do certain things and you don't do certain and so on um and I think nowadays there's a lot of discussion about you know is is there Resurgence of um organized religion because we've drifted so far from this kind of core structures I mean love your thoughts on that and also what you think doing this kind of internal work on oneself without requiring any input or participation from another uh what the value of that is it sounds like there's tremendous value um to just doing this work for oneself maybe with someone trained in ifs yeah I mean um there's like I was saying there's a lot you can do with working with your protectors and helping them get to know self like we didn't do it but had I had you asked that Teddy that t titanium teddy bear how old it thought you were and just really waited for the answer most people will get a single digit it still thinks you're very young and it still thinks it has to protect you the way it did when you were very young and just even updating it creates a huge amount of relief with these protectors so there's a lot that can be done just by working with protectors introducing them to self helping them see they don't have to keep doing this all the time some protectors it's very hard for them to totally drop their weapons until what they protect has been healed so that's where the therapist comes in so uh you know there are coaches doing this work for example they'll work with some executive and they'll do great and then they'll get to an exile and then they'll have the person see a ifs therapist for a couple sessions to heal the Exile and then come back because um you know coaches aren't trained as therapists and right so yeah there's still need for therapists but um yeah but you can do a a lot on your own I'm struck by how experiential it is as opposed to um just conceptual I mean obviously the concepts are important but I think uh in internal family systems was described for me previously kind of mapped out for me on paper I got a sense of it actually with some objects placed out and these um and it was helpful but it it um I think just having done a little bit of it today the only by actually feeling the sensations in the body associated with it does it actually really make sense to me I mean it made sense cognitively but that's so very different it's very removed yeah it's like me telling people you know get out and get line your eyes in the morning and set your circadian rhythm like you can know that you can know the underlying mechanisms the neurons the pathways the hormones Etc but at some level until you experience what that's like for two or three days in a row it's you might as well be reading about um I don't know um Titanium teddy bears you know yeah exactly and that's why I'm so grateful to you that you're willing to try it and because it's true as I describe it to people they don't really get it until they actually feel it experience it and it it is very different from many other therapies which are much more cognitively based because we're we're trying to bypass that and actually get to this raw stuff in here in order to be deliberately repetitive I wonder if it would be useful um to the listeners to would it be possible to just pose the questions sure um to them yeah as an exercise that they could do in real time totally yeah thank you so much um I think that would be tremendously valuable so I'm going to have to erase myself here uh for once I'm going to be quiet for a little while folks and you are the um the lucky patient uh that gets to talk to um Dr Schwarz here and he's going to pose a series of questions and we'll allow some moments of break or silence for you to be able to tap into the answers to these in real time that way you don't have to create a a parallel construction of what we did earlier yeah and and let me lead by saying um please don't do this if you have fear about doing it uh but if you if you're uh interested in some inner exploration then I'll I'll lead you through some of the steps so as you've been listening to our conversation I'm speaking to listeners uh you may be thinking about some of your own Parts particularly your own protectors and if you can't think of any most people have a kind of critic inside or part that makes them work too hard or a part that uh uh takes care of too many people so I'm going to invite you to pick a protective part to try to get to know for a few minutes and just notice that in her voice or that emotion that thought pattern that sensation just focus on it exclusively for a second and as you do that notice where it seems to be located in your body or around your body just take a second with that and some people don't find the location some people they still sense it but it's not clear where it seems be located but if you do find it inner around your body then just focus on it there and as you focus on it notice how you feel toward it and by that I mean do you dislike it and why get rid of it are you afraid of it do you resent how it dominates do you depend on it so you have a relationship with this part of you and if you feel any anything except a kind of openness or curiosity or willingness to get to know it then that's coming from other parts that have been trying to deal with it and we're just going to ask those other parts of you to relax back for just a few minutes so you can get to know it we're not going to have it take over more we're just going to get to know it better so see if they're willing to let you open your mind to it and if they're not then we're not going to pursue this and you can just get to know their fear about letting you get to know this target part but if you do get to that point of just being curious about it without an agenda then ask it what it wants you to know about itself just a kind of nice open-ended question and don't think of the answer just wait and see what comes from that place in your body and don't judge what comes just whatever comes we'll go with it what does it want you to know about itself and what's it afraid would happen if it didn't do this inside of you and if you got an answer to that question about the fear then it was telling you something about how it's been trying to protect you and if that's true then extend some appreciation to it for at least trying to keep you safe even if it backfires or doesn't work let it know you appreciate that it's trying to protect you and see how it reacts to your appreciation and then ask if you could go to what it protects and heal or change that so it didn't need to protect you so much what might it like to do instead inside of you if it was released from this role and I'll repeat that if you could go to what it protects and heal or change that so it was liberated from this protector role what might it like to do instead inside of you and then ask it this kind of odd question how old does this part think you are not how old is it but how old does it think you are and again don't think just wait and see what comes and if it got your age wrong then go ahead and update it and see how it reacts and the last question for this part is what does it need from you going forward what does it need from you and again just wait for the answer and when the time feels right thank your parts for whatever they let you do in this and then begin to shift your focus back outside and maybe take some deep breaths as you do that thank you for that that was awesome I also was able to get some I think good work done in the is that true yeah yeah totally different totally different location totally different set of Dynamics um even though uh what you just took us through is very experiential uh what if any value do you think there is to writing down sort of key takeaways okay yeah so um it's great to do the work you know session or you know this exercise but ideally it's the beginning of a new relationship with this part so and that takes work on your own so what I advise people is as you get that ball rolling in that good direction it'll reverse if you don't stay with it for a while so every day like you were saying you wake up rather than what am I going to do today or what problems do I have in my life how's that part of me doing that I've been starting to work with what what does it need for me today what does it want me to know is it still feeling better uh do I still have compassion for it so or appreciation for it so this like I said earlier this kind of becomes a life practice so I do that every morning every morning not well not not well you're very familiar with these parts and And to clarify for people um when Dr Schwarz is saying Parts he's saying these these parts these um personalities within us not necessarily the body part where it manifests but maybe that that provides a physical anchor to to look too exactly right so uh so yeah I'll I'll check in not with all my parts because I've met many many but the ones I've been working with just to see how they're doing and as I go through the day I'll notice am I in those seword qualities is my heart open is my mind curious do I have a big agenda anything any departures from that is a protector usually and I'll just have a little internal board meeting and say I get you feel like like in preparing to come and be on this podcast I had to work with the parts who were nervous and you know I have my father was a big scientist big uh Endocrinology researcher oh cool great field great field my brother is a big shot Endocrinology researcher uh so I have some some issues that way I hope I didn't reinforce the negative ones well I was that was my part's worries coming in and so I I worked on it and and said okay just but just I get it I get your scare I could feel them in my hands when I was taking a drink earlier interesting um but I just kept okay I get that I get your scare but just trust me just step back just relax and then I I feel this shift a literal shift MH and then I feel those c-words flooding and then we have a much different kind of conversation so it's it's a life practice in that sense love that thanks for sharing that I didn't detect any anxiety whatsoever um neither pre-recording nor um during this this uh this discussion if you don't mind could you describe or maybe even just list off some of the other uh labels of parts that people might encounter if they do this kind of work so you describe them as protectors that manage and then the Exiles which are the parts of us that the protectors and managers are protecting yeah correct okay those are two different things right yes so yeah the big distinction is between parts that by Dent of Simply being heard hurt or terrified or made to feel shamed and worthless uh and usually those are our most sensitive parts they're the young inner children they get stuck with those burdens of worthlessness Terror and emotional pain and then we don't want anything to do with them because they can overwhelm us and so we lock them away and everybody tells us to do that so those are the Exiles and when you have a lot of Exiles you have to these other parts are forced to become protectors so there are two classes of protectors one of the managers we've been talking about and the other are the firefighters so you know we mentioned a number of manager common roles but there's just lots and lots of them fir fighter common roles include you know addictions um uh excuse me dissociating the kind of judgmental rageful Parts uh you I could go on but anything yeah that is reactive impulsive and is designed to protect those vulnerable Parts but in a impulsive way as opposed to the managers who are all about control and pleasing these firefighters are all about if I don't get you away from these feelings right now you're going to die a lot of them believe that and some of them it's true so there's often a kind of hierarchy of firefighter activities the first one doesn't work you go to the next one if that doesn't work the top of the hierarchy for most people is suicide if things get painful enough there's this exit strategy it's actually very comforting to lots of people and here we come along and get really scared of these suicidal parts so this is again it's one of the Hallmarks of the difference FS if you were to say you've got a suicidal part say let's go get to know it I would have you find it and you know all steps and I would have you what are you afraid would happen if you didn't kill Andrew what do you think the answer to that is most of the time that it would just feel like too much to bear yeah like it just couldn't take it anymore exactly which of course is a crazy statement because it's not like my brain would explode some these parts believe it yeah they're not they're not grounded in logic so my well my response to that part is if we could unload the pain that you're so afraid would overwhelm would you have to kill him no and would you let us do that well fortunately I don't feel suicidal um but the answer would be yes okay so because we can prove to you that we can unload that pain and if we could do that what would you like to do instead of being the suicidal part I mean I have to imagine that if somebody forgive me for going into my head about this but if I have to imagine it's just hard for me to imagine being suicidal that's okay yeah but if I have to imagine that if somebody is feeling suicidal in order to protect the themselves against the like enormity of the the feelings they would otherwise feel and then they are offer the opportunity to work through to be released from those feelings I think the scary part would be um like the first it's like waiting into really cold water MH you know I I always feel that way about negative feelings once you get past your your kind of waist or so yes you get you get your your shoulders under that's a good an it's a heck of a lot easier it's a really nice analogy because you realize there's an upper limit to this stuff and you passed it a little while ago um yeah yeah so that suicidal part often transforms into part that wants to help you live actually they they're often in the role that's opposite of who they really really are so as you can hear this is a totally different approach to Suicide for example and we do the same with addictive firefighters find that part that makes you so high how do you feel to it I hate it I want to you know I want to be in recovery I want to lock it up just get all that to step out and just get curious about ask it what it's afraid would happen if it didn't get you high all the time same answer if we could heal all that pain or that shame and would you have to get a m all the time no but I don't think you can do that would you give us a chance to prove we can totally different approach to all these problems something comes to mind for a number of years not now fortunately I I mean I still work a lot but I worked like you know I I don't want to um well I'll I'll share the numbers but it's not a goal that no one should try and exceed this I mean there were times in graduate school where I no joke worked 80 85 hours a week slept under my desk like I lived in my office as a junior Professor wow my students can attest that brush my teeth and not every night but I you know if I had deadlines it was just all in with mind body heart everything it's it's not healthy right right and at some point I had to take a look at it because it's not conducive to a lot of things uh it brings a lot you can get a lot done I won't lie you can get a lot done you can get a lot of uh degrees you can get a lot of knowledge and and you can accomplish a lot um but I decided to take a look at it you know like like what would happen if I I don't know published five awesome papers in a year instead of 10 or something like CRA you know I just started looking at and and it just it seems crazy now but I remember the genuine fear of of backing off that's right and I started to realize that I loved what I did um but that some of the work came from a yeah a desire to um compete out uh other other feelings it's a form of dissociation totally um and then what happened was I was able to adjust my hours really pick the projects that held the most meaning for me and then really Savor them and enjoy them and that's how I approach the podcast and other things I'm doing so it was a tremendously useful exploration but it was terrifying I didn't have to go to 12 step for work addiction or anything I mean it wasn't at that level but um um but you're giving an example of exactly what we do we go to that workaholic Park what are you afraid would happen if you didn't do this to him yeah so what I came to it's interesting was the it was literally a fear of annihilation of Disappearing and then I thought well then you you parsed it a little bit further disappearing to who like it's not like there was an absence of of positive feedback so it wasn't actually to avoid disappearing from the outside world cuz I'll tell you when you're working 80 85 hours we you're already gone um you know uh you just don't realize it um it was actually some way of avoiding um this thing that I've now come to really love I learned it from my Bulldog um I used to have this assumption that slow is low like to slow down is depressive I mean now I love slowing down and I did learn that from my bulldog and a few people came into my life and they're dogs as well and I learned like um to really Savor slow and not just so that I can bounce back into work that too admittedly but but also um to just um and it came through I just would like your thoughts on this I realized right as I would go into or or come out of a meditation or what I call non-sleep deep rest this kind of yoga Nedra like deep relaxation thing that listeners of this podcast will be familiar with hearing about that there's this really terrifying moment where I realize someday assuming I'm awake when it happens or it's not an accident or I don't get involved in an accident um I'm going to take my last breath and it's absolutely terrifying yeah that concept and I realized that the fear of Disappearing is actually a fear of death and what I was really afraid of was death and I was using work so you know it's a long way from like working you know 60 hours or 40 hours a week instead or 30 what whatever people choose as opposed to 885 but what I realized what I was running from was the fear of my own mortality that's right and I didn't have to use any substances to realize this I just had to keep peeling back the layers of like what are you really afraid of and now I've come to the conclusion that most addiction having talked to a lot of addicts with process addictions and substance addictions Etc that deep down everyone addict or no is terrified of death it's just that some people are in touch with that Terror and have like worked through it yeah but so well you remember what what I was saying earlier when we talked to these addict Parts what are you afraid would happen if you didn't make them high he would die so that's a really common answer and basically what you just describe is you were doing ifs without knowing it asking those questions what are you really afraid of what are you really afraid of till you get to the key answer and then I don't know how you help that part that fear death but somehow you helped to relax more yeah I think um if I for better or worse uh if I see or experience something that scares me a lot um I have to uh explore the Contours of it that's been a dangerous part of my life and it's been a yeah oh yeah and it's been a helpful part of my life too you know the ability to suppress one's reflex to avoid fear is such a complicated thing because on the one hand it's necessary to navigate life on the other hand if people always say is it what would you tell your younger self if you could tell your younger self anything and it would I would have said hey dude listen you know if something makes you anxious get out of there because my my reflex has always been that if something gives me anxiety like okay here's a test of myself I see I need to overcome it okay you so that that's another part protector so in any case um some people are the opposite you know um yeah i' I've tended to touch to touch the hot stove three times yeah when it should have been one trial learning and it touched the it hurt excuse me the first time so but that's just me I mean everyone's got these things but what I'm discovering certainly through what you're telling us today but also the the exploration of these things is that so much of life is structured especially nowadays with the phone love the phone love social media but um so much of life is structured to fill all the space between activities and I do want your thoughts on have like what you see in terms of um things that are active impediments to doing good work of the sorts of work that you're describing today self-work I would never ask a guess to be disparaging of of the world just for its own sake but I think people are now starting to develop an awareness of how um certain Technologies and lifestyle habits that are unique to the last five or 10 years are really exacerbating our problems um as they relate to ourselves not just interpersonal Dynamics you seem to be thinking about the the the big picture A lot so I'm curious what your thoughts are yeah so you know all these little machines we have and all the ways we have of never spending any time by ourselves or alone or thinking uh just feed these protective Parts these distractors and leave in the dust more and more these exiled parts so a lot of people's fear of not having something to do is because when they don't or if they're not working in your case or then these exiled Parts start to come forward they they're not being distracted from in my case I mentioned my father I'm the oldest of six boys oh wow I was supposed to be a physician like him and a researcher and um I was spared that fate because I had a undiagnosed add and wasn't a good student and and three of my brothers were physician research types but I was the oldest so he was really hard on me terms of lazy and worthless and so on so I came out out of my family with a lot of worthlessness and uh and actually the model wouldn't exist if I didn't have that because I had this part that had to prove him wrong and drive me not to the extent you're talking about or sleeping in the office or anything but would drive me to find this this model and then take it in the face of a lot of attack uh to where it is now and and if I wasn't working on it if I wasn't getting the accolades then that worthlessness would crop up and then I'd have other firefighters to try and deal with that uh and you know I had not only the workaholic part but I had a part that could close my heart and make me not care what people think and because I was was attacked by traditional Psychiatry and so on for for developing internal family system yeah uh I was humiliated at Grand rounds a couple times and I was in a department of Psychiatry what is with the field of Psychiatry it's a good question so point being that I was dominated as I developed this by these protectors and it got me through all that but it didn't serve me as a leader of a community and I was lucky to have some students who would confront my parts and me just say you can't keep going on like this if you're going to be any use to us and I listened and I went and worked with that worthlessness and now I don't have it I don't have to work I don't you know it's just I feel free because I'm not so afraid of that bubbling up if I'm not distracted and and now we have more distractions than ever as we're saying right that the pain Point can potentially become the source of tremendous growth value to the world based on what you've developed um keep in mind I I learned about your work not just through Martha Beck although Martha as well but several um incredibly talented psychologists scholars in the in the field of research psychology um and um and actually a psychiatrist as well yeah there are some Psy maybe I'll just share the uh uh so a psychiatrist that I think the world of said to me uh I won't reveal who it is but they said do you know why uh there's so many lousy psychiatrists this isn't a joke actually um even though it sounds like the setup for a joke I said no why and they said well because you know if you're a cardiothoracic surgeon and like 30% of your patients die you're considered a pretty terrible cardiothoracic surgeon if you're a psychiatrist unless your patients kill themselves on a frequent basis you can have a pretty quote unquote successful career M it's interesting and no one ever questions whether or not you're good at your job or not yeah because the field a has a dir of tools B the kind of assumption is that a lot of things don't get better and and on and on and they listed off all these reasons why the field of Psychiatry is so replete with u what they described as lousy psychiatrists so I do believe there are some excellent psychiatrists out there research and clinical and both um I don't know if that does anything uh it sounds like you worked through your relationship to psychiatrist on your own you don't need you don't need my statements I agree with you entirely yeah I and I'm you know I tried to stay in Psychiatry and just kept hitting the brick wall and so I went Grassroots for 30 years and now it's starting to come around into Psychiatry so it feels good that way it's interesting how timing in a field is so important and not just an academic field but a clinical field and and the ethos um if anyone is interested in um understanding where we are in the Arc of medicine and culture I highly recommend reading uh Oliver Sax's book on the Move um he was an obviously neurologist and writer but he describes coming up through medicine and being in these various Fields um he worked on headache for a while it's pretty interesting um he wrote a book about migraine he he worked on uh with uh kids on the autism spectrum and bunch of different fields and in every single one of those fields was vehemently attacked MH by some individual for whatever reason usually a superior kicked out of universities moved to another one now he did have his own issues he was you know was the time he was a methamphetamine addict and things like that but he got over that and um became the great Oliver sax that that he was but you know he describes these fields as having a culture at the time of really trying to suppress new ideas and holding people down and then toward the end of his career several of the universities that essentially had fired him earlier hospitals and universities were trying to recruit him back with multiple appointments because now he was this famous guy who had written the movie or worked on the movie Awakenings and like you know and of it revealed the hypocrisy of of uh these big institutions and so it made me chuckle and also realize that for those of us who are doing public health education at at any level and certainly on the these more um non-traditional things uh approaches that uh the time is right for for sharing them and um well the good news is nobody lives forever so you know the the old guard dies or retires you know that's true and I'm not going to hold my breath waiting for that department of Psychiatry to invite me back well you I won't ask which one it was we can have an offline discussion about that they just might um couple of more questions um first of all going back to this thing about the larger context of culture um I love the optimism that's threaded through your view like that we could get God willing uh Democrats and Republicans to come to some sort of common uh ground around the most important issues MH um that we potentially could eradicate destructive racism racism of all kinds um but given the way you described it certainly its implementation in the world is the first thing that needs to be dealt with right um certainly if people can see those parts of themselves uh and work with them that we stand a chance to do that and given that trauma is near ubiquitous right um that people could start to address their own traumas so that they can induce fewer in other people I guess that's basically the the ultimate goal of humanity totally um and I like so many people in um lately not just by the way not just in the last year or so but like for the last 10 years have just been developing the sense like goodness like it just seems like the number of problems is just seems to be expanding exponentially how do we get our our heads around this and you there's so much blame game going on of well it's because of this and it's because of that like that's not a solution at all so I love your um sense of optimism that it's possible and then my question is how do how do we how do we get that going to to be to be direct yeah well that's what I've been working on the last several years years and what I can say is for example I I spent 20 years like you know I I worked with bulimia like I said and I thought okay that's really works with that population you got um people who were bulimic to to essentially not be bulimic any longer yeah wow and then uh I I thought okay well let let's see if no bad parts is really true and so I went to the toughest populations I could fine and so for 20 years I worked with did and I worked with um did sorry um dissociative identity disorder like multiple personality disorder and I I worked with um what's called borderline personality clients and yeah very common right yeah before when you talked about bulimia bulimia is notoriously difficult to uh to treat let alone cure it's because people fight with the symptoms they try to get rid of the symptoms instead of listening to the part that's making them binge about what that's about moving from the one-on-one therapy model to a model where people can do this work on their own as well as in groups um but if I'm correct it in thinking this it seems like getting the work done with oneself is the first like real step yeah that there's no replacement for that right yeah yeah and you know there's in the activist world there's always been a kind of uh you're wasting wasting your time time but there's been a polarization between being in the activist mindset of really trying to change things in the outside world versus sitting around and and just focusing inside and not being an activist but I'm working with a lot of the people's you would recognize terms of activists and when they came to me they were doing their act AC ISM from the sort of righteous judgmental part and if we can get that one to step back and have them do their their activism from self they have a totally different impact people are willing to listen to them whereas when they're in that righteous Place nobody wants to listen to the shaming that does it needs to be both people need to do their work access self and then start to try to change change the outside world or not one before the other but at least simultaneously fantastic no really fantastic I um I don't think we've ever done a podcast like this where um the audience had a chance to do self-work in real time oh I'm I'm really appreciate you give me the opportunity yeah I don't know that I've ever heard a discussion um like it to be honest um which is just a testament to you and um your bravery uh it's very clear that um your decision not to go into Endocrinology was one that we all are grateful for it wasn't a decision well my my endocrinologist friends will um will have to just accept that you know we've got a lot of good endocrinologists we needed you Dr dick Schwarz to um to find yourself uh in this business of of um discovering and creating a truly novel approach to therapy and self-work that uh goes all the way up to the potential to change culture change the world so that's the goal yeah those those aren't just words that's uh those are um real aspirational possible uh things that could be accomplished if people do this work and in coming here today and sharing with us the structure of internal family systems and a demonstration of how it can work and offering people the opportunity to do it themselves in real time and giving us your perspective about the things that are um around it as well as in it uh with Incredible Clarity and um just a a real um beautiful sense of of care for for people that comes through um but also the I like the concreteness of it so very much very concrete right it's it's not abstract right and I really appreciate that and I'm certain that everyone else does as well so I I want to thank you for coming here today um for sharing this we will provide links to um places where people can learn more through books and courses and um other resources um that you've created and and also just for the work that you've done and for being you it's it's been a real pleasure and I'm um so very glad we did it me too oh my God I you know my little nervous Parts giving me a lot of trouble and but once we got going I just felt connected and I felt your appreciation and interest and so we could have this kind of self-to-self exchange which which I love I just I love spreading time and that energy yeah likewise and you know you're a great interviewer too so yeah thank you well this this whole thing is a a labor of love and a um a freef fall through uh just um curiosity yeah so yeah it's clear yeah I I hope to continue the conversation would love to wonderful thanks so much thank you so much thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Richard Schwarz to learn more about his work and to find links to his many excellent books please see the show note captions if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please click follow for the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics you'd like me to consider for the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast for those of you that haven't heard I have a new book coming out it's it's my very first book it's entitled protocols an operating manual for the human body this is a book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and experience and it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to Stress Control protocols related to focus and motivation and of course I provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included the book is now available by pre-sale at protocols book.com there you can find links to various vendors you can pick the one that you like best again the book is called protocols an operating manual for the human body if you're not already following me on social media I am hubman lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram X formerly known as Twitter Facebook LinkedIn and threads and on all those platforms I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content on the huberman Lab podcast again that's huberman lab on all social media platforms and if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a zero cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to three page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep how to optimize dopamine deliberate cold exposure we have a foundational Fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training all of that is available completely zero cost you simply go to hubman lab.com go to the menu tab in the top right corner scroll down to newsletter and enter your email and I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Richard Schwarz and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 29 ---
Video ID: Vh97z1ephuc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vh97z1ephuc
Title: The Importance of Sunlight for Health & Well-Being
Published: 2025-03-03 03:15:01 UTC
Description:


Transcript Language: English
People get up in the morning, they go to their car, they get into their car, they drive to work. The sun's not up yet. They get to their work, the sun comes up, but they're inside. Then what happens is they get done with work, the sun is already down, they come home from work. And so there literally is weeks on end that occur where they're not even getting 15 minutes of sunlight. And I think this is the reason why we have the influenza surge at this time. The EPA did a study and they looked at Americans. 93% of our time is spent inside, 86 inside a building, 6 to 7% inside of a vehicle. And this is a relatively new thing. I mean, what certainly when I was growing up. Yeah. If I came home and had a snack after school, I was getting kicked out of the house. Yeah. It was routine for parents to tell kids they had to go outside. Yeah. It's also the case, as you mentioned, that we're working later, or at least on devices later into the evening. Yeah. Which means there's more exposure to short wavelength light from devices and artificial sources. Absolutely. Absolutely. So my recommendation, which is what the original question was, is take your lunch break outside. It's something as simple as getting outside, even if it's at lunchtime. Yes, the ultraviolet is probably the highest at that point, if that's the only time that you're going to get sunlight, take it.

========================================

--- Video 30 ---
Video ID: goCbY3zIZKo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=goCbY3zIZKo
Title: The Best Red & Infrared Light Source(s) for Mitochondrial, Eye & Hormone Health
Published: 2025-03-02 20:20:41 UTC
Description:
When I say the sun is the best source, I’m not just saying that because it’s zero cost. That’s also true, but it has the greatest power to positively impact your mitochondria. There’s also evidence that it can improve testosterone and estrogen levels in both men and women.

Every time I talk about this, people say, “There’s no sun here.” Unless you live in a cave, there’s sun. But it is true that on overcast days, long-wavelength light is filtered out.

It’s still important to get sunlight in your eyes on those days for circadian rhythm regulation. On overcast days, as well as when you need more mitochondrial stimulation, red light devices can be useful. Most of them emit both red light and infrared or near-infrared light.

Full disclosure: Joovv is a sponsor of tge Huberman Lab podcast because, to my knowledge, those are the only medical-grade red and infrared light devices that are commercially available.

One of the really cool things about long-wavelength light, regardless of the source, is that it can penetrate deep into the skin and scatter as much as 8 cm.

In this post, I talk about how to avoid excess UV exposure while still getting plenty of long-wavelength light from the sun.

I did an entire episode about light—Episode 4 of the Huberman Lab podcast. The episode out now with Roger Seheult, M.D., also covers this in detail, including how red light can improve blood glucose regulation.

The last point is that photobiomodulation is now considered a core component of dermatology and other fields of medicine.

Transcript Language: English
Hey everyone. I've been posting a lot these days about red light and infrared light. Here's the deal. Everybody's asking me, what is the best source of red light? What's the best red light device? The best source of red light, as well as the other longer wavelengths of light, such as near-infrared and infrared light to benefit your mitochondria by getting it onto as much of your skin or body surface as possible in a culturally appropriate way, as well as for eye health, as well as for metabolism, et cetera, is sunlight. It's also zero cost. Sunlight contains all the wavelengths of the visible spectrum, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet. When the sun is low in the sky, some of those wavelengths separate out due to something called Rayleigh scattering. When the sun is overhead, you see the sun more as white light, but it still contains all those wavelengths of the visible spectrum. And of course, at all times, the sun is also emitting infrared light, near-infrared light and UV light, which fall in the non-visible parts of the spectrum. Now, this might all sound technical, but it's really important to understand this. If you want to improve mitochondrial function, you want to improve eye health, get some sunlight exposure to your skin, maybe 15 to 30 minutes per day. Yes, it is true, the more skin that you expose, excuse me, the more skin that you expose to sunlight, the greater the effect on your mitochondria. However, you have to do that in a culturally acceptable way, and you do want to avoid excessive UV exposure. You can check the UV index online. That's very easy, it's free to do. You would want to avoid getting too much UV exposure and getting a sunburn. Keep in mind, when the sun is low in the sky, you're still getting that longer wavelengths of light, those longer wavelengths of light, I should say, and you're going to have less UV arriving at your skin and eyes. First of all, never ever stare at any light, sunlight or otherwise, that's so bright it's painful to look at. All of this is to say that if you want so-called red light therapy and you're wondering what the best source of red light therapy is, regardless of cost, let's say you had a trillion dollars, you could afford any red light source, the best one would still be the sun. Now, if it's very overcast where you live, or if you're looking to augment to supplement your red light and infrared light exposure, that's where red light and infrared light devices become useful. There're red light beds, there're red light panels. People always ask me, "Which is the best one?" You have to shop by cost. However, it is true that Joovv, J-O-O-V-V is a podcast sponsor, so full disclosure, and they make medical-grade red lights that are available commercially. However, there are other sources of red light, so you'll have to shop by cost, but if you want a medical grade, one Joovv is medical grade. There are, of course, others out there, but if you want the short answer to the question, what is the best source of red light, infrared and near-infrared light therapy, (tongue clicking) sunlight. Thank you for your interest in science.

========================================

--- Video 31 ---
Video ID: c9JmHOUp6VU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c9JmHOUp6VU
Title: How to Control Hunger, Eating & Satiety | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-02-27 13:01:01 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I explain how hormones regulate hunger, appetite and feelings of satiety (fullness), along with strategies to help control appetite.

I describe how the body senses nutrient levels and how the brain processes these signals to stimulate hunger or suppress appetite. I also discuss how certain foods can help curb hunger, while processed foods and emulsifiers can interfere with satiety signals, leading to overeating. Additionally, I cover how lifestyle factors such as exercise and meal timing regulate blood glucose levels, which in turn impact hunger and appetite.

Huberman Lab Essentials episodes are approximately 30 minutes long and focus on essential science and protocol takeaways from past Huberman Lab episodes. Essentials will be released every Thursday, while our full-length episodes will continue to be released every Monday.

Read the full episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/Ao6Skcc

This Huberman Lab Essentials is from the full-length Huberman Lab episode, “How Our Hormones Control Our Hunger, Eating & Satiety": https://youtu.be/17O5mgXZ9ZU

*Resources*
Is a Calorie a Calorie? Processed Food, Experiment Gone Wrong (Robert Lustig): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxyxcTZccsE 

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Hormones, Sexual Development
00:00:56 Hunger, Hypothalamus, Cortex & Mouth
00:04:40 Melanocyte-Stimulating Hormone, AgRP Neurons, Ghrelin, Tool: Regular Meal Timing
00:08:56 Cholecystokinin (CCK), Tool: Omega-3s, Amino Acids & Blunting Appetite
00:12:09 Highly-Processed Foods, Emulsifiers, Tool: Whole Foods & Satiety Signals
00:16:49 Insulin, Glucose, Type 1 & 2 Diabetes
00:19:55 Insulin & Glucagon, Tools: Food Order, Movement & Blood Glucose
00:23:01 Tool: Exercise & Stable Blood Sugar
00:25:51 Metformin, Ketogenic Diet, Blood Glucose
00:28:13 Diabetes, Urine & Blood Sugar
00:30:37 Caffeine, Tool: Yerba Mate, Glucagon-Like Peptide -1 (GLP-1), Appetite
00:33:45 Recap & Key Takeaways

#HubermanLab #Science #Hormones 

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to hubman lab Essentials where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health physical health and performance I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public today we're going to talk about how hormones impact feeding and hunger as well as satiety the feeling that you don't want to eat or that you've eaten enough now it's important to understand that hormones don't work alone in this context today I'm going to describe some hormones that have powerful effects on whether or not you want to eat more or less or stop eating allog together but they don't do that on their own they do that in cooperation with the nervous system the first thing that you need to know about the nervous system side the neural control over eating and hunger is that there's an area of your brain called the hypothalamus now the hypothalamus contains lots of different kinds of neurons doing lots of different kinds of things there's a particular area of the hypothalamus called the ventromedial hypothalamus and it's one that researchers have been interested for a long time now in terms of its relationship to hunger and feeding and the reason is it creates these paradoxical effects what do I mean by that what they found was that sometimes lesioning or disrupting the neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus would make animals or people hyperphagic they would want to eat like crazy and other lesions in other individuals or animals would make them anorexic it would make them not want to eat at all it would make food aversive so that means that the ventromedial hypothalamus is definitely an interesting control station for hunger and feeding and satiety but it doesn't really tell you what's going on at a deeper level in fact it's a little bit confusing or paradoxical turns out that there are multiple population of neurons in there some are promoting feeding and some are promoting not feeding or not eating now the other neural component of all this that you need to know about actually has to do with your mouth so there's an area of your cortex so that's a little bit further up in your brain called the insular cortex and it processes a lot of different kinds of information mostly information about what's going on inside you so-called interoception the insular cortex has neurons that get input from your mouth from the touch receptors in your mouth an insular cortex has powerful control over whether or not you are enjoying what you're eating whether or not you want to avoid what you're eating whether or not you've had enough or whether or not you want to continue eating more and that has to do believe it or not with the touch or sensation of eating but the key point right now is to know you got these two brain areas the ventromedial hypothalamus that's involved in hunger and lack of hunger and you have this insular cortex that gets input from your mouth and cares about chewing and the consistency of foods and all sorts of interesting things that are just very tactile I think most people think about the touch receptors on excuse me the taste receptors on the tongue but we often don't think about the touch or tactile essence of food now let's get back to the ventromedial hypothalamus sometimes it makes animals or people want to eat more sometimes less so what's going on there there's a classic experiment that was done in which researchers took two rats and so-called parabiosed them to each other what that meant is that they did a little surgery and they linked their blood supply so that they were forever physically linked to one another and could exchange factors in the blood but their brains were separate their mouths were separate and they essentially did everything uh separately except that they were linked to one another so they had to walk together and go to the same places in order to do it this parabiosis experiment revealed something really important when they lesioned the ventromedial hypothalamus in one of the rats that was connected to the other rat that rat got very very fat it's just really obese the other one however got very thin it actually lost weight so what does this tell us this tells us that there's something in the blood that's being exchanged between the two animals because it was their blood supply that was linked and that tells us that there's hormone or endocrine signals that are involved in the desire to eat and hunger and appetite and so next we're going to talk about what those endocrine signals are and then I'm going to immediately point to some entry points that you can use and you can use these even if you're not parabiosed to anything and that can allow you to time your meal frequency and predict when you're going to be hungry or not so let's talk about the endocrine factors that regulate feeding hunger and satiety one of the really exciting things to emerge in this science of feeding an appetite in the last 20 years is the discovery of another brain area not just the ventromedial hypothalamus but it's an area of the brain called the arcu nucleus and the aru nucleus has some really fascinating sets of neurons that release even more incredible molecules and chemicals into the blood and these chemicals act as accelerators on feeding an appetite or breaks so first of all there are a set of neurons in this arcu nucleus it's the Pro opio melanocortin system now the Palm C neurons make something called Alpha msh melanocyte stimulating hormone Alpha melanocyte stimulating hormone msh reduces appetite and it's a powerful molecule all right so just put that on the Shelf msh reduces appetite now there's another population of neurons in the aru nucleus called the agrp neurons the arrp neurons stimulate eating the activity in these agrp neurons goes way up when animals or people haven't eaten for a while and the activity of msh the release of msh goes up when we've eaten next let's talk about a hormone peptide that activates hunger and this is a really interesting one because it relates to when you get hungry in addition to the fact that you get hungry at all and it's called gin it's spelled g HR e l i n gin is released actually from the GI tract and its main role is to in increase your desire to eat and it does that through a variety of mechanisms part of that is to stimulate some of the brain areas the actual neurons that make you want to eat in addition it creates food anticipatory signals within your nervous system so you start thinking about the things that you happen to like to eat at that particular time of day this is fascinating gin is sort of like a clock a hormonal clock that makes you want to eat at particular times now the signal for gin is reduced glucose levels in the blood if it drops too low gin is is secreted from your gut it activates neurons in your brain at various locations we all know about the famous pavlovian experiments of pavo's dogs you know they start salivating to the Bell after the Bell was presented with food you remove the food and then just the Bell can stimulate the the salivation we become pavlovian at times but rarely is it ever discuss what the neural Pathways for that are and it turns out that these hormones that are secreted from the gut can stimulate the neurons to create a sensation and a desire for certain foods at certain times of day you've done this experiment if you are somebody who eats breakfast at more or less the same time each day let's say 8: a.m. your gin secretion will start to match when you typically eat and it's able to override the low levels of glucose in your bloodstream because the Gin system also gets input from a clock in your liver that is linked to the clock in your hypothalamus in your brain and what this means is if you eat at regular meal times you'll start to get hungry a few minutes before those meal times if you've ever wondered why your stomach kind of starts to growl because it's a particular time of day you're like oh I must want to eat well that's gin so gin is secreted as a kind of food anticipatory signal to get you motivated to go eat at regular times but what that means is that if you suddenly go from eating on a very regular schedule to skipping a meal or pushing your meal timing out or shifting it at all you're going to have gin in your system and that gin is going to stimulate the desire to eat by acting at the level of your brain so gin stimulates the arrp neurons which makes you want to eat regularity of eating equals regularity of gin secretion equals regularity of activity of these agrp neurons meaning you will be hungry at very regular intervals so if msh inhibits feeding make makes us want to eat less and gin makes us want to eat more there's another hormone called cck kinin that is potent in reducing our levels of hunger now cck is in the GI tract it's released from the GI tract and its release is governed by two things one is a subset of very specialized neurons that detect what's in the gut the specific contents of the gut and by certain elements of the mucosa of the mucous lining of the gut and the gut microbiome so what's really interesting is that cck is stimulated by fatty acids amino acids and particular amino acids that we'll talk about as well as by Sugar so which fatty acids in the gut stimulate the release of cck omega-3 fatty acids and conjugated lenol acid CLA either from food or from supplements stimulate the release of cck which then reduces or at least blunts appetite the other thing that stimulates cck that I mentioned are amino acids so when we eat we have the ability to break down different macron macronutrients you know carbohydrates fats or proteins into sugars and glucose that then we can convert to ATP and all that stuff remember the KB cycle from high school we're not going to go into to that today that's for a future episode amino acids both can be used as energy through a process called gluconeogenesis of converting proteins into energy or those amino acids can be broken down and then rebuilt into things like repairing muscle tissue as well as other forms of cellular repair they're involved in all sorts of things related to protein synthesis what does this mean if we eat the proper amino acids at the proper levels if we ingest Omega-3s and clas conjugated linolic acids at the proper levels or get them from supplements there is a blunting of appetite appetite is kept clamped and we don't become hyperphagic we don't overeat we tend to eat within healthy or normal ranges so this is very important because most people don't understand that when we're eating we are basically fat foraging and amino acid foraging in other words even if it's not conscious we are eating until we trigger the activation of cck now there are other reasons why we shut down eating too the volume of food in our gut can be large and we can feel very distended that's the physical reason obviously but at a subconscious level the gut is informing the brain via cck and other mechanisms when we've ingested enough of what we need so as you can see feeding is an interplay between brain and body and it's some of the micronutrients and even the breakdown of particular nutrients that's putting the accelerator or the break on the feeding process you are essentially trying to eat to get these nutrients and then a signal can be deployed up to your brain that you're not really interested in eating that much more there's one particular aspect of food that can powerfully impact cck and I think most people I'm guessing 99.9% of people out there are not aware of this and it has to do with highly processed foods there's a lot of reasons why one would want to avoid highly processed foods in fact if you're interested in that topic and the history of Whole Foods transitioning to highly processed foods in this country I highly recommend you listen to a YouTube video by Dr Robert lustig he's University of California San Francisco it gives a a beautiful description of the history of this and why the food industry started packing in additional sugars and salts and turning Foods into Commodities is really fascinating has no conspiracy theory it's just all scientific facts it's really a wonderful lecture has millions of views should be very easy to find there's another reason to avoid highly processed foods however and that has to do with what's called emulsifiers now many of you are familiar with emulsifiers even though you don't know it when you put detergent in the laundry that is an contains emulsifiers the the goal of that detergent is to bring together fatty molecules with water molecules and be able to dissociate them and break them up to get the stains out of clothes and things of that sort there are a lot of emulsifiers put into processed foods and those emulsifiers allow certain chemical reactions to occur that extends the shell fly for those Foods why are emulsifiers bad okay there are a lot of reasons why they're bad but the reason why they're bad for the mechanisms that we've been talking about today is that when you ingest those Foods you're bringing those emulsifiers into your gut and those emulsifiers strip away the mucosal lining of the gut and they actually cause the neurons that innervate the gut that extend those little processes we call axons into the gut to retract deeper into the gut and as a consequence you're ingesting a bunch of food and the signals like cckk never get deployed the signals that actually shut down hunger are never actually triggered and so as a consequence you want to eat far more of these highly processed foods in addition if you then go from eating a highly processed food to to non- highly processed foods you're not able to measure the amounts of amino acid sugars and fatty acids in those Foods as accurately you've actually done structural damage at a micro level but structural Lev damage excuse me to the mucosal lining of the gut now this can all be repaired if you stay away from highly processed foods for some period of time but the negative effects of these emulsifiers are quite real so to make it really clean and simple emulsifiers from highly processed foods are limiting your gut's ability to detect what's in the foods you eat and therefore to deploy the satiety signals the signals that shut down hunger in addition to to that there's a parallel mechanism at play that I talked about in a previous episode but I'll remind you again that you have neurons in your gut that are sensing sugar and are sending a subconscious signal up to the brain via the vagus nerve and those neurons trigger the release of dopamine which makes you crave more of that food so now you've got parallel signals making you want to eat more sugar making you unaware of how much sugar you've eaten and that are disrupting the inputs to the nervous system that signal to the rest of your brain and body that you've obtained enough fatty acids and you've obtained enough amino acids so these highly processed foods are really terrible and you know I'm not out here to say you know never enjoy a processed food of any kind I'd be a hypocrite because I do eat processed foods from time to time although the ones that I tend to eat I try and make of the healthier variety but eating Whole Foods has tremendous value and eating highly processed food uh has tremendous negative impact on the gut and on the gut brain axis the bottom line is that highly processed foods are just bad for you they increase weight gain they disrupt the lining of your gut in a way that disrupts things like cck and proper satiety signals so there's just so many reasons why these highly processed foods are terrible and they can explain a lot of the ill health effects that we've seen in the last 50 years not just in the United States but all over the world the enormous increase in diabetes juvenile diabetes it's just uh remarkable how far down the path of bad we've gone and it's clear it's almost a Smoking Gun what the cause of this is if you'd like to learn more about that P please refer to the lustig lecture he also spells out why nonprocessed Foods is far more economical in terms of uh just at the level of the household or individual as well as at the societal level really interesting stuff I highly recommend you check it out so now let's move on to some other hormones that regulate hunger and satiety in particular insulin now you've probably heard of insulin before insulin is the thing that's lacking in type 1 diabetics that's why they have to inject insulin whenever they eat the reason they have to do that is because when they eat their foods are broken down into glucose and in order to shuttle glucose to the appropriate tissues in the body and also to keep glucose levels in check you need insulin so the simplest way to think about insulin and glucose is that when you eat that food is broken down into sugars that's true whether or not it's fats or it's sugars or event if it's proteins they are oxidized into fuels as we say your blood sugar needs to be kept in a particular range hypoglycemic means too low hyper glycemic means too high and what they called U glycemic EU glycemic is the healthy range now what those healthy ranges are in general the healthy range the ug glycemic range is about 70 to 100 nanog per deciliter why is is it important that glucose be kept at a particular level once you understand that keeping glucose in check starts to have a rationale behind it and the ways to do that start to make a lot more sense so the the reason is if glucose levels get too high because of the way that our cells in particular neurons interact with glucose high levels of glucose can damage neurons it can actually kill them you can start getting what are called perip peripheral excuse me neuropathies one of the symptoms of some forms of diabetes is that people start losing the sensation of touch in their fingers or their hands or their feet and they can start going blind there's diabetic retinopathies so it's very important that insulin manage your glucose levels now there's also type two diabetes where there's insulin secreted from the pancreas but people are insulin insensitive There's A disruption in The receptors and Insulin insensitivity isn't quite the same as having no insulin at all but it parallels some of the same mechanisms now type 1 diabetes is often picked up because someone has a sudden weight loss because they're not processing blood sugar the same way they were before type 2 diabetes is often although not always associated with being overweight and with obesity both of them are are challenging conditions type 2 diabetes almost always can be managed by managing one's weight and of course there are prescription drugs and supplements that can help manage those we're going to talk about all of that but for most people that don't have diabetes the important thing is to manage glucose to keep it in that ug glycemic range and there are a number of different ways to do that some of them are behavioral some of them are diet-based and some of them are based on supplements or prescription drugs so let's talk about those now so if you eat and in particular if you eat carbohy hydrates blood glucose goes up if you eat fats blood glucose goes up to a far less degree and if you eat proteins depending on the protein it'll eventually be broken down for fuel or assembled into amino acid chains for protein synthesis and repair of other tissues and bodily functions but glucose goes up and then is kept in range when you are hungry you secrete a different hormone and that's called glucagon and glucagon's main role is to to pull stores of energy out of the liver and the muscles and once those are depleted you'll eventually tap into body fat so the two kind of push and pull systems that we're going to think about now to keep this simple is that you have the insulin system managing glucose and you've got the glucagon system pulling energy out of your liver and muscles for immediate Fuel and eventually you'll pull fuel out of body fat that if you've been active for a very long time and all your glycogen stores are depleted or close to depleted so what does this all mean let's say you had a meal and that meal consisted of rice a carbohydrate some meat or fish let's say a piece of salmon and some vegetable some fibrous vegetable like asparagus or cabbage or something like that if you were to eat all of that at once you know you take a bite of one a bite of the other you mix it up then you will EXP expence an increase in insulin and increase in blood glucose that's moderately fast it's going to increase pretty quickly what's remarkable is that the order that you consume each macronutrient has a pretty profound influence on the rate of insulin and glucose secretion into the blood and how quickly those levels rise if you were to eat the fibrous thing first so a lot of chewing but not a big rise in blood glucose that will actually blunt the release of glucose until until you eat the fish and the rice but believe it or not it will actually blunt the glucose increase that the rice would cause now I'm not talking about neurotically eating each macronutrient separately in sequence I'm just trying to give you a picture of what's Happening ordinarily so what does this all mean it means that if you want a steep increase in glucose you are very very hungry then you should eat the the carbohydrate laiden food first or you should eat a bunch of macronutrients combined so that would be like the hamburger or the sandwich the the bread the whatever is in that sandwich all together usually that's protein and and you know vegetables as well if you want to have a kind of more modest increase in glucose or you want to blunt the increase in glucose then have the at least some of the fibrous thing first and then the protein and then the carbohydrate you will notice that your blood glucose will rise more steadily and that you'll achieve satiety earlier in the meal basically what you're trying to avoid are steep increases in blood sugar and the order that you Foods has an enormous impact on that the other thing that has an enormous impact on how long and shallow or how steep that curve of glucose is depends on whether or not you recently were moving are moving or start moving after you eat so it turns out that your blood glucose levels can be modulated very very powerfully by movement if you did any kind of intense exercise or even just walking or jogging or cycling anything before you eat your blood glucose levels will be dampened somewhat and even just moving after a meal even just a a calm easy walk can really adjust the ways in which blood sugar regulated for the better the other thing I'd like to address for a moment is this notion of stable blood sugar versus labile blood sugar or unstable blood sugar some people just have stable blood sugar they can go long periods of time without eating and feel fine other people get really shaky really jittery and or when they do eat they feel really keyed up sometimes they'll even sweat but whether or not your blood sugar is all over the place or whether or not stable can be impacted by a number of things one of those things is exercise so these days there's a lot of interest in what they call Zone 2 cardio which is that kind of steady state cardio where you can just nasal breathe even at pretty high output um where you could maybe have a conversation Zone 2 cardio that last anywhere from 30 minutes to an hour or something times more for your endurance athletes can create positive effects on blood sugar regulation such that you people can sit down and enjoy whatever it is the hot fudge Sunday or whatever the high sugar content food is and blood glucose management is so good your insulin sensitivity is so high which is a good thing that you can manage that blood glucose to the point where it doesn't really make you shaky it uh it doesn't disrupt you basically doing Zone to cardio for 30 to 60 Minutes 3 to four times a week makes your blood sugar really stable and that's an attractive thing for a variety of reasons on the flip side high-intensity interval training or resistance training AKA weight training are very good at stimulating the various molecules that promote repackaging of glycogen so Sprints heavy weightlifting circuit type weightlifting provided there's some reasonable degree of resistance those are going to trigger all sorts of mechanisms that are going to encourage the body to shuttle glucose back into glycogen convert into glycogen into muscle tissue restock the liver Etc and I should mention that one of the advantages of high-intensity interval training or weightlifting of various kinds is that it also it causes longstanding increases in basil metabolic rate now I'd like to turn to prescription drugs that regulate the hormone systems controlling feeding and satiety there's a prescription drug metformin which was developed as a treatment for diabetes and it works potently to reduce blood glucose it has dramatic effects in lowering blood glucose metformin involves changes to mitochondrial action in the liver that's its main way of depleting or reducing blood glucose and it does so through the so-called amk pathway and it increases insulin sensitivity overall metformin is a powerful drug in fact I'm surprised that so many people have sought it out given that most of the people that I'm aware of that sought it out are not diabetic I do want to mention because I'm sure some of you out there are curious about the ketogenic diet I'm going to do an entire episode about ketosis and the brain and the body but the ketogenic diet has been shown in 22 studies to have a notable decrease on blood glucose and that is not surprising because you're the the essence of the of the ketogenic diet is that you're consuming very little or zero of the foods that promote big spikes in insulin and glucose if you consume enough protein some of that protein can be converted into glucose of course through gluconeogenesis but the ketogenic diet has very strong support as for its role in regulating blood sugar which is glucose but the specific effects of the ketogenic diet and one particular effect that I'll address later but I'll mention now which is the ability of the the ketogenic diet to adjust thyroid hormone levels in ways that make it such that if you return to eating carbohydrates after being in ketosis for too long you don't manage thyroid and carbohydrates as well that has been shown as well so we're going to dive deep into ketosis in a future episode so for you ketonist out there don't worry I certainly have nothing against ketogenic diet I actually don't have anything for against any particular nutrition plan I know what works for me at least at this stage of my life and I'll update it if I need to I'm simply trying to get you as much information as I possibly can so that you can navigate through that landscape in a way that's in keeping with your particular goals so now you understand a lot about blood sugar and how it's managed and the ways that you can manage it better depending on your particular needs this is also a good opportunity for us to look back at some of the medical literature because it really points to just how far we've come in terms of understanding these important mechanisms and it points Us in the direction of some actionable protocols so diabetes which is these huge increases in blood glucose because there's no insulin was known about as early as 1500 BC which is just incredible and the way Physicians then understood that certain people had high blood glucose without actually knowing what blood glucose was is that they would take the urine of particular patients and they'd find that ants preferably move toward and consumed the urine of certain patients and not others and they understood that there was something in that urine that was correlated with the sudden weight loss and some of the other probably very unfortunate Health you know symptoms that these people were experiencing so they knew that there was something in Blood and and urine now this business of measuring blood sugar from the urine has been something that lasted Way Beyond these early stages of you know 1500 BC turns out that as late as 1674 physicians at Oxford University were figuring out who had pathologically high levels of blood glucose by analyzing their urine and again they were measuring the sweetness of their urine but and this is medical fact they would do this by taking urine samples from different p patients and tasting them and they developed an intuitive sense of what excessively sweet urine was relative to the other urines that they had tasted so for those of you that are in the medical profession or those of you that are seeking out the medical profession do understand this is not done anymore and you can also just reflect on how far we've come in terms of the medical profession itself in our ability to measure things from the blood and measure things from urine without having to ask ants which urine is sweeter or ask oneself which urine is sweeter so indeed we are making progress as a species before we close out today I want to talk about one more tool that many of you will probably find useful I certainly have I'm a big consumer of caffeine although I don't consume a ton of it I consume it very consistently so I'm big on consuming mate which is a strong caffeinated tea and I generally do that early in the day although I do Delay about 2 hours after I wake up for reasons I've talked about in previous episode to maintain that nice Arc of alertness and focus mate also called yerba mate is an interesting compound because unlike coffee it has been shown to increase something called glucagon like peptide glp1 and increase leptin levels now we didn't talk a lot about glucagon today glucagon is really elevated in the fasting State I mentioned that it's sort of the opposite of insulin in kind of rough terms that's uh one way to think about it but glp1 or glucagon like peptide one is increased by ingesting mate and it acts as a pretty nice appetite suppressant now I'm not trying to suppress my appetite I like to eat as I mentioned before but it works really well to stimulate the brain and to give you a level of alertness and to do a lot of the things that coffee does it also contains electrolytes so we meaning our neurons and our brain run on a variety of factors electrical activity and chemical transmission Etc but they require adequate levels of sodium potassium and magnesium if you were to learn the biology the physiology of the action potential the firing of a neuron something we teach every first year Neuroscience student and I'd be happy to teach you if you're interested you'll hear about sodium rushing into cells and potass ium entering and leaving cells in order to allow neurons to communicate electrolytes are critically important for the function of the nervous system and many things that act as diuretics that promote excretion of water like caffeine can also take electrolytes out along with it in particular sodium and sometimes the lightheadedness or the brain fog that people experience isn't just because electrolytes are low but because they're kind of out of balance so I like mate because it has electrolytes it has caffeine it stimulates the release of this glucagonlike peptide glp1 and it's been a big help to me in extending that early morning fasting window out to about noon or so when I eat my first meal it also just tastes really good and the fact that glucagon like peptide 1 is enriched or is released more when you drink mate and the fact that glp1 can regulate blood sugar in ways that keep your blood sugar in that um we call yug but glycemic not too high not too low mode is one reason why ingesting mate is attractive to me so yamate glp1 can manage in healthy ways leptin levels glucose levels and glucagon levels in ways that if it serves you you might want to try so once again we covered an enormous amount of material focused on how hormones regulate feeding hunger and when one feels they don't need to eat so-called satiety that you've had enough we've just focused today mainly on things like gin on things like melanocyte simulating hormone incredible powerful hormone that can suppress appetite on things like chiccy toyin that comes from the gut and can suppress appetite on things like food emulsifiers on the fact that when you're eating you are amino acid seeking even though you might not realize it that you are also seeking out particular fatty acids so I've tried to give you a number of actionable tools again always do what's best for your health and do that in company with a health care professional I'm not a physician I don't prescribe anything I'm a professor I profess a lot of things if you know anyone that's interested in this topic or you think that someone could benefit from it please suggest the podcast to them as well and most of all thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 32 ---
Video ID: Ag_a3VAQlgk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ag_a3VAQlgk
Title: How Long Wavelength Light from Leaves Enhances Mitochondrial Function
Published: 2025-02-24 22:13:32 UTC
Description:
Leaves reflect long-wavelength light, thereby amplifying its positive effects on mitochondrial function. This is a nontrivial positive effect.

Transcript Language: English
Believe it or not, but the leaves on trees and grass, anything with chlorophyll is highly reflective of infrared light. What that means is that if you go out outside on a sunny day versus going outside on a sunny day surrounded by green, green spaces, you're going to get probably two, three, four times more infrared light in that environment than you would without that environment. You could check this out. You go to Google and just type in infrared photography and click images, and you will see any kind of infrared filtered light, when it shows a tree or grass, it looks like it's lit up, like it's got snow on it. It's bright white, it's very reflective. On a hot summer day, if you go outside and touch some object that's in the sun, it's going to be extremely hot. Touch a leaf. It's not hot at all. It's because it's reflecting that light. In fact, the coolest place in a garden on a hot summer day is where? It's under a tree because all of that infrared light is being reflected off. So we know from years and decades of data that people who live in green spaces have reduced diabetes, reduced hypertension, reduced mortality, just living in green spaces.

========================================

--- Video 33 ---
Video ID: N5DAW8mkJ6Y
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N5DAW8mkJ6Y
Title: How to Enhance Your Immune System | Dr. Roger Seheult
Published: 2025-02-24 13:00:35 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. Roger Seheult, M.D., a board-certified physician in internal medicine, pulmonary diseases, critical care, and sleep medicine at Loma Linda University. We discuss the powerful benefits of light therapy, including infrared light, red light, and sunlight, for improving mitochondrial function in all the body’s organs. We also explore ways to reduce the risk of influenza, colds, and other illnesses that affect the lungs, sinuses, and gut.

Topics include the flu shot, whether handwashing truly prevents illness transmission, and treatments for mold toxicity. We review the efficacy of N-acetylcysteine (NAC), the power of hydrotherapy for combating infections, and strategies for improving sleep and overall health. Additionally, we discuss air quality. This episode provides actionable, science-based tools for preventing and treating infectious illnesses.

Read the full episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/3B2olpP

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Joovv: https://joovv.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman
Function: https://functionhealth.com/huberman
Our Place: https://fromourplace.com/huberman

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://go.hubermanlab.com/instagram
Threads: https://go.hubermanlab.com/threads
X: https://go.hubermanlab.com/x
Facebook: https://go.hubermanlab.com/facebook
TikTok: https://go.hubermanlab.com/tiktok
LinkedIn: https://go.hubermanlab.com/linkedin
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://go.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Dr. Roger Seheult*
Med Cram: https://www.medcram.com 
Academic profile: https://llu.edu/academics/faculty/seheult-roger/education 
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/@Medcram
X: https://x.com/rogerseheult
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/medcram
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@medcram 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/MedCram 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/roger-seheult-514147b8 

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Dr. Roger Seheult
00:02:16 Avoiding Sickness, Immune System, Tool: Pillars of Health, NEWSTART
00:08:03 Sponsors: Joovv & Eight Sleep
00:10:46 Sunlight, Mitochondria, Tool: Infrared Light & Melatonin
00:19:09 Melatonin Antioxidant, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS)/Free Radicals
00:26:38 Infrared Light, Green Spaces, Health & Mortality
00:31:35 Infrared Light, Mitochondrial Dysfunction, Disease
00:38:46 Sunlight & Cancer Risk?, Tools: UV Light, Clothing & Sunlight Exposure
00:41:01 Sponsors: AG1 & LMNT
00:43:32 Sunlight, Incidence of Influenza
00:48:41 Tools: Sunlight Exposure Duration, Winter Months
00:55:18 Infrared Lamps?, Winter Sunlight Exposure; Obesity & Metabolic Dysfunction
00:59:48 Cloudy Days; Sunlight, Primitive Therapy, Hospitals
01:11:33 Sponsor: Function
01:13:21 Artificial Lights, Hospitals & Light Therapy?, ICU Psychosis
01:22:16 Sleep & Darkness, Tools: Eye Mask, Bathroom Navigation; Meals & Light
01:28:27 Influenza, Flu Shots, Swiss Cheese Model; Flu Shot Risks?
01:38:13 Masks?, Flu; Handwashing
01:42:16 Sponsor: Our Place
01:43:57 Water, Sodium; Innate Immune System, Fever & Hydrotherapy
01:53:46 Fever, Heat Hydrotherapy, Interferon & Immune System
01:58:25 Cold Hydrotherapy, Vasoconstriction & White Blood Cells
02:09:56 N-Acetyl Cysteine (NAC), Glutathione, White Clots, Flu
02:19:28 Tool: NAC Dose & Regimen; Mucous, Flu Symptoms
02:25:25 Zinc Supplementation, Copper; Exogenous Interferon
02:28:40 Eucalyptus Oil, Inhalation
02:32:22 Air, Smoking, Vaping, Nicotine Gum
02:36:49 Fresh Air, Forest Bathing, Tool: Go Outdoors
02:40:09 Nature vs Inside Environments, Dark Days/Bright Nights Problem
02:52:38 Mitochondrial Dysfunction, Intermittent Fasting, Sunlight
03:00:43 Smell Loss Recovery
03:05:04 Mold Toxicity, Lungs, Germ vs Terrain Theory, Immunocompromised
03:11:46 Trust, Spirituality, Community, Faith; Forgiveness
03:19:46 Hospital Admission, Tool: Asking Questions
03:25:42 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Follow & Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Protocols Book, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science #Health #ImmuneSystem

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Dr Roger schwell Dr Roger schwell is a board-certified medical doctor in pulmonology which is the understanding and treatment of conditions that impact the respiratory system such as colds flu and other viruses mold infections asthma and more Dr schwell is also board certified in sleep medicine he does his clinical work in the Intensive Care Unit at lalinda University and he is actively involved in medical and public health education through his terrific online Channel called medc today we discuss how to avoid getting colds flu and other viruses and how to treat them to minimize discomfort accelerate healing and avoid long-term consequences during today's episode we discuss long covid as well as the use of sun and red light to stimulate mitochondrial and their metabolic Health across the entire brain and body that opens up a broader discussion about phototherapy which is the use of light to control health and temperature and other levers for improving brain and bodily function Dr schwell emphasizes that sun and red light therapy have a long and wellestablished medical history and their mechanisms of action are known and therefore it's not just biohacking as many people think we also discussed the sometimes controversial topic of the flu shot and if and when you should get one Dr schel as you'll see here is worldclass at making medical Concepts and the actionable items related to health exceptionally clear as a consequence I'm certain that you'll truly appreciate the knowledge that he shares in your efforts to be and stay healthy at any age in fact by the end of today's episode you'll be armed with the real knowledge on how to best get over nasty infections of the sinuses lungs and throat faster should you happen to get one and even better how to avoid them alt together before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is sep from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme this episode does include sponsors and now for my discussion with Dr Roger schel Dr Roger schel welcome thank you so much Andrew for having me I discovered you because you were putting out and continue to put out incredible information about how to stay healthy amidst infectious diseases Airborne in ious diseases skin contact based infectious diseases and on and on and nobody likes to be sick and you've provided me tremendously valuable information about how to avoid getting sick and in many cases how to accelerate the progression from sick to healthy again it's been uh tremendously helpful for getting me back into life as it were let's talk about some of the things that one can do to avoid getting sick when in the presence of airborne viruses in particular colds and flu and other viruses as it were if you were to think about the the major pillars of remaining healthy especially when one is exposed to colds and flu from kids for in your case also in the Intensive Care Unit where people are coming in specifically because they're sick often with infections like colds and flu or worse you need to take specific precautions to avoid getting sick what do you think of as the fundamental layer of keeping a healthy immune system to avoid getting sick and then we'll talk about how to get over and move through being sick more quickly yes well the question is how do you avoid getting sick in terms of uh infectious diseases and as it turns out the answer to that is is actually the same in terms of avoiding getting sick for anything and it sort of goes to the pillars as you call it in my mind there's a there's actually a physician that I know very well just outside of uh Stanford actually in a place called wear wear University Dr Neil nedley and he's actually coined this this pneumonic called New Start um and and each of those letters to me in my mind is something that I go to when I want to improve health uh in in people in general so the and starts for nutrition and we can talk about nutrition and what that does to the human body obviously you know as natural as possible staying away from processed foods that's something there um exercise is e and uh when I'm talking about exercise I'm talking about the understanding that we have regarding exercise not to build muscle necessarily be stronger I'm talking about exercise in terms of health and that has more of a a j hook type of of picture what I mean by J hook is if you're not doing any exercise you're going to have higher levels of inflammation as soon as you start to do some exercise even mild to moderate exercise the amount of inflammation your body starts to come down but as you start to do more and more exercise you do have to be careful in terms of your General Health this is exactly what happens with athletes um they have to be very careful that when they're doing that type of elite athletic exercise that they're not sick on the day of performance and so that that's an issue so I'm referring to just you know mild to moderate exercise is good um the next one would be W water so this is something that's really interesting obviously it seems pretty you know obvious but not only the use of internal water but external water so in that area we can talk about sauna cold plunge things of that nature that can actually help with our immune system that's a whole interesting area of discussion it involves the innate immune system it involves interferon there's a lot of history and data that goes back over hundred years on how that's been used start St so s is sunlight I've been a real proponent of getting people outside into the Sun and we can talk a lot about that there's a lot of interesting research not only in terms of sunlight in terms of influenza but also covid and just about any natural disease lot of interesting information there t t uh stands for the old term called Temperance which you may recall is a is a term that we use to prevent us from taking in toxins into our body that's a whole another discussion so staying away from things that would make you sick a is air and when I talk about air it's not just what we focus on which is keeping bad things out of the air so having fresh air but there's a whole discussion to be had in terms of air that has good qualities in it so there's a whole area of research that looks at for instance fdes which are chemicals that come off of trees you may have heard of forest bathing they've done a lot of research in Japan on this and getting out into nature there are actual chemicals that are in the air that you can breathe that actually have an impact on your inate immune system finally R we're getting to R R and at the end R is rest now this is goes without saying but people who have good sleep habits are going to have much better immune systems whether you're talking about the the antibody response after a vaccine uh versus just um the number of times per year you're sick there's very good data very good research that shows that getting seven eight hours of sleep a night is going to be very beneficial for your immune system has to do with cortisol and beta receptors and all sorts of things and the last t which is trust and uh for some it is is trust in a higher power trust in God these are the sorts of things that can help us uh relieve stress if someone else is is helping you if someone else is there tea would also include Community people that are around you these are some of the less um tangible ways of measuring but when someone ask me a question what can I do to avoid getting sick and as you just asked me in terms of influenza there's a lot of specific things we can talk about but that's where I start out with the pillars of Health I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor ju ju makes medical grade red light therapy devices now if there's one thing that I have consistently emphasized on this podcast it is the incredible impact that light can have on our biology now in addition to sunlight red light and near infrared light sources have been shown to have positive effects on improving numerous aspects of Cellar and organ Health including faster Muscle Recovery improved skin health and wound healing improvements in acne reduced pain and inflammation even mitochondrial function and improving Vision itself what sets juv lights apart and why they're my preferred red light therapy device is that they use clinically proven wavelengths meaning specific wavelengths of red light and near infrared light in combination to trigger the optimal seller adaptations personally I use the ju whole body panel about three to four times a week and I use the ju handheld light both at home and when I travel if you'd like to try ju you can go to ju spelled jv.com huberman chuve is offering an exclusive discount to all huberman lab listeners with up to $400 off ju products again that's ju spell jv.com huberman to get up to $400 off today's episode is also brought To Us by eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity now I've spoken before on this podcast about the critical need for us to get adequate amounts of quality sleep each night now one of the best ways to ensure a night sleep is to ensure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct and that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3° and in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized your body temperature actually has to increase about 1 to 3° eight sleep makes it very easy to control the temperature of your sleeping environment by allowing you to program the temperature of your mattress cover at the beginning middle and end of the night I've been sleeping on an eight Sleep mattress cover for nearly 4 years now and it has completely transformed and improved the quality of my sleep eight sleep recently launched their newest generation of the Pod cover called the Pod 4 ultra the Pod 4 ultra has improved cooling and heating capacity I find that very useful because I like to make the bed really cool at the beginning of the night even colder in the middle of the night and warm as I wake up that's what gives me the most slow wave sleep and rapid eye movement sleep it also has a snoring detection that will automatically lift your head a few degrees to improve your air flow and stop your snoring if You' like to try an eight Sleep mattress cover go to 8sleep.com huberman to save up to $350 off their pod 4 ultra eightsleep currently ships in the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again that's 8sleep.com huberman let's start off with one of my favorite topics would be the s in New Start let's talk about sunlight listeners of this podcast or anyone that's heard me on social media know that I'm you know as big a proponent of getting morning sunlight in one's eyes as one could possibly be without repeating himself 10 million times per year uh it's a daily activity that we just know has such an outsized positive effect on the whole setting of the Circadian rhythm and thereby improved daytime mood focus and alertness and nighttime sleep but the way you describe sunlight goes beyond just getting morning sunlight in one's ey so if we want to parse this s sunlight in new start how are you thinking about sunlight is it sunlight on the skin is it also midday light not just morning sunlight is it a certain amount of sunlight and then maybe we can also talk about some of the underlying mechanisms yeah exactly so when you talk about sunlight and I'm a big believer I'm board certified in sleep medicine and I and I I'm cheering you on when you talk about these things because it's so important that light into the retina does have an effect on the Circadian rhythm supermatic nucleus it does have an effect on mood goes to the per cular nucleus in the brain and has an effect there those are well known and very important um what I'm talking about when I'm talking about sunlight is an aspect of light that is not very well known in terms of its visible effects so we we know about the visible effects of light these are photons that are coming into the eyes that we can see what I'm discussing and what I'm talking about is the is the effect of sunlight on the human body the skin penetrating into the human body now this at first sounds kind of uh woooo I guess we could say but the the point that I want to make here is understanding that when we look at the sun we are seeing about 38% of that energy coming from the sun is in the visible spectrum there's a whole another 52% of the photons coming from the Sun in the infrared spectrum and on the other end on the ultraviolet side this is the part we have no problem understanding because we know that ultraviolet B light comes into our skin and it's high energy so it's able to actually move the bonds on these uh cholesterol derivatives in order to make vitamin D so we know that so now what do we say when I say hey I want to go outside to get some vitamin D we know that we're going outside to get this light that we can't see that's very imperative to giving us something called vitamin D which is hormone in our body and it's very very important on the other side of that though on the infrared side is is something that there's new science new data that is coming out that is showing that it's actually very very important and so that I I would point to a an article that really changed my my thinking on this and really open my eyes no pun intended there was an article that was published in 2019 uh in melatonin research by Scott Zimmerman and Russell Ryder and the the name of that article was melatonin Optics of the human body the Optics of the human body and what Scott Zimmerman and Russell Ryder set out to show is that in fact fact um infrared light because of its very long wavelength um it can penetrate through into the skin actually very deep and we're not talking about how long a a path length goes through you have to remember that that this type of long wavelength can scatter and it can can scatter throughout up to they say up to 8 cm according to this this data a single Photon a single Photon can bounce around it's it's a very low energy Photon uh but low energy photons because they're very long in wavelength can penetrate very deeply a good way of thinking about this is you you know you pull up to a stop sign and a car pulls up next to you and they're playing this really loud music right what do you hear in your car it's very low frequency sound and the reason why that's what you hear is because low frequency sound is the only kind of sound coming out of that guy's radio that's able to penetrate not only his car but go into your car and shake the steering wheel on your car it's it's the same thing like for instance if you were to go to the Grand Canyon and there's a storm coming storm very far away what's the first thing that you're going to hear it's low rumbling it's because that low frequency energy is able to penetrate very deeply um there's a astrophysicist in Europe uh in England actually Bob Fosbury he sent me a photograph of his hand in front of a infrared light source and it was almost like uh uh the first guy who took a X-ray of his hand Ren rigan guess is his name and uh he said he looked at his hand he says I almost like saw my own death cuz he could see the bones in his hand through the X-ray well Bob Fosbury who's at the European space agency and is well tuned into this type of of understanding he put his hand in front of a infrared light sensor or infrared light source and took a infrared light photograph and the light comes through the hand it illuminates the entire hand uh and this is of course a lot more than a few millimeters and the mind in thing about it was you could not see any bones it was either penetrating through the bone or it was going around the bone and very clearly you could see that infrared light is able to go much more than just skin deep it penetrates through your clothes you you can actually test this out on a on a on a summer day or even on a winter day if the Sun is out wear a few clothes of uh layers of clothing go outside close your eyes and move around and see if you can feel where the sun is you can and the reason is is because it's that infrared radiation that's able to penetrate through the clothes penetrate through your skin actually activate the heat sensors in your body and actually go much deeper than that that's actually in a straight line after it does that it hits something and then it bounces around a couple of more times maybe a few hundred more times and so the point of that paper the Optics of the human body is that we have this understanding or this idea that light simply hits our skin and that's where it ends and that's not the case why that's important is because of the effect of this type of infrared light has on mitochondria and that's really the mind-blowing aspect of this is that mitochondria are like engines in your in your cells right they're like engines in your car the engine in your car Burns fuel makes Locomotion and in the process of making that Locomotion it creates heat and that heat if not dealt with can shut down your engine well in the mitochondria you've got this process occurring making ATP which is basically the currency of energy in in the cell and in the process of doing this it makes oxidative stress oxidate reactive oxygen species if you don't deal with those reactive oxygen species that could shut down the mitochondria and um and and quite truly just about every single chronic disease that we have in this country whether it's diabetes hypertension heart disease dementia uh all of those they all has have at the root of them mitochondrial dysfunction and this this goes to a much bigger picture of the mitochondrial Theory of Aging we know that after 40 years the output of mitochondria which is ATP drops by about 70% 70 70 can you imagine being in your house and somehow the energy production to your house drops by 70% can you imagine what an impact that would have on just about every function that goes on in your house this is exactly what's happening in the cell and so what does this have to do with sunlight well here's what they've shown that the mitochondria actually make on site melatonin in orders of magnitude higher concentration that is made in the pineal gland really yes so they've actually done the work where they have serotonin they are actually labeling the carbon in serotonin and showing that that melatonin in orders of magnitude higher concentration are being made on site in the mitochondria okay I have to ask about this yes most people including me are familiar with melatonin secretion from the pineal gland correct being suppressed by light via some neural circuit Pathways that go from eye to supermatic nucleus to there there's a a circuitous Loop to the you know uh the brain stem and then up uh um to the pineer so light suppresses melatonin release from the pineal we know that yes in that context melatonin is the hormone of darkness and causes sleepiness correct what is the role of melatonin in the context that you are describing because if indeed infrared and long other long wavelength light is causing the production of melatonin from the mitochondria in the rest of the body I'm assuming that's not to increase our levels of sleepiness that is correct and I do know that melatonin is a powerful antioxidant yes so I'm guessing that next you're going to tell me that it is combating or the reactive oxygen species that are produced as a function of mitochondrial uh metabolism absolutely okay absolutely so the the mitochondria make melatonin on site this is not being secreted into the blood it's being used on site so this is not being used as a secondary Messenger to tell the body anything about circadian rhythm this is a extremely powerful as you know extremely powerful antioxidants it's actually one of the most powerful antioxidants in the human body it actually upregulates the glutathione system by regulation so what this melatonin does is it's able to mop up these reactive oxygen species let's let's back up a little bit there reactive oxygen species what are they so if you if you let's get let's get nerdy let's get into the details in the mitochondria the way it works is that you burn fuels you burn carbohydrates proteins and fats and as a result of that you make these very reduced agents nadh fadh2 they go to the electron transport chain and as just as the Colorado River as it goes down through various different dams and then dumps out into the Gulf of California the same thing happens with these very highly charged and electronegative electrons they as they start to fall down and get trans erred from one uh enzyme to another they cause the out out production or the out transfer of protons into the in membrane space the problem is though is when you finally get done with these electrons they've been completely spent there's nothing else to accept them and the only thing that can actually do that is something so Electro negative that it would actually take these electrons and that's oxygen and that's the reason why we breathe oxygen it's it's because we need an electron acceptor for these spent electrons it's very near and dear to my heart as a pulmonologist and critical care specialist I we need to have oxygen if you don't have oxygen things shut down very quickly for those that aren't familiar with these biochemical Pathways maybe one way for them to think about it is that free electrons are not a good thing in this system you don't want electrons floating around and in these biochemical steps that convert energy into the stuff that cells can use more readily to move and do everything that we do right electrons are kicked off oxygen can work with those free electrons I'm trying to use language here that you know divorces us from the from the uh you know the classic biochemical pathway so that more people can grasp it because it's really a beautiful mechanism it so if you have a a positive charge to effectively work with the the free negative charge then um the system is is stabilized or at least isn't pushed in in the direction of inflammation these is many people have heard of free radicals exactly and that's what we're referring to you want to you want to offset the free radicals correct and to the biochemists out there and the biologist I'm using the term offset Loosely um okay so melatonin in the context of how sunlight can activate melatonin within cells maybe it's um worth pointing out to people that when the pineal gland releases melatonin to make you sleepy that's an endocrine or hormone type mechanism hormones act on local tissues and more distant tissues in the body corre phermones act between bodies right right in the context that you're describing melatonin is acting within cell correct okay so let's let's think of the let's think of this dichotomy the mitochondria always needs to have antioxidants otherwise it's going to become damaged like if these free radicals are produced the very next molecule that they bump into it's going to change it and if that's the mitochondria the mitochondria is going to be damaged so it needs a cooling system just like your car has a cooling system for heat the mitochondria needs a cooling system for oxidative stress what's the cooling system during the day sunlight comes in activates these uh it upregulates melatonin which does that well when there is no sunlight what is the cooling system then it's the system that we've always known about and the reason why we've always known about it is because we can draw blood samples it's much easier to detect melatonin in the blood because we've developed techniques first to detect things in the blood but what we're talking about now is how do we detect things not only intracellular but intra organel that's much more sophisticated yet now we do have the technology to show and the amount of melatonin we're talking about is 20 times higher than we're picking up in the blood so at night the system is melatonin is secreted from the pineal gland it goes into the blood diffuses into the cell diffuses into the mitochondria and does the job do you think that that role of melatonin from the pineal at night is part of the reason why sleep is so restorative absolutely it's probably no coincidence then that when we fall asleep it's at least correlated with and in many ways caused by the reduction in core body temperature like it's very unusual for melatonin levels to be high when body temperature is high yeah these things normally are coordinated at night I'm not aware that it actually drops body temperature but it might I I'm just not aware of the literature but what you're describing is amazing I mean first of all most people's minds including mine are going to be blown by the fact that long wavelength light can actually go through clothing yes and skin and so you can imagine that if you have a minimum of clothing on whatever is appropriate for that context and you get some sunlight on your skin even on a cloudy day yes some of this should be coming through we could talk about that it's more UV light short wavelength light that's going to break through thick cloud cover correct uh cloud cover because it's water vapor and water vapor does absorb infrared it will be substantially less but much more than being inside and on a clear day or partially cloudy day uh we're getting a lot of red light long wavelength light and infrared and near infrared light coming through absolutely I think a lot of people don't realize that because in this age of of red light devices and infrared light devices um of which I own one and I love and I use um but people forget that the uh the primordial and arguably I'll I'll say the best source of red light and near infrared light and infrared light of the sort that we're talking about right now is going to come from the sun right I mean there's there's no device that can replace the sun 100% okay 100% yeah okay great so how does this keep us safe from infection as long as we're here yeah um what else is it doing to offset the 70% reduction in mitochondrial function because what we're talking about now is um the role of melatonin within cells to um lower temperature and reduce these uh reactive oxygen species yes does that somehow offset the reduction in mitochondria that normally occurs it does and so there's a so the increase in melatonin from infrared uh radiation going into the mitochondria is one aspect there's a whole host of other aspects that occur there is cytochrome 4 oxidase again one of those enzymes in the electron transport chain can absorb infrared light there's nitric oxide what what the whole effect of this is and the bottom line is is that when you have red light to near infrared light getting in that deep there is a increase in the efficiency of the mitochondria so this is the key point because if in fact with the theory of mitochondrial aging that we're having a decrease in the efficiency of the mitochondria as we get older if there is something that we can do to reverse that or to at least prevent that from happening that can have a tremendous impact in our health overall so two points one uh one point about infrared and its characteristic and then number two let's actually get to some data because we're we're saying a bunch of things but what we really need is evidence-based stuff okay so the first thing there's one other thing that I should mention about the effect of infrared light especially in nature and that is is that not only can It penetrate through clothes you may remember the Sony cam uh night vision thing uh back in the 90s where Sony came up with a night vision camera that you could take pictures at night and some enterprising youth probably a man fig figured out that you could use it during the day and you could see through clothes and presumably they took that off the market they took it off the market pretty quick yes um but there's one other thing that's really important to understand too and that is that believe it or not but the leaves on trees and grass anything with chlorophyll is highly reflective of infrared light what that means is that if you go out outside on a sunny day versus going outside on a sunny day surrounded by Green green spaces you're going to get probably two three four times more infrared light in that environment than you would without that environment if you you could you could check this out you go to Google and just type in infrared photography and click images and you will see any kind of infrared filtered light when it shows a tree or grass it it looks like it's lit up like it's got snow on it it's bright white it's very reflective on a hot summer day if you go outside and touch some object that's in the sun it's going to be extremely hot touch a leaf it's it's not hot at all it's because it's reflecting that light in fact the coolest place in a garden on a hot summer day is where it's under a tree because all of that all of that infrared light is being reflected off so and and just to jump ahead here but we know from years and Decades of data that people who live in green spaces have reduced diabetes reduced hypertension reduced mortality just living in green spaces is it possible to tease away the effect from the other things associated with living in green spaces because fortunately our audience is train to think scientifically and they'll know well it's not necessarily causal right people live in green spaces tend to walk more they tend to perhaps eat more fruits and vegetables and on and on so so uh getting on to that uh there was a study that was just done in Louisville Kentucky four square miles they measured everybody in that four square miles h R hscrp what's hscp it's basically it's a surrogate marker for inflammation in the body and then they did this they did something incredible they brought in 8,000 plus trees mature trees and they planted those trees in that four square mile area took them about a year two to three years later they went out nothing the the income of these people living in this four square mile area did not change the presumably they did not do any exercise programs in this area everything was the same the only thing they did was plant trees and they went out and they rechecked everybody's highly sensitive CRP levels they drop by 133% wow and that's about on the order almost on the order of Doing exercise three times a week I should mention that um crpc reactive protein has been associated with a number of blinding eye diseases um uh associated with inflammation and basically um everything bad you can imagine in every organ of the body heart attack uh esia yeah this kind of thing um incredible yeah so let's let's actually look at some data so we've talked about you know any astute person listening to this is like okay so you talked about a lot of observational stuff is there any Interventional stuff so I I uh turned to Glenn Jeffrey who's um he's in the department of Opthalmology you you know him well actually at uh University College London and he's done some really interesting experiments in the last two to three years looking at red light one of them was uh the first one he did was he took um older subjects who had difficulty with color sensitivity in their vision and he exposed them to 670 nanometer which is red it's visible light for just three minutes in the morning it only worked in the morning in this case which is interesting and he showed that there was a 177% increase in color sensitivity that lasted for days now why would that be again you should know that the retina is the the one tissue in the human body that has the highest concentration of mitochondria and if you understand what's going on in light and I know you do but our audience might not is when you have visible light coming in to the retina it is causing a photochemical reaction that requires a tremendous amount of energy vesicles budding off things uh diffusing electrical conductions and it has to happen very very quickly otherwise what you see is going to be there as a blur so this is constantly being updated so it's no surprise that you know mitochondria is so uh concentrated there so what's actually going on there what we believe is going on is that this red light is actually stimulating these mitochondria to produce more ATP and it's improving the sensitivity but the the the cord or the the Pella resistance was his next study which he did where he took 30 subjects he gave them 75 gram of glucose and in a blinded way so they couldn't tell what was if the light was on or off he exposed their backs to the same 670 nanometer lights and he he monitored their glucose over time uh over the next two hours basically multiple points and what did he find he found that those that were exposed to red light and didn't know it had lower glucose concentrations so he surmised that the mitochondria were working more efficiently they were using up more energy and this is the reason why the glucose didn't Peak as high but he couldn't be sure unless he also monitored for the output of metabolism so what happens when the mitochondria is working it's making carbon dioxide so he also measured carbon dioxide and sure enough those subjects that had the intervention of the red light had statistically significantly higher carbon dioxide levels on exhalation awesome too bad the guys in England that's a joke about for my British friends uh yeah it tends to be very overcast there but the does come out in England as well so so here we have basically this is a randomized controlled intervention trial which showed that red light's doing this and there's a whole host of other uh other trials that show the same thing so when I started to see this in my patients and and what caused me to even do this you might ask what's a pulmonary Critical Care doc talking about mitochondria in the eye what really spur me on to look at this was when I was in the middle of something called the co pandemic and I was seeing patients in my IU that were that were dying and what were they dying of covid but what were they in there for they had things like diabetes hypertension dementia um all of these things which have at the root of them mitochondrial dysfunction so what we have is is an epidemic I believe of mitochondrial dysfunction and how are we going to repair that I think sunlight is one of the ways to do it so I started looking around at the evidence um there was a study that was done Oxford and the University of leadon in the Netherlands where they looked at about 10,000 subjects they just drew their blood and they said let's just check triglycerides and insulin sensitivity and then what they did was they looked over the previous 10 days at the weather report and they were able to show that by the hour the more sunlight that there was in the previous seven days that actually predicted an improvement in insulin sensitivity and a reduction in triglycerides that fast over a 7-Day period of time there was another study that was done this was in Sweden uh so this was an epidemiological study but maybe actually showed some causation they looked at Swedish women it was about 30,000 Swedish women living in uh Sweden at the time of course and they divided them into three groups those that avoided the sun those that got moderate sun exposure and those that got a lot of sun exposure Ure and what they showed after following them for 20 years so a long period of time was that those women that were out in the sun not only had lower all cause mortality but they also had lower cardiovascular mortality and what's really interesting is they had lower cancer mortality and it was in a dose response curve which suggests Bradford Hill criteria that there was maybe some causation here what was really interesting about that study is that they looked at smoking so what was the difference here it wasn't a small difference it was actually such a large difference that the sunlight made that they were able to show that those women in Sweden who were in this study who went out into the sun avidly and smoked had the same mortality as those women who avoided the Sun and didn't smoke the first thing that hit my mind was is what do we what do we do to people here in this country that want to smoke we tell them to go outside I'm not encouraging people to smoke clearly the best outcomes are going to be from not smoking um and from getting sunlight but it is a remarkable study I mean this is certainly I smoking would be under the te for temperance that would be where I would put a new start we we would not want to do that but it that same study was repeated basically again University of Edinburgh they did a biobank study 10 times the amount of people 400,000 repeated the study showed exactly the same both men and women uh except this time they actually measured UVA so they used uh ultraviolet a radiation as a surrogate for infrared and for sunlight in general they found exactly the same thing reduction in mortality such so is the evidence that even dermatologists are starting to rethink there was an article that was published in the journal of investigative Dermatology by Richard Weller and uh the name of that article was published last year it was titled uh sunlight time for a rethink and he said look there are societies that are seeing this and they're already saying that there's a potential benefit for getting out into the sun yeah the um dermatologist that I hosted on this podcast Dr Teo solmani um also happens to be a Derm oncologist so his specialty is skin cancer anwers and um I was surprised to learn but you know we've talked about several times Now offline as well too and I I was surprised to learn that the sunlight induced cancers of the skin while they do exist that's real right get too much UV exposure you're going to um age your skin more rapidly you're uh going to increase the likelihood that you'll get a skin cancer however this was really surprising to me according to him there is no evidence that sunlight induces the deadly types of cancers like melanoma those are more genetically determined yeah yeah that's not to say that sunlight can't damage skin but it is really interesting that more and more data and clinical trials included are pointing to exactly what you're saying which is that more sunlight exposure is beneficial and the risks of sunlight exposure can largely be offset by limiting your exposure to excessive UV and it's pretty easy nowadays with any app um a lot of zeroc cost apps out there I can put uh links to one or two in the show note captions that I like that have no affiliation to whatsoever by the way um we'll tell you when the UV index is highest it's in the middle of the day typically and so it's possible to get plenty of sunlight on your skin without exposing yourself to excessive UV yeah and I even take it a step further because we we know that a single layer of clothing can actually is pretty good at blocking ultraviolet lights right but remember what we talked about infrared infrared can penetrate through so if someone is fair skin and they're concerned about getting skin damage wear a broad rimmed hat put a put a a long sleeve shirt on but get outside because that's where the infrared especially if you're around uh you know Green uh green uh shrubs and and and leaves and things because those are a lot of infrared light we know that green spaces are are are beneficial in terms of that and we talked about you know Louisville Kentucky that there's a benefit there just by putting the tree there I love those data I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor ag1 ag1 is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink with adaptogens I've been taking ag1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring this podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still take ag1 is because it is the highest quality and most complete foundational nutritional supplement what that means is that ag1 ensures that you're getting all the necessary vitamins minerals and other micronutrients to form a strong foundation for your daily Health ag1 also has probiotics and prebiotics that support a healthy gut microbiome your gut microbiome consists of trillions of microorganisms that line your digestive tract and impact things such as your immune system status your metabolic Health your hormone health and much more so I've consistently found that when I take ag1 daily my digestion is improved my immune system is more robust and my mood and mental focus are at their best in fact if I could take just one supp supplement that supplement would be ag1 if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 with your order of ag1 again go to drink a1.com huberman to claim this special offer today's episode is also brought To Us by element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need but nothing you don't that means the electrolytes sodium magnesium and potassium all in the correct ratios but no sugar proper hydration is critical for optimal brain and body function even a slight degree of dehydration can diminish cognitive and physical performance it's also important that you get adequate electrolytes the electrolytes sodium magnesium and potassium are vital for the functioning of all the cells in your body especially your neurons or your nerve cells drinking element dissolved in water makes it extremely easy to ensure that you're getting adequate hydration and adequate electrolytes to make sure that I'm getting proper amounts of hydration and electrolytes I dissolve one packet of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up in the morning and I drink that basically first thing in the morning I also drink element dissolved in water during any kind of physical exercise that I'm doing especially on hot days when I'm sweating a lot and therefore losing a lot of water and electrolytes they have a bunch of different great tasting flavors of element they have watermelon Citrus Etc frankly I love them all if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element.com huberman to claim a free element sample pack with the purchase of any element drink mix again that's drink element.com huberman to claim a free sample pack in terms of your original question which is uh getting back to influenza or flu or things so there's a St there's a great study that I always love to talk about uh in terms of this and it was U actually done by Harvard it was a Harvard Kennedy School uh um which is not the medical school this is the public policy politics school and what they did was they looked at this very question of influenza and why do we always get it in the winter time and what's what's potentially beneficial for it and the problem is is that we always have this influenza season which is in the wintertime we can talk about why that might be I would suggest to you that it's because that's when we have the shortest day of the year but we also have other things that happen at that time right what else is happening we're having parties at that time there's there's Thanksgiving there's new years it's cold you know does the does the temperature have anything to do with it uh we're also inside because it's cold so what is it that's actually doing it well 2009 was a banner year because 2009 was the year that we had the H1N1 pandemic and that was a boon for us the reason is is because not because of the deaths that we had but from scientific standpoint this epidemic actually peaked in the summertime and it was in areas where the humidity was sometimes high and sometimes it was low and sometimes the temperature was high sometimes the temperature was low sometimes the sun was out sometimes it was cloudy in other words we uncoupled the influenza virus in 2009 from it being in the winter time and all of those things that were associated so now we have all of these data points and so Harvard went to work at looking at all these data points they looked at solar uh radiation data at that time and they were actually able to look specifically where that person came from and what was the solar radiation in that particular area and what they came up with was abs absolutely they said quote sunlight strongly protects against getting influenza it was a amazing study um I'm reminded of a study that was published in covid this was published in 2021 and it was looking at this very question is it temperature is it humidity or is it sunlight so what they did was they looked at the Autumn surge of covid in the winter time in Europe in Autumn actually and they asked this question when there was the surge date in this country whatever country it was in Europe when did it happen and what were the things that caused it to happen so they put all the data out there for temperature and it was a flatline there was temperature did not predict which country how the country got uh covid-19 when the surge started to happen they did the same thing for humidity Flatline when they got to Latitude it was a perfect correlation in other words as the sun in the wintertime started to peel back off of the Northern Hemisphere and started to sink below the equator and when there was a critical period of time that the day shortened to the point where at first Finland got a the shortest day or short enough day and then and then Germany and then further on what it showed was l ude actually perfectly predicted when the surge dates would happen starting off with Finland and ending up with Greece at the bottom wow do you see influenza at the equator you do see certainly influenza at the equator but what's really interesting about that is that if you look at for instance uh the the influenza mortality in the United States obviously in the northern hemisphere what you will see is you will see it Peak generally one to three weeks after the shortest day of the year which is around now in in December and January now if you look at Australia what do you think you'd see the inverse exactly it's it's actually in Australia the influenza season Peaks late June early July so if you now now go look at something like the Singapore Singapore is I think within 100 miles of the Equator you will see that in Singapore there are there is influenza Peaks and troughs but it's not seasonal it's just almost random is it not the case that um in hospitals and other um recovery Wards as it were uh that there used to be classically there was a uh a habit of putting people out into the sun like sun decks on the roof of hospitals and things of that sort I'm smiling because you you're absolutely correct you're absolutely correct and and as I started to go through this and look at this I started saying to myself we need to get people out in the sun and then I realized not only am I not the only one saying this but certainly this was being done 100 years ago 150 years ago just as a speculation why do you think we've migrated away from this frankly basic biochemical cellular understanding of how the Sun can benefit us I mean I feel like so much attention has been paid to how the Sun can damage our skin and quote unquote give us skin cancer that perhaps we overshot the Mark I think it has to do with scientific reductionism and what I mean to say by that is we've had a lot of data that shows that ultraviolet lights can cause cancer and so we've assumed that anything that has ultraviolet light can cause cancer there's this complete dismissal of the fact that this ultraviolet light is packaged for the entire existence of human nature along with infrared lights and and if you it's it's a beautiful thing when you start to look at this because you start to realize that the infrared we we never get blue light or ultraviolet light ever without the presence of infrared lights unless it comes from an artificial Source exactly so this is really the first time in human history that we've had this preponderance of short wavelength AKA blue uh and green light in the absence of red light in fact maybe maybe we should just spend a couple of moments talking about what kind of sunlight exposures you recommend for people Depending on time of year yeah and then after that I'd like to talk to you briefly about this shift away from incandescent bulbs to uh indoor lighting with LEDs but just to make sure that um I don't move us along before uh providing some of the key uh takeaways yes how much sunlight should we get each day in the shorter days of winter and in the fall and and when should this be done in the Jeffree study it was cleared that there was circadian regulation as you mentioned getting that sunlight excuse me getting that red light infrared light into one's eyes early in the day was important if I'm living a standard life of of work and job and people are managing kids and all sorts of things sometimes it's hard to get into the sunlight because you're just following a schedule how much time each day do you recommend independent of anything get you know related to getting sunlight in one's eyes for circadian rhythm setting right so how much time what time of day yeah and what frequency across the week excellent question and and you've hit on on exactly the issue uh based on Glen Jeff's studies based on another study that was actually done in Brazil it was actually an Interventional study in covid that showed that just 15 minutes a day for 7 days was enough to actually get people with covid out of the hospital faster this was a randomized placebo control double blinded amazing study 940 nanometers so when I talk to Glen Jeffrey about this he says he sees it in humans he sees it in bees he sees it in insects it's all the same the mitochondria behave exactly the same when you say 940 nanometers you're talking about long wavelength light coming from an artificial Source correct okay yeah that was 940 and it was actually very low it was about 2.9 mowatt per square centimeter so low energy most people yes um are not going to own a a red and far in a red a far red or an infrared light so yes um I just want to emphasize again for people you can get that wavelength and all the other relevant wavelengths from the Sun exactly that's your that's your red light therapy exactly and this is what I'm trying to say it's like this is not like some powerful laser that they were using this is 2.9 Ms I mean sunlight all of sunlight is about 100 Mills per per centimeter squared by time it reaches at through the atmosphere through the atmosphere so 130 uh when it hits the Atmosphere by the time it hits you it's about 100 if you're looking at just in for red light we're talking about 20 uh Mill per square cm and so this was 2.9 at a very specific wavelength so something that's completely doable okay and so what they did it was 15 minutes a day for seven days and what uh what Glenn Jeffrey was telling me is that Roger it he says Roger it doesn't matter if I do if it's in insects if it's in bees if it's in humans once you hit a certain point 15 20 minutes diminishing marginal utility the the the the Improvement after that point is so minimal that you only need about 15 to 20 minutes that's why he was able to do his experiment in the eye about 3 minutes was all that was necessary so is this 15 minutes outside in the first three hours of your of your conventional day as I call it because people would say well the sun comes up later this conventional Day meaning after the sun after the sun has crossed the Horizon has R I don't think it matters I don't really think it matters I think it what would what would matter is if there's a lot of ultraviolet light which would be when the sun is high and for people who are skin sensitive that could be an issue but if you're covering up it doesn't matter and here's the issue the issue is is that when you need it the most in the winter time is when it's the hardest to get so you really have to make a concerted effort and for a lot of people and this is this is what happens probably right after November and probably going through to mid January is this is what happens people get up in the morning they go to their car they get into their car they drive to work the sun's not up yet they get to their work the sun comes up but they're inside then what happens is they get done with work the sun is already down they come home from work and so there literally is weeks on end that occur where they're not even getting 15 minutes of sunlight and I think this is the reason why we have the influenza surge at this time uh if you look to see the EPA did a study and they looked at Americans 93% of our time is spent inside 86 inside a building 6 to 7% inside of a vehicle and this is a relatively new thing I mean certainly when I was growing up yeah if I came home and had a snack after school I was getting kicked out of the house to go outside you know it was it was uh routine for parents to tell kids they had to go outside yeah and I think there's also um it's also the case as you mentioned that um we're working later or at least on devices later into the evening yeah which means there's more exposure to short wavelength light from devices and artificial sources absolutely absolutely so my recommendation which is what the original question was is take your lunch break outside it's something as simple as getting outside even if it's at lunchtime yes the ultraviolet is probably the highest at that point but if that's the only time that you're going to get sunlight take it now for some you know we can say this I can say this I live in Southern California I'm blessed by 300 and some odd days of sunlight every year what do you do you do when you're in Boston what do you do if you're in New York what if you do if you're in England in Sweden and these places where there isn't a lot of light well there's a study that was done looking at infrared lamps right so you've got to be careful there because if the infrared lamps are too high in amplitude this result from infrared light in the body is something known as a basic response and that's really important to understand don't come into this if you're going to get a red light therapy and think that more is better because more may not be better um you actually could do detriment if you have the red light at too high of a level so I would match it to what we're getting from the Sun as you said the sunlight is your best infrared or red lamp so there was a study that was done looking at well-being and they did a red lamp Red Light lamp infrared light so it was coupled with 850 I think was the nanometer so that is definitely in the infrared Spectrum can't see that cannot see it and they had it set up at a desk that some guy was sitting in front of for 4 hours a day for 8 weeks and they did the study and they they did it in the summertime and they did it in the winter time and this is really telling there was no effect on the subject when they looked at those that had it in the summertime I would say probably because they were getting plenty of infrared light elsewhere it was only they only showed a statistically significant effect in the wintertime and so if you look at influenza I would even go beyond that look at a chart of the United States throughout the entire year and look at all of the natural causes of death not just influenza and pneumonia look at cardiac disease look at look at uh kidney disease Alzheimer's disease all of those deaths go up all at the same time and they all go up about 1 to 3 weeks after the shortest day of the year and they all come down and they all are at the nator about 1 to 3 weeks after the longest day of the year when you see that and you you just start to just digest what you're seeing there and then you start to understand that infrared light from the sun which we have filtered out with LEDs and all this we can get to that all of that's gone that we're spending 93% of our our time indoors put that all together and the fact that infrared light helps the mitochondria and the fact that the mitochondria is at the sort of the core of all of these chronic diseases that we're battling it it it really wakes you up and you start to realize that maybe the lowest hanging fruit that we can do right now today for literally no money is simply to just work on getting more sun exposure in the winter time two questions one um it's hard to attach a single number to this but uh what fraction of the Obesity epidemic that we observe in the United States do you think um is caused by altered interactions with sunlight or you know artificial light and its consequences or put differently let let me put it let me phrase the question differently If This Were if we were designing an experiment and I wanted to wager the hypothesis that exposure to 15 minutes a day of sunlight could help reduce um you know adapost tissue Etc independent of caloric intake I know this is kind of a heretical idea yeah independent of additional exercise and all that and I designed the experiment with you and we said okay people are going to go outside for 15 minutes a day they're going to wear short sleeves if they can or just simple long sleeve clothing they're going to get this long wavelength light from the sun 15 minutes a day yeah based on what you told us about the the light shown on the back and the lowered glucose response yes independent of all other variables what percentage Improvement in um uh sort of the overall all metrics of obesity and metabolic disease do you think we you would predict if we were just going to you know we bet a sushi dinner for instance you know I guess another way of asking the question is is at what level would I be really surp if it was 50% I would be surprised right same yeah if it was 20 to 30% I think that would probably be where it is but that's significant that's still significant okay so that's that's very helpful um I think a lot of people hearing about the role of sunlight and long wavelength light in particular its potential influ inuence on improving overall immune system function metabolic Health Etc might think that this sounds a little bit kind of biacky because the moment we get into red lights that's sort of like cold plunges it's kind of immediately associated with kind of uh biohacking people say it's Bro Science this kind of thing I just wanted to remind people that in the early 1900s a Nobel Prize was given for the use of phototherapy which is what we're describing for the treatment of Lupus so the idea that um that specific wavelengths of light can be used in order to treat cellular health or offset uh cellular disease is not a new idea at all and you mentioned this earlier but I just wanted to underscore that for people um the other way of looking at all this is that it's it's primitive so some people will say oh this is biohacking right other people say well this is just primitive like get sunlight of course but you you made a very key point which is that the way we interact with light and it in particular with sunlight nowadays is so disrupted compared to how it was just 10 15 especially 20 years ago I would just encourage people to pay attention for one week to how much time you're actually getting outside now a few people will already be getting a lot of time outside but just pay attention how much time each day do you actually get outside yeah without sunglasses onh and just measure your total exposure to outdoor time let alone sunlight I I think that's just an important experiment for people to do and because when one does that you start to realize my goodness I'm hardly getting outside at all yeah there was a study that was done uh looking at just this except they actually used watches that uh was able to detect how much light it wasn't infrared light but just Total light and the the name of the the study was basically you know dark days and bright nights and and that is associated with higher mortality we know of course about Bright Nights not being good so not having a dark room to sleep in these are things that can impair melatonin that's associated with all all sorts of of bad things but the dark days was something that um we really had not seen and it was very interesting they actually could show by the hour that if you were having light coming in exactly what that did to your mortality and mortality went up dramatically as you were still in in daylight about midnight but right around 7 o'clock in the morning 8:00 in the morning if you were out there and you're getting light now instead of uh light being a liability it was now a benefit and it dropped dramatically I also want to point out that when it's raining out or when it's very cold out even when it's dark and cloudy quote unquote dark and cloudy there's far more photons coming through the cloud cover during the day than at night people I can't tell you if I had a dollar for every time somebody said to me online and in person there's no sunlight where I live listen go outside on the shortest day of the year yeah go outside folks and look at how bright it is at 10:00 a.m. or even 2:00 p.m. compare that to the middle of the night there is sunlight unless you live in a cave there's Sun sunlight all year round it's just it's just striking so this morning you know it's uh for Southern California it's pretty overcast today there it's a Misty Rain a little bit more and I didn't want to go outside and get my sunlight this morning but I know I was going to be in studio all day and so I went downstairs and I put on a beanie cap and a hoodie and I just got outside with sunglasses and um got some sunlight in my eyes you know it's it's really bright outside even when it's raining yeah it's really bright outside even when it's storming and I think people somehow they think that if it's not a clear sunny day there's no sunlight to be had correct and they many uh gems that you're providing us today but one key take takeaway is I want people to understand there is sunlight all year round yeah I yes unless you live truly a Subterranean life that you are underground there is sunlight during the daytime yeah and if there is we have to work on that um to your point about it being primitive you know um I was looking at the history of this and it was actually very interesting to me you know we used to have uh tuberculosis sanitariums at very high altitude and part of that treatment was getting out into the the Sun at very high altitude you have less atmosphere more ultraviolet light coming in more light in general coming in and when I started to look at this I I found it was very interesting what people started to say and what what these people were actually saying at the time about sunlight um you know in terms of these these people these Physicians and these healthc care providers back in the 1800s they didn't have all of the scientific accoutrements that we have today they didn't have x-rays and things of that nature but one thing that they were very very good at probably better than we are good at is their power of observation they they were able to get a stethoscope put it on the chest listen to the the space between the second heart sound and the opening snap and be able to say this person's got severe mitro stenosis say this is the one you need to operate on and they would do that and and sure enough when they opened it up sure enough this is the one that had you know so the power of observation was probably better back in the 1800s so what do you have you have people like Florence Nightingale who is the the founder of modern nursing and she was there uh you know in um uh there during the uh the Crimean War taking care of British uh soldiers and she wrote down I'm paraphrasing basically what she said she said look when it comes to treating the whole patient the one thing that more than anything else is beneficial for these these soldiers to recover is fresh air but she said a very close second is direct sunlight getting them out into Sunshine getting them out out into into direct sunlight um when I was looking at this the Smithsonian Institute a couple years ago a few years ago put out their top 100 most influential Americans of all time one of them was this lady she's she's most translated female author in in the world her name is Ellen G white and she had a third grade education but she was also very interested in health health reform and she wrote at that time in the 1800s that we ought to be getting out into the sunlight that that's makes a big difference interestingly something else that she said that I found really amazing and this is they're writing this before we understand circadian rhythm before we understand melatonin she wrote down she's like hey this idea of keeping the lights on after after 9:00 it's a wretched Health destroying habit every light should be extinguished she said after 9:00 so I know about her sayings a little bit because she was the the founder of lumaland University which is where I went to school so but uh just we had this knowledge as you said we we had hospitals that were designed specifically to get people out of the hospital and into the sunlight like you could see the architecture was designed for this why don't we do this today I think we ought to but I I kind of have a sense you asked the question why don't we do this today I have patients that I take care of now that I understand this I have patients that I have in the Intensive Care Unit that I want to get outside in the sunlight I actually try to get them out it's difficult to do these people are critical um the people that we admit to the hospitals today are far sicker than the people that we admitted to sanitariums and and hospitals in the 1800s you you have to make sure that they don't desaturate you got to take the oxygen tank out there with them you've got to make sure that they don't have a code I mean you're outside right so you're outside of the the bowels of the hospital where your support system is it's a little bit of a risk to get those patients out there nevertheless I've convinced um some of my hospital staff to do that and I've I've had a number of success stories where we've had patients that were ready to be intubated and we we got them outside in the sunlight and they steadily improved dramatically after days of getting worse and uh and they got better there was a lady that actually contacted me her name is Amy hanm H NM yhr if you want to look up she's on social media her son this is a really amazing story her son contract basically at the age of 15 got uh leukemia got put on chemotherapy and this was in Minnesota fortunately it was in the summer time and he got admitted to the hospital with what they call neutropenic fever very high fevers very low white accounts as a result of the chemotherapy and his immune system was was completely shot and unfortunately he developed a very severe fungal infection in his lung called mucor and it just basically eats up the lung goes right to the blood vessels he got so bad that they there was there was only one solution that they had at the time and that was to take out the left lung so they took out the left lung and he continued to get worse the right lung became infected he started to to get worse had higher fever they had a meeting with the family 15 years old completely with it realizing that he's dying and they have to tell him that he's dying so they made him what they call no code or DNR and uh the staff came to him and you can imagine and I've been in this position before you've trying to do everything you possibly can and you just you can't do anything else so they came to him the 15-year-old and they said you know this is it do you have any basically last wishes and you know Amy his mom told me that he'd like to play outside so he told them you know without any knowledge about what we've just been talking about he just this is his dying wish take me outside just I just want to go outside and and you know that nursing staff will move Heaven and Earth to do something that the patient requests to do uh even though it's not going to you know benefit them they still want this is dying wish they're going to do it so they they hooked up oxygen tanks they uh they they got this this 15-year-old boy in a in a hospital bed outside on BiPAP with auction tanks for 5 hours a day um his mom was telling me they also uh using something called a firefly device where they were just basically Shining Light onto him to see if it would work you know how the story ends he did not die in two days like they told him he got better his fever went away his oxygen requirements came down and and I'm not telling you this as a as a as a proof that this is what happens but you have to realize that he was in the hospital for six weeks under underneath you know LED lighting and as soon as he got outside fever went away and make a long story short after five days he came back inside they repeated the CT scan and she sent me the CT scans I've seen them we actually did a a little thing on our our megc channel on it and um it was the disease was almost gone there's no explanation to this day they don't have an explanation still alive today still alive he's getting chemotherapy he he went from basically and of course he he's missing a lung but he still has that lung he's on he's getting the the antifungal medication there's no sign of the fungus anywhere so this is an anecdotal story it doesn't prove anything and I don't I don't I don't present it as proof the things that I present as proof is randomized control trials epidemiological trials with with dose response curves these are things that we can actually show the science with the reason why I bring it up is because it shows what is it that we would need to do to get this type of treatment it's it's not easy to do but if there is a will there's a way to do it I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors function last year I became a function member after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing function provides over 100 Advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily Health this snapshot offers you with insights on your heart health Hormone Health immune functioning nutrient level and much more they've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful Plastics and tests for pases or forever chemicals function not only provides testing of over a 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from Top Doctors who are expert in the relevant areas for example in one of my first tests with function I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood function not only helped me detect that but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels which included limiting my tuna consumption I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with Knack and acetylcysteine both of which can support glutathione production and detoxification and I should say by taking a second function test that approach worked comprehensive blood testing is vitally important there's so many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be detected in a blood test the problem is blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated in contrast I've been super impressed by functions Simplicity and at the level of cost it is very affordable as a consequence I decided to join their scientific Advisory Board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast if you'd like to try function you can go to function health.com huberman function currently has a weight list of over 250,000 people but they're offering Early Access to hubman podcast listeners again that's function health.com huberman to get early access to function it's a spectacular story um it by any account um I wanted to just touch on the fact that there's no replacement for sunlight getting patients outside is hard yeah um and at the same time most people listening to this aren't fortunately are not patients of um thank goodness many people however have relatives or themselves are elderly um as people get older they tend to slow down get outside less they're any uh fortunate exceptions to this but one of the setups that I created for myself um that I think is certainly feasible for a lot of people is the following uh well first of all I always make it a point to get outside and get sunlight in my eyes yeah rain or shine right um and regardless of where I'm traveling and uh Etc I do that every single day if I miss a day it's only because of something like a like a flight where I happen to be on a plane at the time of you know sunrise or something in any but I have a setup that I um constructed for myself that is basically a 10,000 Lux light these are available I don't have any relationship to 10,000 Lux light sources um those 10,000 Lux light sources tend to be short wavelength shifted they tend to be very blue they're white light but I don't think they have power across the visible spectrum I think they're they're very a red light and infrared diminish they tend to be um very blue and green light and enriched and it shows up as very bright white light so that's what um I put in front of me when I first wake up if the sun isn't out yet but now I've started um putting a red light near infrared light next to it and I'll spend the first couple minutes of my day um usually as I journal or do something like that or sometimes just with my eyes closed just pleasantly you know uh facing in the direction of the 10,000 Lux white light and the red light near infrared light and I must say um this is anecdotal but that the combination of the two not only does it wake certainly wake you up the white light will do that alone yeah uh we know the biological basis for that but I I have noticed a a tremendous Improvement in energy mood Focus Etc that comes from the addition of this red light near infrared light this is not an advertisement for red light near infrared light I promise uh although you know I this podcast does have a relationship to a medical grade red light devices I I but I mention this because what I'm trying to simulate there is sunlight but I still get outside and get sunlight so I just mentioned this setup because it seems to me that hospitals should be able to create this setup it's for a minimum of cost certainly less cost than it takes to maintain a patient for one day exactly I mean the cost of maintaining a patient in uh for inpatient uh care is so high medical staff the the disposables the dis the the dis the um actual disposing of the disposables the janitorial to after the ca like I mean Hospital costs are outrageously high now of course people will hear this and think well that's exactly what hospitals want right like they can Char the longer you stay it's like a hotel the longer that you stay the longer they can charge you or your insurance and I'm not a conspiracy theory type yeah but it it is interesting that for many people they associate going to a hospital with staying a long time and and getting sicker sometimes they get better and go home thank goodness you're certainly a well-meaning doctor the nursing staff are well-meaning people yes put simply why don't hospitals include light therapy given the abundance of data on circadian rhythms and light therapy and I'll just attach one more thing my audience always gets upset at the duration of these these questions SL editorials but this is my wheelhouse this whole light thing so I can't help myself there's also something known as ICU psychosis absolutely which is when people who are perfectly mentally healthy go into a hospital yeah because of the relationship to light and the disruption and circadian rhythm from the overhead lights the checking of the patient in the middle of the night the disruption in sleep Etc people literally develop psychosis that resolves itself the moment they get home and get onto a normal schedule and it's well known that the patients that are in a hospital bed next to a window don't experience this to the same degree if at all so it's it's sort of like I feel like we're we're in an we're sitting under an avalanche not a waterfall but an avalanche of data telling us what we need to do and like forgive me but like what the hell is going on exactly so I I can tell you that not only do you have less likely to get uh this type of ICU psychosis but the data actually shows that people who are in a tw- bed room that are next to the window actually discharge from the hospital faster and you say ah well maybe that's the reason well it's interesting because the financial incentives with hospitals is not monolithic some hospitals uh and their relationship to the insurance companies are at a situation where when a patient comes into the hospital and the and the physician diagnoses them the insurance will pay the hospital a certain amount of money for that diagnosis and that's that and also there's something called subc capita uh Arrangements where the hospital has a contract with an insurance company to take care of 30,000 people per member per month and if that patient gets admitted to the hospital that hospital has to take care of that patient whatever the costs are so it it basically takes the risk now and puts it from the insurance company onto the healthc care provider so in those situations you'll see a hospital having a an army of case managers they come down every day what are we doing for this patient what do we need to do to get this patient out of the hospital so they're motivated to get people out and so when I say that I'm even more bewildered than when you said at the beginning well if we have good data that shows that light therapy and light getting people out into the sun actually can improve the discharge we we had that as I said that study from Brazil where there was a randomized controlled trial and they used 15 minutes of they actually made this jacket that they put on the patients and they flipped it on with some patients and they didn't flip it on with others they they the jacket was a light jacket it was an LED jacket that was giving light out at 940 nmet infrared light so you can't even tell if it's on and as I said the the the Mills per square Cen was like 2.9 so you wouldn't even feel it but yet these patients when they were done 7 Days 15 minutes a day they had better oxygen saturation they could take deeper breaths longer breaths they their heart rates their their respiratory rates improved even their lymphocytes improved the the ones that are very important for fighting off covid-19 and so at the very end of all of this the average length of stay in the control group was 12 days about 12 days in the intervention group it was 8 days how much does it cost to spend 4 days in a hospital it can be outrageous outrageous and and so all and it's potentially possible and this is why I think really people need to understand this not just not just people who are wanting for their own care but people who are in charge of hospitals people who are in charge of of of Health Care in this country is understanding that I believe why I'm happy to talk about this is I think that the lowest hanging fruit potentially after you look at that graph of deaths throughout the year is encouraging sunlight in people especially in those that are hospitalized and sick absolutely I don't know why but I think if somebody were to pick up the Baton and decide to do a very simple study where you you'd have to hire some nurses that would actually I've actually thought about doing this the study myself is having a unit outside in the sun where people go for literally 20 to 30 minutes and they come back you have a whole bunch of nurses there with monitoring so that you can make sure the patients are stable and then you send them right back up we send people down at the cat scanner all the time it takes 15 to 20 minutes this is not something that we don't do the difference is you're just sending them outside hopefully it's warm it's not too cold you know there's nothing that bad that happens and you send them right back up that would be a very easy study to do you could randomize them and then see what happens to their length of stay in my experience and it's only anecdotal I have not done the study it it it's a world of difference that's for sick people if we're thinking about health maintenance and health Improvement in healthy people who are not in the hospital which fortunately is most people it's very clear 15 minutes a day of sunlight exposure uh and if you absolutely can't get sunlight exposure think about um some artificial light Arrangement that might be beneficial I want to make sure that we talk about not just sunlight exposure and long wavelength light exposure from artificial sources but the flip side of all this which is is the importance of Darkness yeah at night um I'm aware of a study published in proing the National Academy of Sciences where they basically had kids sleep in either a completely black room or a room that had aund Lux this is very dim light folks 100 Luxe light source down in the corner kind of like a night light and then looked at morning glucose level blood glucose levels and there was a significant difference in the direction of you don't want any light in the room that you're sleeping now that's hard to do especially if you're you know if you're traveling hotels but IM masks in particular um silk or even faux faux silk eye masks which are very comfortable um Can essentially provide that it's very clear that it's the light exposure to the eyes what if anything do you recommend for people who are basically living in an environment that's too bright at night um you know do you yourself use like blackout curtains I mean what I mean how rigid I find that this is the one that's a little bit harder for people um you have kids I mean what do you how do you how should we work with these data um and what what are your thoughts about the importance of getting things really dark at night yeah that that that is the same question and the same problem that I have with people that do night shift because they go home and they're supposed to sleep and it's bright it's this daylight outside so what do you do um you know that's where you get the aluminum foil around the Windows that's where you you know you basically have to block out all of that light and then the eye patch of course is a nice thing to do as well um uh realizing though that um that even when you close your eyes if there's a light source in the room people think well I'll just close my eyes those those uh photons can go through the eyes just like we talked about with infrared light can go through the skin and and I don't know if this is true or not but I've heard even one or two photons of light hitting the back of the retina can cause enough signal to go to the supermatic nucleus that shut down melatonin production or at least impair it in some way yeah in um experimental conditions that's definitely true even um I mean the the sensitivity of the of the human visual system is extraordinary I mean your rods the more the higher sensitivity photo receptors in the back of your eye can can detect a single Photon yeah one Photon most people aren't familiar with thinking in in photon quantities so um that might not mean anything to them put differently and this is these are wild data from Chuck cers Lab at Harvard uh Medical School light suppresses melatonin the question is how much light do you need because of the increase in sensitivity of the of the eye at night this rod rod system and these specializ cells that that send signals to the circadian clock 15 seconds 15 seconds of artificial light exposure will significantly quash your melatonin that's a whiz at night 15 yeah right so if you go to the bathroom so then be say well what am I supposed to do how do I navigate at night and how do I make sure I'm peeing in the toilet especially for men right um and how do I not trip and fall this kind of and root to to the bathroom or getting a glass of water it's actually you know it's funny the answer turns out to be so logical but you almost have to hear it before it's you kind of go oh that makes sense so perfectly fine to use your phone as a flashlight and then people say well flashlights really bright but yeah but you're you're not shining the light into your eyes so looking at your screen limed way down in the middle middle of the night is going to be very detrimental to the Melatonin system right at the time where you want melatonin high and other things too yeah but looking at a flashlight shown into the you know the hallway so you can navigate right very different scenario than it shining directly into your eyes so you can um and then there are a number of different red light sources that are that are pretty good like little red light lamps that are effective and or you can just turn your phone to uh red light mode there's a there's a a way to do that well I remember a podcast that you had probably a couple of years ago where you had someone I forgot his name but he he he said his his uh house is very dark at night and people would be afraid to go over because tripping all that's my good friend Dr Samar herar now keep in mind that Samar is the head of the chronobiology unit the National Institutes of mental health so he like literally lives and breathes this stuff right the other thing about Samar which is interesting is when I first met Samar um he was very very overweight what samur may have relayed on that podcast um perhaps not is that by changing his relationship to light sunlight and in getting sunlight during the day and darkness at night and by the way he lived in Baltimore at that time so it's not trivial to do that and changing his sleep schedule to one of getting into bed around 9 or 10 p.m. and waking up earlier as opposed to staying up late and sleeping the equivalent amount into later in the morning yeah he lost over 80 pounds wow effortlessly his appetite just adjusted because he finally got in tune with his natural circadian cycles and and Glen jeffy's work has made me think in my mind because of the presence of light in that study and the fact that the glucose was less it makes me wonder whether or not we really shouldn't be eating only when the Sun is up I agree that we probably should only be eating when the Sun is up I myself I like dinner somewhere around 6 6:30 it's tough for me um but but I totally agree if people would if people were willing to meet me for dinner earlier I'm good now it is true that sleep is vast improved when you haven't eaten in the previous couple of hours it's also true that trying to fall asleep and stay asleep when you have gnawing hunger in your belly is not easy okay yeah and I I would say the other thing is too is uh making sure that these rules that we're coming up with here based on physiology aren't laws so so that we get so anxious about following them that they actually become a detriment there's there's a point where we just have to do well enough and then move on to to the you know to the next we try to do it the next day we're human yeah I want to talk about the other aspects of new start nutrition exercise um trust rest Etc but before we do that I want to touch on something that I've been curious about for a long time it's somewhat controversial I've stated my stance on this previously took some heat for it um but maybe I'll revise my stance you see a lot of patients in the ICU with flu yeah obvious VI ly the flu can be deadly in some circumstances but for most people that are healthy generally healthy first of all how concerning is flu like should I really be concerned about flu this winter season even though I feel robust and then the second question is do you personally get the quote unquote flu shot I said on a previous podcast that I don't get it um and I took a lot of heat for that I understand that the flu shot does protect against certain forms of flu not all of them uh that statement was um kind of pushed out there by folks saying that I was going against CDC guidelines I'm not going against CDC guidelines people should do as they choose they should just know what they're doing I've never gotten a flu shot I I don't know if I've ever gotten the flu um but that's my personal choice and it's not based on any specific fear of the flu shot it's because it's never been an issue for me and I'm okay with getting a cold or a flu every couple of years years feeling miserable for a week or two and bouncing back I feel like that's good to develop my own antibodies but maybe I'm thinking about this completely irrationally so do you get the flu shot do you recommend the flu shot for healthy people do you recommend the flu shot for people that are met metabolically challenged yeah it's a good question I think it's and the approach that I take is is the approach that I take with any intervention in medicine every intervention in medicine has a benefit and every intervention has a risk no matter what it is so for me because I work in an intensive care unit around sick patients all the time I'm exposed to a lot of flu I mean you literally walk in and the next day they say oh by the way that guy he had the flu so you you find out after the fact so for me I've always since I've been a physician I've always gotten the flu shot every single year do you get it multiple times per season no just once okay so at the beginning of the flu season when they say flu shot available now it's it's a mix of antibodies against known um strains of the flu yeah interesting the the way that they try to figure out or guess uh the way it is because that's what it is it's a guess is they look six months earlier to see what happened in the Southern Hemisphere and they see what was circulating there and then they believe that's what's going to be circulating uh in the Northern Hemisphere and they do the same in in the South they look and see what's circulating up here and they try to figure out what it's going to be there so there's usually about three or four different ones that they try to put in there ever since 2009 they've tried to put one in there about 2009 because that was a really bad year we we mentioned that in terms of that study on sunlight but but in terms of the uh of the the side effects as a result of that it's it's been pretty bad I mean to give you an example I had a patient really recently in the Intensive Care Unit uh this patient came in uh very poorly controlled diabetes hemoglobin A1c of like 16 17 it was very bad and she developed uh she got the flu and she her immune system was not well she actually also got uh a very bad fungal infection that was near fatal um and so that's that's the typical patient that we're going to see who's going to have that type of a bad reaction to the flu people who are imuno compromised people who are not metabolically healthy these are the ones that are wide open and so a flu virus is going to to do a lot of of damage there so what does the flu vaccine do it gives the immune system a an advanced notice of what this antigen is and that has two effects what a lot of people believe is that it's going to protect you from ever getting infected it's not the case uh you can still get infected but what happens is that the symptomatology or the the side effects of that infection will be greatly diminished so instead of you being hospitalized perhaps maybe you're only you coming down with the flu and you stay at home a lot of people would say I got the flu shot and it didn't help I got the flu anyway what we don't know is how severe that infection would have been in the first place so that's why for people who are imuno compromised I generally recommend it to get the flu shot or people that are exposed to a lot of flu because like you you work in the ICU but it and if I may like do you um do your kids get the flu shot yeah we give them the flu shot as well um it's more because they're the kids of doctors who might bring home the flu got it um and and more than anything else but uh there there was a point where we were not doing it it when they're in their teenage years that's when we start actually giving them the flu shot that was just a personal opinion even though I know it's approved up down to 6 months of age I believe so you started your kids once they were in their teen years yeah yeah um I remember one year our our uh our son Ryan he he uh he got some some virus I don't know what it was but he had very bad diarrhea and we had to take him to the uh to the to the emergency room to actually get an IV and get fluids into him he was very dehydrated um I don't know what that was I don't know if it was Rota virus but something was going around that year so and he's perfectly healthy so this is something that can happen and um you just have to look at the risks and benefits so if well I am telling you that I've never gotten a flu shot am I being irresponsible as a citizen I I don't tend I mean I go places I go to restaurants I go to the gym I I um I've remained healthy um for the most part I'm an occasional sniffle here and there every couple years I'll get it's been a long time actually now that I think about it I think irresponsible is probably too strong of a word the way I look at things is is through what I call the Swiss Cheese model I don't know if You' ever heard of the Swiss Cheese model I love swiss cheese okay so the Swiss Cheese model says this every if I cut up a bunch of pieces of Swiss cheese you'll know that every piece has a hole in it right or maybe a couple holes and if you line up those pieces of Swiss cheese those holes might be in different places so if you are let's say you're on one end of those multiple slices of Swiss cheese and little particles are coming through if you have enough pieces of those swiss cheese no no particles are going to get through and and that's really what we look at in medicine we don't just depend on one slice of Swiss cheese like in the operating room for instance we don't want to have infections so what do we do we sterilize the instruments but we don't just leave it there right we sterilize the skin that we're going to ins size we make sure that the room is the right temperature the right humidity because that has an effect we make sure it's under positive pressure the the surgeon is wearing a mask he's also wearing sterile gloves so we we we go through we try to do everything that we can possibly do so that if there is a breakdown in one place we still have a bunch of other swiss cheese slices in place it's the same thing with the flu and new start so nutrition exercise water all of those things and then at the end when you've done that for yourself if you want to have extra protection you want to add on another piece of Swiss cheese then you well you can talk to your doctor see what the risks and the benefits are and then make that decision if that's something that's right for you are there any known risks of the so-called flu shot um and if so what what's the percentage risk yeah well definitely there are risks in terms of allergies so they'll they should be asking you when you get it you know have you ever been allergic to the flu shop before I mean you can have anaphylactic shock that's one possibility um of course you can have that with anything right but specifically to the flu there was actually interestingly one year and I can't remember which year it was but there was a I think it was in Europe and we actually never got it in the United States but there was a rash of narcolepsy that was occurring so something about the the flu vaccine was causing a reaction that was causing an autoimmune response and the antibodies they believe were were acting against the um where hypocretin is made in the in the uh in the brain hypothalamus yeah and uh and so they they they noticed that there was an association I don't know if they actually determined that it was causal but they stopped that uh that brand I I would not want narcolepsy I used to work in a laboratory for a summer that wor uh studying narcolepsy it was the laboratory Emanuel minol Lab at at Stanford School of Medicine um he and his colleague s nishino identified the uh hypocretin ere yes mutation as the source of narcolepsy and people with narcolepsy people think it's just excessive daytime sleepiness but anytime they have it at the extreme in the extreme examples when people with narcolepsy have any kind of emotional activation they fall asleep and they have cataplexy too so they can't they can't drive they become essentially paralyzed like a like a sleep aonia right um pretty devastating disease so it sounds like um that particular strain of the flu shot in was neurotox in some way yeah there was one particular string we'd never seen it before um never seen it since and so yeah it's uh there are these one-offs right but you know everything has risk sure and so the example that I give is look I I'm in the ICU all day and I'm seeing people with you know occasionally with head beds right and they're on a blood thinner and but I don't I don't go back to my clinic in the pulmonary office and then take everybody off of blood thinners because we know that blood thinners epidemiologically in the long run actually save lives because they prevent Strokes heart attacks things of that nature so what we try to do is figure out what's the right individual for this medication or what's the you know what's the right medicine for this type you know type of situation and that that requires training and that requires you know sometimes you have calculators that can figure out these risks in the winter months when flu levels are high are you wearing a mask from the moment you walk into the clinic in the morning until when you leave um when you walk up to a new patient um if you know they have a flu or if you know they don't have the flu um are you masked up I mean this became a big issue around the um the covid discussion uh but to what extent is wearing a conventional um mask or even an95 actually protect you from from flu yeah so the the the regular surgical masks are very good at preventing things from coming out of your mouth and going to other people or coming onto your mouth if you happen to have one on so in our Clinic where we work we actually look at the flu incidents and then we see if it's if it's rising everybody that comes into that place Physicians patients everybody puts a mask on to to to reduce that uh n95s are a little different in that they don't prevent viruses from coming out of somebody you may notice when you put an n95 mask on they may even have a valve that pops open and and and gas can come out your respiratory air can come out or comes out the sides it's when you take a breath in and it's seals now it's filtering that air so n95s are very good for people who don't want to get infection and don't have respiratory issues because you're now having to to breathe air in through a filter that takes a little bit more work if someone has COPD or you know or which is a obstructive lung disease or or other lung diseases that might not be the best thing to have in those situations so uh yeah I do wear a mask um I was very careful I know I was coming on your show this winter time and I was like there's no way I want to get the flu miss and miss miss getting on uh to see you so yeah thank you for not for for avoiding bringing flu here it's wild because ever since I started this podcast you know we put out now two episodes a week full length episodes on Mondays and these shorter essential episodes on Thursdays so uh I can't afford to get sick yeah you know and I haven't been sick in years I I I take care uh to not get sick but I'm going to think real carefully about this flu shot thing um what about handwashing is that so A Friend let me Let me Give a Little Bit of backstory uh the guy I worked for as a postto was an mdphd and he used to joke about the fact that handwashing did nothing because he was a in his prior life he was a a surgeon he did a I think he did rotation a surgery uh rotation he eventually became a neurologist okay then then a researcher um and I used to say what do you mean the handwashing does nothing and he's like well have you ever seen what a physician does before surgery you know they wash up to their up to their basically their shoulders they um they've beta dine they glove in properly and you know that's how you prevent infection washing your hands does nothing it's a formality and I thought there's no way that could be true then I started digging around in the literature about this yeah and it's kind of mixed like so to what extent does washing our hands actually help us avoid getting infection I you know it's a good question and I I think it probably comes down to some of the studies are probably not good data or or heterogenous enough to do a metaanalysis but what's what's really interesting is how many times a day if you were to watch yourself that you touch your nose you touch your face and these are the these are the portals for viruses to come into your body yeah eyes nose mouth that's where they come and we we touch them all the time um you touch handles I mean if you think about it it's it's almost uh I don't know creepy and flu it is creepy and flu and cold can survive out on surfaces for how long I I have to look up the numbers but it's it's it's longer than you might think I know that we when we looked at Co it it it's that really we we I know we went crazy at the beginning of the co pandemic about wiping things down and really that's not the way it seems to spread uh for Co and more Airborne things but for influenza droplets um that is uh you know Rota virus CI that's a claustrum defal infection of the bowel that's that's the primary way that it actually spreads I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor our place our place makes my favorite pots pans and other cook wear surprisingly toxic compounds such as pases or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans as well as utensils appliances and countless other Kitchen products now I've talked before on this podcast about these pases or forever chemicals like Teflon which have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption gut microbiome disruption fertility issues and many other health problems so it's really important to avoid them this is why I'm a huge fan of ourplace ourplace products are made with the highest quality materials and are all p and toxin-free I particularly love their titanium always pan Pro it's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating instead it uses pure titanium this means it has no harmful forever chemicals and it also doesn't degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time it's extremely durable and it's also beautiful to look at I cook eggs in my titanium always pan Pro almost every morning the design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan I also cook burgers and steaks in it and it puts a really nice sear on the meat but again nothing sticks to the pan so it's really easy to clean and it's even dishwasher safe I love it and I use it every day for a limited time ourplace is offering an exclusive 20% discount on the titanium always pan Pro if you go to the website from ourplace do.com huberman and use the code save huberman 20 you can claim the offer with a 100-day risk-free trial free shipping and free returns you can experience this fantastic cookware with absolutely zero risk again that's from hour.com huberman to get 20% off let's talk about water and air I think I like many people are curious as to you know how much water I drink is that influencing my susceptibility to uh infections Etc um water on the body uh water we get into this kind of thing and then air uh humidity temperature um ozone any anything interesting in those yeah um let's talk about water so the most obvious one is the internal use of water and what's interesting about that is that we actually can do a blood test on people and it's called the sodium concentration one of the first things you learn as a medical student is that the sodium concentration in somebody has very little to do with how much sodium they take into their body it has much more to do with how much water they take into their body so the more water they take in the lower the sodium concentration goes but it's very well regulated there's a study that was done a number of years ago that looked at the chances of death so mortality and sodium concentration and as sodium concentration went up so did the chances of dying so it's important to drink water how much water you know there's this old eight glasses of water uh thing it's um it's probably not that much but uh it it certainly is important so internal use of water is well known I mean it's it's a substrate that allows your kidneys to to dump toxins and you need to to flush those things out and you sweat especially if you're exercising you're going to need to take more water in because you're sweating you're breathing faster you have something called insensible losses of water but I think um the other part of water that I'd like to talk about is not the internal use of water which is pretty obvious and and the data is there but the external use of water and the reason why I bring that up is in the context of what we're talking about which is illnesses and flu and viruses one of the properties of water that is is very very important is its high enthalpy what does that mean means it takes a lot of energy to raise water the substance 1 degre Cel and the opposite is also true so if you put warm water on someone uh it can transfer a lot of energy into that person without losing temperature why is that important if you want to use if you want to increase someone's body body temperature water is a very good way of doing it if you've ever gone into a sauna and it's a dry sauna you haven't yet put the little Ladle onto the heating you can you can tolerate 170 180 degree uh sauna pretty well as soon as you put that water on the heat just starts to come down on you and that's because water is such a very good way of transmitting that heat so why is that important let's let's put that away for a little bit and I'll explain why that's important let's switch gears and talk about viruses in the immune system so your immune system is divided into two components an annate immune system and an Adaptive immune system the Adaptive immune system is what we've all learned about in terms of vaccines and antibodies and all the things the discussion that we've had the last four or five years you see something very specific your immune system does and it makes an antibody directly against that if it's slightly different the antibody response is not going to be as effective so it's very high tuned very specific that's the Adaptive immune system the innate immune system on the other hand is the one that goes out first gobbles things up and presents it to the Adaptive immune system but there's also something else in the innate immune system that's very important and that is the system that has to do with recognizing damaged molecules and recognizing pathological molecules there are certain pathological patterns PM is pathologic iCal Associated molecular patterns that the innate immune system recognizes without ever having seen it and it can take those things out and the greatest tool that the innate immune system has to take those things out is something called interferon interferon is an extremely important um molecule it has a very wide ranging ability to take out viruses something that's important to understand is that with all of the variants that we've been talking about with covid with all all of the the different strains that we have of influenza none of that matters with interferon interferon has very why and that's why it's such an important molecule it's been said that the immune system is so well-designed that there are no viruses that can infect it unless they have countermeasures and that is absolutely true this was first seen when SARS kovy 2 came out they looked at SARS kovi 1 the original one that came out in 200 too and and sure enough that virus SARS kov1 if you want to call it that or just SARS had a mechanism contained within it to neutralize and to suppress the secretion of interferon uh they did some searching and they looked at SARS kov 2 and sure enough mac 1 which is a a gene in SARS kov 2 is is a is a gene that is specifically I don't want to say designed but it's there to get around interferon that should tell you how important interferon is so with that in mind let's go back to our talk about water and temperature there was a number of studies that had been done looking at temperature interferon and what they showed this was an inv vitro study where they took lymphocytes they put it into a medium and they bathed it in uh LPS LPS is basically a a molecule that is seen in bacteria that usually sets off the immune system so you have lymphocytes you have LPS and then what they did was they slowly increased the temperature and they measured interferon once it hit 39° C there was a 10-fold increase in interferon secretion from the lymphocytes 39 degrees for those uh who are on the Fahrenheit system that's about 102.2 okay so slight fever slight fever yeah or or a good fever yeah good fever so what do this means this means that and this gets into the whole discussion philosophically about fevers in general should you block them exactly and I'll tell you in the hospital I'll I'll get so many calls hey doctor this patient has a fever and and the the idea is is that the fever is part of the problem and we need to fix the fever because it's part of the problem by the way that was the same thought process in the in the 1918 Spanish flute pandemic that we had aspirin had just been discovered bare aspirin 18 1999 and uh it was great it seemed because aspirin took away fever it took away the body aches it took away the pain and all of that was subscribed to the virus that was going on they didn't know even know it was a virus just the influenza disease and so uh it was being used almost excessively in fact in many cases probably toxically in these Army hospitals in 1918 people were coming in with the flu young people were coming in with the flu and they were getting high doses of aspiring they thought this was the way to treat it and the mortality rate the case fatality rate was like 6% it might have been even higher than that so getting back to water external use of water here is a way to deliver large amounts of energy that can be stored in water as a substance to the patient to elevate to actually help Elevate body temperature to see whether or not we can improve the innate immune system to actually help out in that type of a situation so we're talking about hot baths hot baths sauna hot shower hot showers um probably the most effective way of doing it is uh the old term and again something that was used a 100 years ago is hydrotherapy or hot fermentations is the term that you'll find if you look at the old literature this is where they would get hot towels linen towels they would uh soak it in water they would heat it up usually in a stove but you could do the same thing in a microwave the big thing is that you have to make sure you don't burn yourself or the house down exactly um and so you would put a protective layer of of batting or or cloth on the patient and this would go on top of them and you would basically cover them up until you started to see them sweat and you do that for about 20 minutes once you start to see them sweat you know that you're elevating the body temperature above the set point and what that's supposed to do is to activate the immune system to uh to secrete interferent look we we have studies there's a study that was published a couple years ago looking at covid giving exogenous interferon to people with covid-19 reduced hospitalizations by 50% so you're getting around take exogenous interferon oh yeah absolutely you take it as a pill uh it's an infusion you would digest it in the stomach so this this was an infusion that they gave to patients uh I'm surprised that I haven't heard of like peptide Clinic selling into feron um can you can you inject interfer on sub subcutaneously uh you can in this this was actually published in the New England Journal of Medicine um it was uh interfer on Lambda I believe and it was a it was a uh phase three's trial looking at getting FDA approval I think probably because of the fact that um we weren't having as many hospitalized patients that probably hasn't gone through but in that study it reduced hospitalizations by 50% wow for those that don't have access to interfere on infusions um or a sauna or even a bath it so what is it you know a 5 to 10 minute hot shower then get under the blankets this kind of thing I mean this kind of um good old uh good old mom's advice kind of stuff isn't it interesting so I'll tell you what the protocol was um there was uh and actually this is quite interesting historically there were a number of sanitariums in the northeast of the United States back at that time of the century and um they were run by the Adventist Church and their their way of dealing with the pandemic was different they were not using drug medications they were using hydrotherapy and sunlight some of the things that we've been talking about here and there was a guy by the name of Wells Rubble who was the medical director of the uh New England sanitarium and he said let's just take a look and see what's going on here let's look at let's pull the 10 sanitariums in this area see what's gone on in terms of the way we treat the patients and then look at the published data from the the Army hospitals and there was a stark difference he divided into two sections the first phase of influenza is the early phase and and the major uh end point of that early phase was did they get pneumonia okay and then from pneumonia the second end point after that was the second phase and that was the question was did they die so where the sanitarium seem to do a much better job than in the Army hospitals was in that first phase they had one sixth of the people actually go to the pneumonia phase so what were they doing immediately they were doing hydrotherapy immediately they were doing uh which was basically increasing body temperature doing fever types of treatments getting them out into the sunlight you you can remember maybe in your mind's eye these photographs of these Army hospital or these Army Camps and the tents were outside because they didn't have any place to put them in some of these cases so the sunlight was good but the thing that they weren't doing was the hydrotherapy once they got to the pneumonia stage there was no difference between what the sanitariums were doing and the Army hospitals the mortality was 50% remember this is prior to penicillin this is 1918 this is before 1928 when we discovered penicillin so once you hit pneumonia it was really difficult to treat so he he actually wrote this up and I actually found it in a uh someone directed it to me they actually showed it to me it was in a um it wasn't even in a scientific journal that he published it it was some sort of periodical called life and health May 1st 1919 still remember in my head and he says hey this is what we did this is what they did they had one sixth of the mortal it in their uh in their institution and this was repeated multiple times this is not done in isolation there let's lead you up to the to the big thing here there was a Nobel Prize that was given for this in 1927 Jules Wagner yor was a Austrian psychiatrist who noticed that in his uh patients that had neuros syphilis that when they had a fever their symptoms improved so this is again prior to penicillin he actually took patients with malaria and he took the blood from these patients and carefully infected his neurosyphilis patients with malaria and of course you know that malaria causes very very high fevers he cured neurosyphilis by causing fevers from malaria wild um and all he really had to do was heat them up um there was many ways of doing it at the time he closets sometimes they would inject foreign proteins to create a fever this was another way of doing it with malaria of course at the time they had the treatment for malaria right um quinine well and LPS will do this yes right LPS as you mentioned is lipid polysaccharide I think they get it from um yeast cell wall or something and um it's a foreign antigen yeah it's a contaminant in a lot of gray Market peptides and things that I suggest people don't take you know there are a lot of people now who are interested in peptides and they buy them on the gray market and it says not for human or uh animal use research purposes only and people often say well why not use those you know why do people have to go through a physician and a compounding pharmacy if they're going to explore that territory at all yeah and the reason is there it's very clear that most of the gry market peptides have LPS um in them so small amounts but injected repeatedly over time people start getting the systemic inflammation and fever response there you go um you that's it's a little bit of a tangent but it gets to the same mechanism yeah uh so when when you say um the use of water in this context it's really about trying to heat up the core temperature of the body exactly okay and so when we think about Russian Bas uh which I'm a huge fan of you know there's some a bunch of them in different cities um whenever I'm in New York I go to this place down on Wall Street Spa 88 um I have no relation to them and they have a medium hot sauna for Russians medium hot as very hot it's like a spice for uh in in certain restaurants you know you have to calibrate to the the the uh the local ethnicity um and then they have very hot sauna and what they do there even when they're not sick is they'll go from you know moderately hot to hot to um Steam and then back to hot hot SAA then into cold water so they're doing heat cold contrast therapy and they and you know the Eastern Europeans and Russians have been and Scandinavians have been doing this for centuries absolutely right here we think of it is like biohacking and this new new domain of Health but this has been going on for a very long time so in my mind anthropologically I'm wondering those cultures that don't have access to the sunlight that we have here maybe they use this as a way of supplementing that CU we don't see in Winter right so we don't see that we don't see a lot of sauna use near the equator in any kind of culture yeah I don't I'm sure they exist down there but I feel like um Brazil in the summertime probably feels like a sauna so you don't need a SA right right whereas Siberia in Winter feels a lot like the way I imagine Siberia in Winter if you look at probably the biggest purveyor of this type of therapy that we're talking about hydrotherapy was at the Battle Creek sanitarium in Battle Creek Michigan and they had whole protocols for this and when I looked it up the general protocol for this was 20 minutes of hot followed by a very very short probably Le a minute of cold that involves some sort of physical rubbing or or sort of um abrasion on the chest okay and and when I saw that it's like I immediately thought of what they do in Finland and where they where they hit themselves with yeah the the um the Russians use these eucalyptus branches eucalyptus and it's the um it is it's eucalyptus branches I call it I think it's called platza or something like that yeah um and uh yeah it costs a little bit more but if you go to one of these Russian Bas you could pay someone who's skilled in this they make basically make you lie down you cover your face and and groin and then they they hit you with these uh eucalyptus branches not not to smack you with them but to now the idea is that in the sauna you're going to bring some of the um uh additional Vasa dilation to the to the uh surface of the skin so you're getting more blood flow to the periphery is the idea I don't know if there's any truth to it but um my understanding from what I've heard and read is that um obviously the heat part is to heal up the core body temperature and that has a whole host of of uh of responses which I'll I'll I'll touch on after this that I I read a recent article that was just amazing but the the cold part of it is going to cause vasil constriction and we know this in medicine we're actually taught this in medical school that a cold shower Vasa constriction causes demargination of the white blood cells that are actually attached to the inside of your blood vessels and it knocks them into circulation so if you think about this what what is it that you're doing with you're doing the heat aspect and the fever goes up and the temperature is is basically a it's a non hormonal signal to the entire body to start up up uh regulation and transcription and then the very last thing is the cold now what does that do number one it knocks those cells into circulation to go wherever they need to go that's number one and number two vas of constriction peripherally which is what you will see prevents that heat that you've just built up from going out to the periphery and and being lost so it kind of locks the heat in in a sense allowing that heat to last longer amazing could you just repeat one more time even though you said it incredibly clearly yeah um this uh this phenomenon of of how the uh white blood cells are liberated by by cold and constriction yeah so when you have imagine a a tube that's lined with white blood cells they all have little poyes little things that attach and what happens when you have Vasa constriction is it causes Vasa constriction it shrinks down because of the smooth muscle muscle in the wall and you have release of these white blood cells into the circulation um and that's called demargination so after a cold shower you will actually be able to see and this is kind of a trick question does one's white blood cell count go up after a a cold shower the answer is technically you have the same number of white cells but now they're just more of them in the circulation so yes the number that you get back on the Lab Test shows that it's gone up and the white blood cells for those that aren't familiar they go out yeah these are the these are the macras the neutr these are all different branches if you will of the Arm Forces of your body that go out to try to find things and neutralize them and this is part of the innate immune response this is not so both actually white blood cells right on white blood cells are involved in the the Adaptive IM immune response as well amazing I've never heard of um deliberate cold exposure being used to liberate uh white blood cells in that way but it makes perfect sense it sounds like it's largely mechanical it it is um and it also may seem to be mechanical in terms of locking that heat in so um one of the things that I that I always was puzzled about is I've I don't know how many people are able to really get their core body temperature up to 102.2 I mean it's possible you'd have to really try to do it and then I came across a paper that was incredible and this was a paper where they actually looked at mice which by the way I looked this up they actually have the same Target temperatures that humans have and also ham ERS and again the same Target temperature and what they showed in this they looked at the inate immune system and the signaling that's required for the secretion of interferon and they looked at stat and Jack these were the two um areas or signaling and what they showed was essentially that whereas before I had told you that you had to go up to 39° Celsius to get a 10-fold increase in interferon secretion what they did was they looked at 36 37 38 and 39 and they saw a jump going from 37 to 38 so in other words at 38 degrees which is only 100.4 Fahrenheits there was a dramatic increase in in the signaling in probably six or seven different areas of the stat and the Jack system uh signaling when they did further analysis they said what what's going on here is it is it the lack of breakdown of mRNA what what's actually happening this is the clusion that they came to after they did all the molecular studies it was simply the just the increase in temperature that was causing an increase in transcription in the nucleus transcription of of of the proteins leading to more interferon correct so these we're talking about not the transcription of the protein interferon but the transcription of the factors that regulate the increase in interferon yeah so it was basically transcription in the nucleus is actually upregulated itself by nothing else other than temperature I love it uh one thing that people might want to play with a little bit although they should be careful right if you're pregnant forget the sauna for a while um you know if you're absolutely you know everyone has different thresholds for heat tolerance and cold tolerance but uh spend a little time in a Russian B and you'll soon realize that they all wear these uh like wool hats yes and you might think oh well that's just going to heat you up more no it insulates you against the Heat and so you can stay in much longer because the signal to get out like that it's too that it's quotquot tooo hot is a is a brain signal first oh wow which makes sense right your brain basically evokes something um analogous to the gasp reflex when you're not getting enough oxygen right okay so if you go in there with a with a towel on your head or or you cover your head what you find is that you can sit comfortably at much hotter temperatures than the sauna got it that could be a problem right because you don't want to burn your skin but the sauna actually provides a lot more um degrees of freedom exploration safely then does hot bath because if you get into a bath that's truly too hot you'll burn your skin correct right whereas in the sauna you know you might go into a very hot sauna I'm very heat tolerant I don't like the cold so much but I do it anyway but I'm very heat tolerant and but when I first hit a um you know a 210 degree sauna which is very very warm sauna um if you if your head isn't covered your heart starts racing you feel like you want out of there if you go in there wearing a like a wool beanie cap yeah you like you're fine yeah yeah you're fine because the the brain signal does doesn't get kicked off for a while so so that's interesting because I've seen some old photographs of when they used to do this like in mass in the big hospitals back East 100 years ago and there was these treatment rooms and each of the treatment rooms had a little hole in not a little hole but a hole enough to put your head and so it was it was kind of funny because you saw this long hallway and all of these humans heads kind of sticking out of a hole while the treatment was going on inside the room their heads were outside the room you know it's so amazing how humans um find the same Solutions through different portals I'm fascinated by this you know every once in a while I sit back from the information that we touch on in this podcast since we launched in 2021 and I think you know there are so many different tools and protocols and um and you're providing additional ones today they almost all fall into about six to 10 batches and whether one comes through the the portal of traditional Western medicine or Eastern medicine or what the you know fins or the Russians do it's so interesting that you know we're talking light yeah temperature and these things obviously relate um hydration which I'm sure we'll talk about um mitochondria cellular metabolism I mean that you know there's there isn't an infinite number of conceptual themes and they tend to sort of batch into them and I think understanding those themes helps people make decisions like if you're on the road and you're feeling run down after getting off the plane and you're thinking you might be coming down with something you get that little throat tickle mhm you know you only have access to a hot shower that that's your best bet do that like you don't need a sauna ideally you're getting sunlight you don't have sunlight you can you know take some of the other measures that we were talking about before um yeah I find it fascinating that humans eventually Converge on the same answers it just sort of varies in terms of what you call these things exactly you call it hydrotherapy I call deliberate heat exposure deliberate cold exposure if you're you know in some cases and people from all over the world in different cultures have talked to me in Asia in the Middle East and they say you know what my grandmother my mother they used to do this to us all the time they put us in the hot sand I remember someone telling me from from Iraq they said if we were hot if we were sick they would put us into the hot sand to heat us up and then you you talk to somebody you know from the 1950s uh Grandma's say oh they put us to bed and and make sure we're all warm with the covers and hot water bottle hot water bottle exactly I mean in Asia they would do something uh different i' I've heard them tell it it's interesting to me how all of these cultures that really haven't connected necessarily have come up with the same answers for for a lot of these things that said um there are things that purportedly we can take to accelerate our progression through uh an illness should we get one uh and to help avoid illness one of the things I'm most interested in is uh your thoughts on maack and acetal cysteine U my understanding is that a few years ago in this country there was an FDA ban on netal cysteine but that the people who had already been taking anical cysteine were so bullish about it that they SW back and it has remained freely available without a prescription my understanding is that netal cine requires a prescription in some countries could you tell us what the various uses of an acetylcysteine are um and what its potential role is for avoiding or even accelerating the progression uh through a viral or other type of infection yeah so the an and I I sometimes say n ayine it may be just my Canadian accent coming through I'm guessing I oh I didn't realize you're a Canadian uh I'm guessing you are correct and I'm incorrect no I think you are correct cuz people have corrected me so I think if I say it if slip up that's that's what happens so Mom Mom you know ninth grade grade nine these are all Canadian that true yeah so so the probably the most obvious one to start with is the one that's actually we use all the time in the hospital and it's for Tylenol overdose and that's because Tylenol uh the metabolism of Tylenol depletes the liver of these reducing agents glutathione things of that nature so um an acetal cysteine is going to replace that and that's one of the things that's well known we actually have dosing protocols we have nomograms to tell us when we should use it when we shouldn't use it and it's it's very well documented so it supports liver metabolism it it supports liver metabolism and prevents the liver from going into failure so people could literally die if we didn't give them this medication does it also effectively treat liver failure due to other things like alcohol that's a excellent question uh I would say if you ask asked me that question 20 to 25 years ago I would have said no there's no evidence but now if you talk to some GI Specialists they'll say yeah there's some data that it it actually may be beneficial it's certainly not going to hurt and so in patients who have liver failure uh from one thing or another they may actually recommend using that medication as well and estaline so Knack is a glutathione precursor is that right it is it is one that it's recharging so if you want to think about it in terms of redo this is a good way to think about it is think about a um a sulfur uh element with an a hydrogen attached to it that is the reduced form because it can donate that proton off and and it'll be in a reduced situation so it can reduce something that was oxidized however when it reduces something that was oxidized and it it does that in a in a good way it itself becomes oxidized and instead of having an s h it's now SS so now it's it's oxidized that's really important in a lot of places because of that SS Bond so you'll know that the SS bonds occurs in in amuno acids it's the reason why you're you can perm your hair uh you may not know that but uh the way your hair is is because of ss bonds and then what you do is you reduce all of those SS Bonds in other words you know basically disconnecting them and then you can curl it however you want and then when you take it away those SS bonds clamp down and you have a perm all right Next Episode I'll show up looking like a Chia Pet that's the reason why when you go to get a perm that stuff smells like rotten eggs is because that's the sulfur group yeah so um that's also by the way the same reason why and this gets it a little bit other discussion about why I think Knack may be I'll just call it knack uh is used in other areas is um this is also the main reason why we get thrombosis of platelets so pulmonary artery if you have the endothelial lining which makes sure that the red blood cells as they're going through the pulmonary artery are not causing clots if those if that endothelial lining would become damaged it would release underneath it and expose a huge collection of something called Von willbrand Factor Von willbrand factor is a monomer but it quickly becomes a polymer and the way it does that is in forming SS bonds so that's a a quick pull ization then of course the next step that happens is that these polymers will then trap platelets and cause them to Clump and you will get something called a white clot so for those that aren't familiar with monomers and polymers and this kind of thing basically you're taking a a bead and you're creating the polymer which is more like beads on a string exactly exactly and that can capture more things like a big clumpy Mo big clumpy sticky molecules aren't quote unquote bad or good but in this context they're definitely bad they would be yeah so imagine now if you will uh the pulmonary artery in somebody who becomes infected with either influenza or covid-19 and that causes an oxidative stress situation where you have the cell having more oxidative stress than it should causes dysfunction of the cell the cell becomes damaged peels back releases some of the Von Willer Brands factor and now you have clots in the in the pulmonary artery this is something actually that we did see with co uh when they did the autopsies found many times more of these specific white clots in these patients and so um I don't know if that's the mechanism that's occurring in influenza but there was a lot of papers that were published in Co and the interesting thing about that was is that uh do you remember when they published they they had a paper that was published looking at blood types and covid and they said you know what what we're finding is is that those with type O blood are just slightly less SU suceptible to getting Co they have a slightly less mortality yeah that was a relief to me because I'm O blood okay yeah well the interesting thing about that is well known is that people with typo blood have slightly less Von willbrand Factor so does that mean in general that that we clot less if that clotting is related to Von will Brand's Factory and platelets then yes there's other ways of causing clot gen the CL clotting Cascade but yes so I found it really interesting that was kind of two independent points that sort of connected each other the other thing that was actually really interesting about this and this will lead to the conversation about Knack and why I was using it in actually patients with co9 and influenza and we'll talk about that study too is is ace2 so ace2 is a receptor for the spike protein for SARS kov 2 true but let's take it one step further that ace2 what is it actually there for what why is it even there it's not there to be a receptor for for Spike protein the actual job that ace2 does is converts Angiotensin 2 which is a prooxidant into Angiotensin 17 which is an antioxidant so let's go back to the beginning of our discussion again here's the mitochondria here's the the mitochondria is doing what it needs to do and it's producing oxidative stress and it's got all these different enzymes that are there to lessen the heat from that engine catalase glutathion peroxidase superoxide dismutase melatonin as we discussed at the beginning and Angiotensin 17 so now what happens you've got these patients that have obesity you have these patients that have cancer um heart disease dementia these are people whose engines are running hot they're barely making it because of all of the oxidative stress damage that has occurred now what happens this virus comes in Spike protein hits the A2 receptor and now that thing that was in balance is now out of balance because you're no longer taking a pro oxy and making an antioxidant so now the the analogy is is that you're you're in a car and your car the the the Heat and the engine's barely I mean it's it's coming up right and you're barely making it and now you approach a Hill Called covid-19 and you're going up that hill you're going to burn out your engine's going to overheat and that's what was happening with these patients remember they were coming in happy hypoxics they were calling them they were there they looked they were fine but they were they were severely um uh hypoxic what I believe what was happening and some data to show this is the case is that the as the virus went into the lungs and I believe this also happens with influenza these the virus was getting into the pulmonary circulation and as it was going down it was binding to the very rich A2 receptors and all of these pulmonary endothelial cells and it was causing these enzymes to stop working and now the oxidative balance was being knocked out these cells were becoming damaged they were peeling off Von willbrand Factor was coming into circulation and this polymerization was occurring and these white clots were occurring and that was leading to hypoxemia how do we stop that from happening well certainly one way of doing it is to make sure that the redo balance in these cells are are are maintained and one way of doing that is light and melatonin and all the things that we just talked about but another way of doing it in addition would potentially be in preventing those sulfide bonds from forming and causing polymerization and that's where you have Knack which is basically it would go through to those SS bonds that are causing the polymerization and break them off I see so I started taking Knack at I think at 600 milligrams or even 900 milligrams three to four times per day which is a very high dose yeah but restricted to times when I felt like I might be coming down with an infection or I was traveling um in the winter months I still do this or if I had any kind of um low-level congestion and uh my understanding is that it's a mucolytic yes because mu mucus again the reason why mucus is so thick is because of those SS bonds so when you put Knack in there it breaks it off and now it's liquidy it's used to treat cystic fibrosis and the uh to counteract the buildup of fluid in the lungs as I understand yeah um so it will make your nose run a bit if you have a little lowle congestion but what I love about it and I don't have any Rel to be clear f I don't have any relationship to any company that sells Knack no one I'm not paid by big Knack um uh or anything similar or Big Mac no or certainly not by Big Mac but um by Big Mac either um but I don't like conventional decongestant I like steam um but but I don't like taking over the counter decongestants of the sort of uh conventional commercial type because they tend to be very drying they sometimes have a little bit of a stimulant quality to them I I just don't like them and I find that neck in addition to increasing glutathione which can only be a good thing um is a great decongestant you do have to keep blowing your nose quite a lot if you take it right before you go to sleep and you sleep on your back you can wake up like feeling more congested so you have to kind of understand what it's doing that's why we're talking about it in this way yeah but um I I find that it's helped me move through um periods of uh you know sort of exposure to uh colds maybe flu but certainly colds um much faster and actually there to support that it can prevent Contracting the flu virus well uh not necessarily Contracting it but certainly having the symptoms of it so this was a this is this is like the best study you could ever imagine right so this is a multi-centered double blinded Placebo controlled trial right so you're eliminating a lot of the confounders and what they did was in a winter season so I think it was over six three to six months people were taking 600 milligrams of knack twice a day and what they did was they looked to see how many people got infected and what they're symptoms were and it while it did not reduce the number of infections from influenza there was a significant reduction in the symptoms of influenza so infections no it doesn't reduce but symptoms dramatically and which symptoms specifically it's the most annoying symptoms so the the one that dropped the most was the runny nose and the sore throat those that was what it was best at reducing there's been some question about Knack because it's so it's so good for cells right because it it replenishes uh there are some studies in vitro in cells that are designed to be models for cancer that that can actually cause the propensity for some of these cells to uh to um grow and and and uh expand um I think that probably needs to be taken with a little bit of grain of salt because these were in models that are designed for cancer cells to grow so the same thing would happen if you were to give nutrition to cancer cells on a p Tre dish right that doesn't necessarily mean that that nutrition causes cancer right yeah you ra a really important Point around this I mean the uh the joke that was told to me years ago is you know a drug or a compound is a substance that when injected in to an animal uh creates a scientific paper meaning meaning it's very easy to see things change when you add when you do a dose response curve of just about anything right um and some people might say Well thank goodness are are any compounds doing anything that are that's real or is it all Placebo I think there are real effects of compounds uh the context is really important yeah um do you take Knack continuously given your job or do you uh do you increase your your dosage when you are you know you're coming into contact with flu patients I do uh I do exactly as this paper was doing in a winter season when I know that things are going to be elevated and high and I'm going to be seeing a lot of uh influenza patients I do take 600 milligrams twice a day U but I tried not to do it for more than 3 months I don't know the long-term effects but I think three months is probably good enough yeah I know people take it continuously I've never taken it continuously I I sort of enjoy the fact that there are certain compounds out there like Knack that um I personally can observe of a benefit from if I take it for short periods in slightly higher Doses and then I stop and I have the you know unfounded theory that it um it helps punctuate the the effectiveness because you're not you know because there is downregulation of pretty much every mechanism you could possibly imagine right I mean there's so many redundancies that are built into the system but uh in this situation I I I don't know what the mechanism is but I believe that with influenza there is a um there is a a tilting of the scale toward oxidative stress and Knack in that sense can be very helpful and as I recall in the study that you described um where people took this 600 milligrams of knack twice a day the uh reduction in um what in severe symptoms or or was it the number of people that experienced severe symptoms went from somewhere in the high 70% maybe 78% or something like that I'm not quite um uh exact on the numbers here folks to about 28% is that right yeah so that's that's uh about a 50% uh absolute risk reduction which if you do the math it's a number needed to treat of two which is extremely low and very amazing and you're getting um and a increasing glutathione to boot so yeah wonderful um other things that have been shown to improve symptomology or perhaps even immune system function um maybe we could talk about zinc yeah I take what most people would consider very high levels of zinc and I've been doing it for a long time and I'm going to continue to do it because I I do my blood work and I it works for me I think there is actually good data for zinc um some people might uh might disagree but I think the studies that I've seen seem to show that that zinc supplementation can be beneficial um the theoretical of course and I'm sure you're familiar with it is is the copper deficiency and if you're checking that then that's fine um the recommendations that I have seen um is 40 milligrams of Elemental zinc so you have to be careful when you look up zinc on your on your bottle tell you how many milligrams but it's the entire molecule that they're measuring so you've got it'll also say how many milligrams of Elemental zinc that is equivalent to and the recommendation that I've heard from people is is 40 milligrams but um I don't I if you're checking your copper levels then you should be fine yeah well it's never charted out by body weight either so I weigh you know 215 lbs so um what's the risk of copper depletion um blood um deficiencies and things of that nature yeah okay I'll get my copper levels checked I believe it's in my blood uh blood panel um it is in my blood panel and I don't have a flag there but I'll keep an eye on it yeah liver I believe also is involved with copper as well so what is zinc doing to improve immune system function there's a couple of enzymes that use zinc as a co-actor um and I believe that that's what it's related to uh I'm not I can't remember exactly which ones they are but zinc is used as a co-actor in some of the enzymatic reactions of the immune system yeah why doesn't somebody Market an interfere on inhaler or n nasal spray you know actually they they are looking at that um when I was researching this for you know the uh intravenous interferon um I was I remember seeing something about interferon in terms of a nasal spray I haven't seen that yet though someone out there who's industrious can yeah can um create one it doesn't make you feel very nice okay I mean uh when when these patients for instance uh well this might be material to understand too for many years we had hepatitis C that was incurable and um interferon actually is the is the cure there was a point where we was used to give uh infusions of interferon to cure people with hepatitis C um but when we gave them the treatment they felt horrible felt like they had the flu and it's for good reasons because when you have high levels of interferon you you do have the flu it feels like that it's worth touching on this that so much of the uh symptomology when we have a flu or a cold or what have you is the is the immune system doing its thing the fever the congestion or correct um and we think think of that as the illness but it's often the byproduct of the body trying to extrude or kill exactly nobody likes congestion um so you know I don't have I don't mind treating that but I think out of all of those symptoms that you mentioned there the one that I think is probably the most beneficial to keep is the fever what about these cocktails that I see of eucalyptus oil oregano oil all this stuff is it completely worthless no it's not completely worthless um so let's look let's talk about the science let's talk about the um the actual data we don't have I don't have a randomized control trial to give you like I did with light but there was a study that was done and they the reason why they were looking at this was a bunch of oncologists that were looking to see if there was something that could improve the immune system when people were getting chemotherapy and they did an invitro study so this is in vitro but they were able to show that just a very small amount of eucalyptus oil had a tremendous impact on phagocytosis uh on the inate immune system they actually fyos folks sorry for interrupting but is a gobbling up of of yeah of bad stuff by good cells yeah exactly so they had these beads uh and you in the paper uh showed that these beads and they were fluorescent and you could see in the cells that had not yet gotten uh the eucalyptus oil that there was a number of beads outside and these cells were just kind of mosing around and uh they had both white microscopy and electron microscopy and a few few of these beads had gotten you know eaten up inside and then they showed the next slide it was like a transformation with the eucalyptus oil so the instead of these nice rounded cells they were like all of these things just coming out like like little poyes like reaching for things and then a few hours later it showed all of all of the beads that were outside were now inside so there was something in the eucalyptus oil itself that was stimulating the annate immune system to gobble this stuff up and again we go back to the folksy type of you know old stuff the main ingredient in vix Vapor Rub is eucalyptus oil could I have a theory yeah that um it's not going to be uh very kind to eucalyptus trees or koalas or anything related to Eucalyptus which is that maybe the eucalyptus oil is a mild irritant yeah at the cellular level you inhale it you know you get this Menthol like or um uh odorant it's kind of custic yeah and the immune system reacts to it by activating fago sites to go gobble up more stuff it could very well be um in that line of of discussion it I it's very imperative to understand that eucalyptus oil is never recommended to be taken internally um there's actually been reported deaths from taking too much eucalyptus oil so I just put that out there that people think that it's going to work and more is better um usually the way it's used and the way it has been used historically is and for instance in hydrotherapy they would put um maybe a few drops of that or rub it onto the skin and allow it to to sink and it's it's extremely potent if you if you go online to buy eucalyptus essential oil uh that should not really be taken internally it's not designed for that um it's extremely potent and um you know putting it maybe on your sometimes I'll do that put it on the upper lip so I'm inhaling it um and actually can can be um actually very soothing in fact one of the things that I found very soothing and there are actually some data in the literature on this is if you get a cold and you're congested is just U heating up some hot water on the stove putting a towel over your head and just inhaling that steam it tends to open things up and uh decrease the congestion and I've been known to put a couple of drops of eucalyptus oil into that and that's actually been beneficial as well great don't ingest eucalyptus oil folks I'll uh take it as a personal insult but I'm not take a responsibility if you do it anyway yeah um that's a great segue to air yeah um I've heard conflicting things uh Visa should we sleep with an air humidifier should we sleep with a cold room under warm blankets you know uh lowering core body temperature definitely helps us fall asleep but that's under conditions where we're not combating an illness I have had the experience several times now to the extent that I really believe it's a real effect where if a room is extremely cold even if I'm under warm blankets breathing that cold air at night I'll often get some um respiratory stuff going on probably because of a drying out of the respiratory Pathways yeah that's that's very possible um so let's talk about air um 30,000 foot level first of all don't inhale anything that's not either a medicine designed for your lungs or air itself so goes without saying but smoking um cigar vaping exactly sorry folks vaping might be better for you than smoking but it's still terrible for your lungs I I'm The Vaping Community hates me because they want me to say it's not carcinogenic but the data show that it can cause popcorn lung I mean it's just not good no uh right before Co hit I can't tell you how many young kids were being admitted to my ICU on ventilators um it was a little different at that time because it was so expansive that people were making Vitamin E oil to cut the nicotine and they were making basically garage out of their garage brand Vapes and selling it and these kids were ending up in the ICU this is totally unrelated to co this is totally unrelated to co okay and to be fair totally unrelated to the brand of vaping the brand names so this is off-label stuff people making their own thing and selling it it was crazy but let's talk about you know briefly the brand so yeah we're starting to understand now that um vaping doesn't have as many toxins that smoking does but it's it's not uh it's it's not a healthy choice and contrary to to the thought process is that it really doesn't get people off of nicotine in fact there's higher concentrations of nicotine in the vape than than in regular cigarettes very high concentrations incidentally what what are your thoughts on non-smoked non Vaped non- dipped non- snuffed nicotine so nicotine gum nicotine pouches I mean it's a will raise blood pressure vas a constrictor but definitely increases alertness while causing relaxation I'll come clean I occasionally will take a milligram or two which is very little um of nicotine gum um yeah so you know but never smok or vape or Dipper snuff it I use it all the time in my patients who I'm trying to get off of smoking so um and and that's a safer alternative especially for the lungs right because this is not they're not um atins that are going into the lungs so no problem with that especially if it's used to to get them off of smoking um it's it's something that we use all the time do you use nicotine no no yeah there's a a massive expansion in the number of people taking nicotine pouches now yeah and and it's it's something that affects the brain as you know it affects the um pregnant women um affects a a number of aspects of of the nervous system we we have receptors called nicotinic receptors for a reason because that's the neurotransmitter so um yeah it has an effect it is highly habit forming SL addictive um it does seem that at least in people 60 and older there may be some mild cognitive sparing or enhancement due to nicotine use I think that's an area that needs further exploration yeah I I'm not familiar with that data but certainly something to look into yeah yeah I'm not going to try and convince you to get on nicotine I I I'll also say that it it doesn't just hit the nicotinic receptors it'll also hit the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors and that's one reason why if you do take nicotine gum or use nicotine gums or pouches what you'll notice is when you don't use it you'll feel as if your throat is a little um mildly irritated and and then you take it and it and it relaxes it interesting and this is one of the more subtle but powerful ways in which it is habit forming is that people feel like they're more verbally fluid they can breathe easier when they're taking nicotine but it's a vasal constrictor so that for those interested in performance enhancing effects um it's run pushing you in the opposite direction anyway so in terms of air we've talked about what should not be in the air but um there's actually some data that's really surprising that I was I found during the pandemic that was interesting to me that should be in there that maybe isn't in there and that's fresh air associated with going outside so what is out there in the air what should be out there obviously clean air um people who live you know next to freeways and pollution those are bad things we've talked about that but um the Japanese seem to have a corner on This research it's really interesting stuff um you've heard heard of forest bathing so there was a number of studies where they've taken uh the CEOs in Tokyo and they took them up to the Hanoi Cypress forests sounds beautiful it is and um what they found was they did actually very controlled research where they checked blood levels and they they did blood tests and they had them walk around for three days in the forest uh Forest bathing and they actually took air samples and they found that there's these substances called phon sides which are given off by the trees not just Hanoi Cyprus trees but just about any kind of trees so fur trees oak trees all sorts of uh pine trees and that these substances interact with our bodies and specifically again the innate immune system they were actually able to look at chromogranin a which is a a substance that's in some of these white blood cells that are are you know fighting white blood cells that fight infections and they were able to show that when they were in that environment there were definite changes in the immune system toward the positive and that these changes lasted for seven days so they did another aspect of the study so there was multiple Publications that this group in Japan did they took these same guys and they took them down to a hotel in Tokyo out of the honoki Cypress forests and they infused these same fight and sites from these hoki Cyprus trees they basically took the oil from these trees and Infused it in the hotel room and they found very similar results to what they were getting out there when they were walking in the forest so that would seem to indicate that there was something that this was what was being made responsible the one difference which was interesting between when they were up there walking around in the forest and when they were down in Tokyo in the hotel room with the infuser is the urinary cortisol levels were lower when they were walking in the forest than when they were in the hotel and that's as you know a symbol of basically stress so there is there is something that there is a junqua I guess the French would say there's something Galt about walking in the forest that's different than just infusing the Hanoi Cyprus but I I thought that was an interesting thing and it kind of goes along again with what we were talking about at the beginning when you're out there in nature in the in the forestry in the green walking green spaces we have this evidence these leaves reflect a lot of infrared light which we've already talked about but there's also Al something else in the equation as well and it kind of leads just a bigger picture and bigger philosophy of of life and that's the reductionism of science we always trying to reduce something to an active ingredient to try to figure out what it is but there is actually something to be said for getting these things in the environment that we would normally be getting them in I think that's interesting someone made the comment recently that so much of modern health or our attempts at um being healthier in modern times perhaps the better way to put it is about trying to bring the out ofd Dooors indoors you know we we exercise in gyms whereas we're used to you know carry buckets of fruit and soil and you know uh we are talking about some artificial light um there's no replacement but uh ways to supplement artificial light excuse me ways to supplement sunlight with artificial light you know we're just indoors a lot more and uh no one's suggesting that we all run around in loin claws outside all the time um but there really does seem to be many factors within outdoor environments so many both known and unknown seems that the reductionist approach to science while I you know I've made it my profession um for many decades is um it makes sense why no one thing seems to solve all the all the uh issues that we're we're after that we need to experience these things in combination Maybe is just the best way to do that yeah and I I I can't help but think of some studies that have been done in the past where this has really highlighted it um there was some evidence they believed that people with lung cancer would do better if they had they because they noticed that people with lung cancer did better when they had diets that were rich in vitamin E and vitamin A derivatives so they said oh reduction of science let's go ahead and get vitamin E vitamin A let's package it let's give them to them in high doses maybe this will solve lung cancer or help lung cancer they have to stop the study early because they did worse than the control subjects important important to point that out yeah that the high dose supplementation is not the same as ingesting something in the context of of a food and we didn't we didn't discuss it uh directly but we kind of alluded to it with light and indoor light and artificial light so what do we get the human body since its existence has always had blue light in the presence of red light and altogether the entire biological Spectrum and now what we've done is we've essentially created an indoor environment where we have efficient lights which are supposed to be you know more efficient would imply that it's equivalent But realize that led lights or the LED lights that are commercially available for us to buy are energy efficient because they're no they're not broadcasting if you will in the infrared or in the ultraviolet it's a very specific narrow range of visible light we we alluded to this often times there's there's no red light in there either exactly they are really blue green yellow sometimes even UV light right I mean the fluorescent lights in a in a department store for instance or in a pharmacy I haven't done the um spectral waveform analysis but you know those who have it's published it's out there there are a lot of data about environmental Occupational Health stuff um would show that it is the um the emission Spectra are severely tilted toward short wavelengths and there's hardly any red light in there whereas a candle for instance or a fire roaring fire roaring candle people ask that sorry to interrupt is almost all orange and red light right and then people say well won't that wake me up at night and a lot of people are surprised to know this I'll just ask you and it's not a it's not a a trick question but how many looks do you think come from like a um a really bright candle or a roaring fireplace or the brightest Moon moonlit night on a full moon since you asked it that way I'm going to try to guess the other direction and say like 50 so somewhere between one and and 10 would be high level and then and then I started and I was like there's no way that could be right you know how could it be it's like this roaring fireplace or the the Moon that lights up so it turns out that if you're at a at a campfire and we're facing one another around the campfire I can see your face across the campfire I can see the front of your body and so there it looks like the it's so bright must wake me up but no you have no trouble going back to your tent and falling asleep or your cabin if you turn away from that bright campfire you need a flashlight to navigate even the shortest distance which tells you that it's not very bright at all it's it's very concentrated but the falloff of that brightness is is is really what indicates just how how dim it really is but if we think about an LED coming off a wall panel to adjust temperature in a hotel room uh it has something like 100 to 400 locks and and yet we think of it as a dim NightLight and so it's it this is sneaky stuff yeah it's really diabolical because that wall night light or uh thermostat light messes up our glucose regulation as shown in really good peer- reviewed studies absolutely and then the other aspect of it and I actually I think I learned this from you is that um the photo receptors are in the lower portion of our retina right or sorry the um yeah the lower portion of our retina and so this and so your the type of light that's going to affect your circadian rhythm is going to be much more likely to do that if it's coming from up above or you know at the same level than down below that's right and the Scandinavians I have my stepmom a Scandinavian um understood this intuitively and so in the evening they don't have ceiling light they turn off the ceiling lights and then they only use desk you know sort of table level um or even floor lights yeah now candles along the floor would be the ultimate but it's super dangerous and we just had a bunch of fires here and those were outdoor Fires at first anyway but I and the reason we're kind of um uh that we're riffing in a kind of light bio uh uh you know improv here is that when you step back and you just look at it logically yeah we have dim days as you pointed out before we have bright evenings and and nights and it's all short wavelength at night it's terrible I I'm beginning to think that many many many of the problems that we have in terms of our metabolic Health sure it has to do with food certainly has to do with lack of exercise and a number of things screens Etc but I'm convinced that the light piece is at least one of the top three if not the top two major factors in determining the kind of obesity metabolic crisis I I completely agree with you the the one um thing I was going to add to that too are the windows so you you're aware of course in in California we have um we need efficiency um and we have these windows called Low e glass and they're specifically designed to filter out infrared light so the way you can tell whether or not your window is uh is filtering that out is just stand in it when the sun is on it if if there is a lot if you can feel the warmth of that sun then you know that it's one of the old windows that's allowing that to come in if you don't feel it that's a low E glass and so what we've done is we've created this environment inside there's no the we've gotten rid of the incandescent bulbs we have LED bulbs we've gotten rid of the regular window it's all for Energy Efficiency which is a a reasonable thing to do we need Energy Efficiency but but we no one's no one's asked what the human collateral damages to this type of of uh efficiency yeah and we shouldn't have to take vacations to expensive sunny places to overcome this stuff that's not the the right way to think about the way is to try and weave it into our lives low expense or no expense getting outside for instance opening Windows um in cars is the worst yeah so what's Wild is if you go to the Pacific Northwest in the fall or winter when it's really hard to get lighted you know I think Seattle's the northernmost City in the contiguous us it's so dark up there and you get into an Uber they have tinted windows it's so crazy like it's you know it's so wild especially since the research on this stuff is being pioneered largely out of the University of Washington in Seattle okay like we've got a number of things exactly backwards and and light in our relationship to light is one of the the ways in which we do the problem I think is when we start talking like this people think oh well we're all supposed to have you know atriums and skylights and be outside all day it's like yeah actually that would be great and dimmer and darker at night yes so taking small steps towards adjusting toward Bright Days yeah and very dim and Dark Nights is key we didn't talk about incandescent bulbs it used to be until about 15 years ago that the quote unquote efficiency bulbs that were present in all our homes the the bulbs that would burn out pretty often were we know that the incandescent bulbs are more full spectrum yeah they have a lot of red and orange emission you see them as white or but they look a little warmer it has that warm those are great yeah um those are great they're harder to find now actually they were illegal for a short while I don't think anyone was going to come to your house and arrest you but you couldn't get them they were banned and now they're available again is my understanding oh I I haven't seen them but um I know that in new constructions they're not even putting in sockets they're putting in receptacles that can only be replaced with other LEDs so in New in new constructions that's what's going on um you know uh we'll see what happens I I believe there is a movement right now based on the new Administration to see if we can change some of those rules and maybe uh get some rule changes I I believe it's with the Department of energy so do you know who are really the smartest about this stuff that um if you want to know where human self-directed human health is going to be in 5 years you know where uh you know where you can look tell me you talk to the people who are really good at maintaining Aquaria and reptiles ah yes because those animals literally die under conditions of pure blue light like if you've ever had fish tanks I'm a fish like you don't want to send me down this path but there's there's a very famous fish tank designer I was a huge fan of his unfortunately he died of pneumonia in uh at when he was 60 tekashi Mano um there's museums in Japan about we developed this thing called aquascaping which is about plants and lighting more than the fish although there's fish in it and everyone I've been involved in aquascaping in one level or another for a while now um super geeky I know but the whole principle is that you're trying to create full spectrum light plants air you're trying to create the right conditions for these fish and other um aquatic elements like plants to thrive and anyone that understands how to maintain reptiles or understands how which I'm not into I don't like scaly things except fish um or Aquaria they know you can't have a dir of long wavelength light or all the fish get sick the plants die they they just can't do it now there are deep sea plants where the red light long wavelength light doesn't get down to the bottom um and forgive me for for going off on this maybe I should just do a solo episode but you know what's amazing is you know the intrinsically photosensitive cells of the eye that that set our Circ rhythms and that do all this the quote unquote reason um why the peak of the um portion of the V of the visible spectrum is where it is for those cells is because it's the wavelength of light that can go deep into water if you've ever been snorkeling you only see Reds down to about 10 m or so you you swim down a little bit lower you need to bring a light with you right now of course the fish that are red are still red down there you just can't see it because the lack of reflectance of light long wavelength light so yeah so we we are walking around in the evening basically um being exposed to what our eye and brain think is daytime just as our retinal sensitivity is going up oh and then all day we're in this and it's not bright enough right so anyway I'll stop now but um it it has me activated as you can imagine because you hear about all the mental health issues the physical health issues yeah I think they're all Downstream as you pointed out of M andrial dysfunction yeah put differently mitochondrial function is Downstream of proper relationship to light absolutely which you so beautifully Illustrated and I learned a ton that I hadn't known before about that um okay if I continued on Aquaria we won't get out we'll be here this will be the longest podcast episode ever okay I'd love to talk a little bit about two more things um we will return to New Start okay um but I want to know about long covid is long covid a real thing oh yeah and it uh what is long covid what can be done about long covid um how do you know if like like most people by now have had covid at a high level or low level yeah how do you know if you have long covid long covid is defined as having symptoms of of of a number of different types of symptoms typically it's fatigue could be headaches could be all sorts of things um even loss of of uh taste and smell for more than 12 weeks after the infection so we're talking a good three months the thing about long covid in my experience and what I've seen is that it's very heterogeneous and it can be due to many different things so it's been very difficult to put together exactly what the issue is but I'll tell you one one uh as a as a physician as a pulmonologist one of the Cardinal symptoms of long covid is shortness of breath and so because because I'm a lung doctor and uh and people believe that shortness of breath always has to do with the lungs I get a lot of consults for people who have shortness of breath long covid after they were infected months ago and so a lot of these people came to me and one of the things I had to do is research this topic and um as as it turns out one of the not for everybody but for many people with long Co guess what's at the center of long covid and actually we have research to show this mitochondrial dysfunction the thing that gets them covid is the thing that keeps them actually having long so there was a study that was done looking at metabolism and they showed it was uh one of these plots where they looked at up regulation and down regulation of metabolism in the mitochondria and uh they looked at the enzymes of glycolysis if you can remember back all those enzymes and they looked at the enzymes of beta oxidation so fatty acid basically oxidation and it was pretty well shown that there was a significant downregulation in people with long covid versus people who had covid that didn't have long covid that had a downregulation in beta oxidation so they are they were not able to very well utilize and metabolize fatty acids in the mitochondria why is this the case well based on what we talked about earlier one of the certainly one of the the possibilities here is that they were infected with covid it downregulated for many of the systems in their body oxidative stress mechanisms caused damage to their mitochondria and we don't know why but perhaps the areas of the mitochondria that were damaged most had to do with beta oxidation and fatty acid so you you'll talk to people who have been infected with covid and they said we gain weight after after we infected with Co and I have all these symptoms first of all when when someone comes to you like that as a physician you have to make sure that you're ruling out all of the obvious things so I'm getting an echocardiogram to make sure they didn't have some sort of cardiac issue I'm getting pulmonary function tests to make sure they didn't get scarring in their lungs and to you know have restrictive lung disease so I'm ruling out all of these things and so about a month or two later I've got all these tests back and I'm going over it and and for the ones where everything is negative CU there were some where I actually discovered they had clots and we had to treat them for that but for people who have everything negative and they're still complain I remember one gentleman in particular he had eight out of 10 shortness of breath and uh he couldn't sleep very well and this had been going on for over a year and we ruled out pulmonary embolism we ruled out congestive heart failure we ruled out interstitial lung disease with all of the tests and it was about this time that I was coming on to this idea about light and looking at these studies about the mitochondria and I had this idea because there was nothing else left um I had this idea that if there was some way we could regenerate the mitochondria but instead of it being damaged because you know when you have damaged mitochondria that that creates just more oxidative stress and damages it even more so in other words we have to basically get his body into a situation where he was generating new mitochondria so we could get rid of these issues with metabolism so I had this idea and I don't know if it worked this way but I I actually got him to do intermittent fasting this whole idea about how intermittent fasting allows the body to generate things at night because you're now the body knows what it needs to to down regulate and break up you just have to give it the opportunity this is how I understood it the innate immune system looking at pathological molecular patterns and also damaged molecular patterns so pamps and damps DP if we were to allow the immune system to do what it needs to do it would find these areas that are not working well tear them down destroy those cells and then allow regeneration of new cells with hopefully brand new virgin mitochondria so that was the first thing I did he vowed that he would never eat after 5:30 after I explained all this to him I took a clinic visit we explained all of this the other thing I did was told him to get out in the sun now this may sound you know dismissive can you imagine you've got long Co you've been suffering and you go to a physician and they tell you well I want you to stop eating after 5:30 I want you to get outside more like is he taking me seriously does he really believe that I have a condition but I took the time to explain why I was thinking about these things and going through the studies so he did it and I saw him back a month later he was he was amazed I was amazed he said that he um his gastrosoph reflex disease completely went away after he stopped eating after 5:30 his shortness of breath went from an 8 out of 10 to a 3 out of 10 and he said it doesn't even bother him anymore this is after a year of having this type of of uh of symptoms so that really took me a pause now I'll tell you the first thing that that doesn't happen to all of my patients with long covid but it tells me that when you're dealing with long covid you're dealing with people who have had uh an infection that has caused damage to the system and some of the studies from what I reviewed sometimes people have residual virus still in the system there was a study that was done looking at to see whether vaccination of covid-19 would work after patients with with long covid there was some uh benefit it wasn't big but it was some and it may it may be that you're just stimulating the immune system again to fight off this res this this remaining virus that's still in the system um but we have data that shows that the type of inflammation that we get with Spike protein is actually a toll-like receptor 4 type of inflammation there's a study that looked at this and they were actually able to show and demonstrate that infrared light coming back to that again can actually mitigate the inflammation from tolik receptor uh mediated inflammation which is exactly the inflammation mediated in covid-19 so short answer to your question or that's a long answer but the short answer is yes I do believe that long Co is is something and I believe people are suffering with it it's a very heterogeneous um uh disease and it's hard to just pin one thing on everything and and have it work for everything that being said I don't see a lot of downside in instituting some of these things that we think may work sunlight as being one of those things uh people who are sick with uh covid and long Co tend to be sick and they stay indoors and so there may be an exacerbation of the process the last thing they want to do is to get outside um but it may actually be beneficial yeah I would imagine that pretty much everything that you shared with us today would be benefit icial my understanding is that some of the heterogeneity of even just the covid response in various people who got it in addition to the heterogenity and long covid symptoms could be due to the fact that the distribution of A2 receptors is very widespread in the body yeah um SARS K2 uh binds to the A2 receptor um it's the primary receptor site is I understand yeah um and you know I remember early in the pandemic um asking on social media are there A2 receptors in the brain and on neurons and people are like no there's no A2 receptor turns out the olfactory uh thefactory neurons are chocka block through full of uh A2 receptor and they are bonafied uh CNS neurons um their brain neurons um and so and and you lose them fortunately those can replenish over time in an activity dependent way but yeah when I hear that some people you know got covid and it was no big deal other people got covid and um they felt like they had brain fog for six months and are still coping with it probably has to do with the extent to which the virus was able to bind to A2 receptors in one person's brain versus someone else maybe their bloodb brain barrier you know it didn't get in there at all right yeah as I recall from the um from the and this is actually kind of interesting about olfactory is that the Nerf cells that are next to those neurons in the AL Factory are the ones that have a lot of A2 receptors and and that's so what happen is these Nur supporting cells that were helping with the you know whatever they do to support the neurons were dying off and that's why they were losing a sense of smell and so when the nurse cells came back and replenished people didn't smell exactly the same because it when isn't exactly in the same uh didn't come back in the same way there was uh and this has been used for years in in air nose and throat circles is uh something as as this sounds kind of silly but smelling sticks there's actually a protocol that is used that these Mar markers that are manufactured in Europe where they have a different uh different orange lemon chocolate exactly and and smelling these things uh actually over there's a randomized crossover Placebo control trial that actually showed that they were able to regain their sense of smell by training their sense of smell with these sticks it makes sense because the olfactory neurons are replenished not just regenerate but they turn over um in an activity dependent way and so it requires electrical activity and their electrical activity is dictated by smell um in it and so certain clusters of olfactory neurons and the Brain neurons that they connect to or reconnect to in this case are going to be activated by different smells and so the the smell training based protocols for bringing your sense of smell back um uh uh intentionally includes a variety of smells you don't just want to smell lemon you want to smell lemon coffee this um people always say do I need foul smells too in in kind of in and kind of unfortunate way um the neurons that detect noxious odors and bad odors um tend to not die off as readily but it makes sense because those are the the cells that actually preserve your um innate uh aversion reflex right they're the ones that can you know our ability to detect smoke in the air something very relevant to the recent history here in LA or uh ammonia you know things that are potentially hazardous for us is are the detection thresholds are incred ibly low we're just so sensitive this like the fifth cranial nerve isn't it that does that uh uh well yeah so the trigeminal um will you know it it's involved in some of the protection of the the nasal epithelium and and whatnot but these are the this is a direct line through um the olfactory Pathway to the amydala a fairly direct line that's right it bypasses the thalamus right so right all of olfaction bypasses the thalmus but the but the learning of odors is um your odor maps are going to be slight than mine based on your experience but when it comes to the representation of smoke vomit feces and and and rotting bodies all the dangerous stuff yeah um our our Pathways look pretty similar got it got it to be to be blunt um given your expertise in lungs and uh a number of people I know have mold issues they claim or they believe that um mold has infiltrated their lungs um some doctors tell them they're crazy some doctors tell them that they're not crazy uh about that idea um is mold toxicity a real thing can it be treated maybe we do an entire episode about this another time but yeah uh is it a real thing and what is the kind of primary treatment for for mold toxicity it it is a real thing and mold is a is a substance that um can have multiple different effects on on the body let me give you an example um there's a fungus called aspergillis and uh there's two ways that aspergilus can affect the human body one is if it just sets up shop in your lungs and it doesn't invade you could become allergic to it and so the symptoms are allergic actually there's a condition called allergic Bronco pulmonary aspergillosis so it's kind of like an autoimmune situation ex exactly and so you have you have symptoms of asthma you have symptoms of of of inability to breathe and the primary treatment ironic there is steroids because you need to reduce the inflammation but Al also antifungals to get rid of the thing that's inciting in the first place that's as opposed to invasive aspergillosis that's where the fungus comes in and starts to invade and create a cavitary lesion usually with a fungus ball sitting in the middle of it oh yeah it's pretty pretty bad sometimes it's so bad that you actually have to do surgery to cut out that thing because you can't cure it um the way that this often happens is mold and fungus is are in the air all the time so so here's this this understanding of there's germ Theory and there is terrain Theory and today and I I almost hate to even get into it but people think it's one or the other and I can tell you as a physician it's both there are certain diseases it doesn't matter what your terrain is it's it's going to like neria menius if you get that it's going to cause a bad menitis no matter how healthy you are okay there was just a I remember reading about a young um Japanese star I think or Taiwanese star just recently here that died of of influenza 48 years old no no medical problems so it's possible no matter how good your terrain is you could get a bad bug a bad germ and it could kill you on the other hand there are certain bugs that are just sitting out there and they will go in and your immune system will just kick it out like it's nothing why because your terrain is good because you so I can talk about like different types of infections that could do that so that's where we are with molds so typically you're breathing in all sorts of mold and fungus spores all the time but if your immune system is good it'll just kick it out and it won't have a chance to survive where you have a problem is if you have a situation where your immune system is compromised to give you an example of that practically there are some biological medications that people get when they have rheumatoid arthritis before we would if we get to that point where you have rheumatisms there's an antib body there that's suppressing the immune system so that you don't have the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis that's actually suppressing your immune system in those patients we'll always check them for tuberculosis because certain people walking in the population will have an inactivated tuberculosis they've infected but their immune system has walled it off then we put put them on a biologic and the tuberculosis pops up so all of that to say that yes it is possible if you have mold in your house versus if you don't have mold in your house that just increases the burden of mold that you're inhaling and to the degree that it's going to match against the uh your immune system you know that could depend on whether or not it jumps in and actually causes a problem so you know we're coming up this is the time of year where we're coming up to the Super Bowl so it's the question about terrain Theory versus germ Theory and the question is is whoever wins the Super Bowl did did they win the Super bowl or did the other two lose the Super Bowl and that's who knows so this is where this thing is it's not it's not or it's and and really what determines whether or not you get infected is how good is your immune system and how varent is the burden of of pathogen that's going in the reason I asked is it a real thing is that people that I know who um believe they have a mold infection or they did do seem to have symptoms that last a long time yeah and there doesn't seem to be any general agreement about what specific treatment to use for for this unless maybe they need surgery or something so do you give people antifungals um are there is there anything over the- counter that can help will the sauna protocols and steam protocols we were talking about earlier help I would imagine a lot of warm moist air is exactly what fungus loves yes uh it it does if if if someone came to me with mold uh with a mold complaint thinking they had mold um there are a number of tests that you can do to see whether or not there's antibodies to those things and you can see whether or not that may or may not be there it's not definitive but if if somebody actually truly has mold growing in their lungs we should be able to see that on a CAT scan we should be able to identify it we should be able to go and biopsy it we should be able to go and collect it and if that's exactly what grows out on the culture after we take a biopsy or culture we can tailor antifungals for that particular thing in the sense though that someone may be having uh symptoms of some sort of infection or something and there's nothing on the CAT scan um it's harder to really isolate exactly which one it would be and what would be the right treatment although there are some syndromes um known as RADS or reactive Airways disease uh where you can have an exposure to something that's so egregious that even though you don't get exposed that thing again it can still cause persistent uh um difficulty with breathing it's very similar by the way to um to asthma so for instance somebody let's say someone's working in a vat and uh there's a chemical that's spilled and they get an incredible amount of inhalation of that chemical it's well known that these people can go on and have these types of problems even though their lungs May image uh correctly and they may never be exposed to that chemical again let's talk about the T in New Start trust yeah you talked about higher power you talked about Community you talked about connection generally and specifically um you know I've always been struck by how the belief system can impact our physical health we recently had Dr Ellen Langer on the podcast from Harvard who's done incredible studies really about how beliefs can shape our phys physical health in any number of different ways um what is your clinical observation of people who are ill severely ill mildly ill and the role that trust in you know fill in the blank um you can fill in the blank has in terms of the severity of their symptoms and the rate at which they recover and hopefully they do recover yeah they do um some of the times sometimes they don't we can't help that but um you do do the best that we can no it does help uh quite a bit so people who have a a a um a network people that have uh Faith people that have Community have that um that strength that allows them to get through uh those those very difficult times there there's been a number of studies that have have looked at this you think that this area is kind of nebulous and hard to study now there's actually some some pretty good data on this and uh I think back to a number of studies that have been done and where they looked at thankfulness and the the the Mind Body Connection people who are more thankful um have less um sematic complaints for instance than those that are not so they actually did an experiment where they had people write out letters they thought about some mentors in their past and they wrote out letters to thank them and it and it was interesting because not all of the people that wrote the letters were able to actually deliver those letters to those recipients but it didn't matter what they found in the study was just simply the thought of of writing out those letters actually had a a change in the end points in those studies there was another study that was done that that was very um telling to me it was a survey that was done of 1500 people it was published out of of Texas in this particular case they wanted to limit the population of of the uh of the recipients so these were just Christians in this case uh just because of the um the heterogenity they want to see if they can get an endpoint and what they did was they looked at they asked people in this survey um how do you forgive forgiveness has to do a little bit about faith and and Trust as well and there was basically two major types of forgiveness there was forgiveness that was conditional and there was forgiveness that was unconditional and what I mean by that is is that you know people that would forgive conditionally would be if someone did something to somebody they might forgive them if they came back and apologized or they showed some sort of remorse those are the people that forgave conditionally the other people people who forgave unconditionally were the ones that would just forgive regardless of what that other person would do they would just forgive them and it would be off their mind they would just go on their way what they found was really interesting between those two populations now this was an associative study but they found that when they looked at uh anxiety at the end of life uh in terms of anxiety in terms of dying uh well-being somato sensory complaints um all sorts of a whole list of of different things they found that people who for gave conditionally the ones that would wait for someone to come back to them had higher marks in those in those cases in other words they had more anxiety they had more somato complaints um they were less feeling of well-being and so they found that that was really interesting well they didn't stop there they wanted to figure out what was going on and they asked the question okay well what is the biggest determinate that determines whether or not somebody forgives conditionally versus uncondition Al and I think the odds ratio on this statement was like a two or three which is it's getting up there it's almost it's almost you could say that the likelihood ratios are high enough to say causation but not quite but it was high and it came down to this statement and the and the and the statement was do you feel like you have been forgiven by God if they felt like they were forgiven by God they were much more likely to forgive unconditionally if they had ever felt that they were forgiven by if they feel like they were forgiven by God yes for whatever it was that they had done so this was really interesting to me because I often times I will have patients in my Intensive Care Unit who are very anxious they know that I mean anybody who gets admitted to the hospital starts to think about the mortality just imagine if you get admitted to the Intensive Care Unit A lot of my patients are not able to communicate they're they're mentally out but there are a few that can and those you can tell become very anxious so this is an area that I have to sort of delicately ask about because you don't know people's Faith structure you don't know who they are um I'm a I'm a graduate of Lind University and and our motto um and it's it's a Christian institution is is to make man whole and part of that is not just the physical not just the mental but also the spiritual aspect of that so we make no no excuses about that but it's it's important to also understand that not everybody wants to have a spiritual component to their care so you have to approach it in a way that you're almost do give me permission to do this and you have to watch for things it's it's not an easy thing to do but you want to help if someone wants to be helped so often times I will I will talk to them about this very issue and I will say you know is there something on your mind that you need to get off your chest you would be surprised about how many times people have this issue it's because they've done something at some to somebody in their past and they don't feel like they're forgiven and if you have the opportunity to do that to actually give them that ability in their in their belief structure to tell them that they are forgiven it's there's a world of difference and it's it's quite it's quite actually it's quite amazing it's interesting to me that uh in all hospitals not just hospitals with a uh you know an affiliation to a particular branch of religion uh you have chaplain yeah uh you have different um people Associated often with different religions that people can call upon which I find amazing right in this in this quote unquote modern time I mean you know of modern medicine right as far as I know every major hospital has this doesn't matter how Cutting Edge or how small a community hospital which by the way many Community Hospitals are excellent should point that out the words Community Hospital ju opposed to you know cuttingedge research institution you know there's actually a debate as to like which one you would prefer to go to depending on on your needs but they all have um generally as far as I know have um access to uh people um with whom patients and family of patients and Friends of patients can pray and um I that's not a coincidence I think that there's a deep understanding of of the of some sort of relationship there um and certainly there's good science to support everything you just said um and your clinical experience in my mind goes um along with that you know science as you said is very reductionist right but people in two groups one prayes one doesn't you know that's sort of that's the way science is done course but ultimately um the the real world clinical implications are are what um what really resonates so thank you thank you for that I have one final question yeah and and it might get you in trouble okay but I'm gonna ask anyway um let's say I or someone that I care about is admitted to the hospital what are the things to do or ask that were not told that can facilitate better care that are within bounds now I will go on record since these days I'm in the habit of just kind of saying it all um I'm aware that families of donors to hospitals get special care this is I will just tell you there you go to a hospital there's a Code language I happen to know it for several hospitals um there's a Code language of this is a quote unquote special patient this will anger some listeners but it's true this is the way the world works not only some listeners but some Physicians some Physicians too right so that there's a there's a CO there's a Code language that differs by hospital and and I know it for several hospitals and um um I don't want to get into that it's it's uh it's one of the more complicated aspects of medicine in hospital as businesses and things like that yeah um I'm going to get some angry calls about this now the point of asking this is that most people are not donors to hospitals they're not going to um be flagged as a special patient that gets the room with the window that gets sunlight in the morning that gets the room alone without somebody next to them who's coughing all night um and on and on so Are there specific things that people should mention or ask for in order to get the best possible care when um admitted to a hospital sorry I got to put you on the spot no this is this is excellent this is an excellent question um some of the things you can control some of the things you can't control getting a bed is is just completely out of your controls if you're in the emergency room uh you can ask when you're going to go upstairs you'll get to get you're going to get a bed when there's going to be a bed and sometimes I can't even get patients upstairs so they're triaging right they're this one this person is at risk of dying yes this person is miserable right and you're less miserable you're going to wait is that how it works okay potentially I think in terms of in terms of where you are in the hospital and the Great and the care that you're going to get I believe that the number one thing that you can do to make sure that you're getting the appropriate care is to in as many ways as possible communicate to The Physician usually not directly that you are familiar with the disease that the patient is being admitted for and you're going to ask some tough questions um yelling yelling at the nurse uh is not going to help you um saying insulting things to the nurse or the doctor the staff is not going to help you it's going to make things worse I think the number one way and I can tell you that in terms of as me as a physician if I'm speaking to a patient and we have a family member that is asking me intelligent questions about something that's going to put me up on my game that's going to make sure that I know I'm going to be ready for Rounds because you're not going to be glossing over things they're going to be asking some tough questions I got to know what I'm doing and and that's kind of what um I I've been doing for the last 10 years 12 years in terms of uh of the teaching that I do we have a a website called medcram.com where we put up you know if you get a like you go to your doctor and you get a CBC back right how do you interpret that c CBC can you explain CBC to people CBC is a complete blood count and it's the blood test that you get back when you get your blood test there's a there's a metabolic panel that you get back how do you know what's going on with the things um what about a EKG you know you have these smart watches that can actually measure your your heart rate how can you interpret what's going on there we've put courses together to educate people we even have courses on diseases uh congestive heart failure what what kind of questions do you need to ask in congestive heart failure what are the things that you need to watch out for what are the medicines they're going to put you on what are the side effects of those medicines um I think if and you don't have to be that educated actually or even know that much but if you can show that you're ask asking the right questions to a physician they're going to ask you are you in the medical field you're like no I just know about this disease and I have these questions about when are you going to start to do this when are you going to start to do this when is this happening and when's the ne I think that more than anything puts those people who are taking care of you on alert to know that you're intelligent you're going to be asking some questions and they're going to need to make sure that they focus on and answering those questions effectively I think that's that's the number one thing I love it and thank you for stepping right in the line of fire with that one not trying to dodge it so it speaks to uh the kind of person you are it speaks to uh the spirit behind your work which is so clearly in service to helping people you know it's such a cliche thing we hear you know helping people I want to help people but it's very clear that you want to help people you do this in your social media you do this through your um uh online teaching we'll by the way provide links to all these um sources and you're doing this in so many ways and of course in your clinical practice and you know for all those reasons and also for coming here today to take time out of your very busy professional and Family schedule and you have your own self-care right if you're not healthy you can't take care of other people's Health right um I just want to say on behalf of myself and everyone listening and watching thank you so much I learned a ton and I know everyone else listening did as well it's all actionable in service to basic health and improving health and in service to avoiding illness those are not the same thing necessarily although they go hand inand and to moving through illness should one um contract a an infection and you know just a treasure Trove of knowledge so thank you so much I'd love to have you back again I would love to come back I look forward to seeing you online but um even more so in person so uh thank you so much Dr schwell you're a real gem thank you so much thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Roger schwell to learn more about his work and to find links to him on social media and YouTube please see the show note captions if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please click follow for the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics you'd like me to consider for the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast for those of you that haven't heard I have a new book coming out it's my very first book it's entitled protocols an operating manual for the human body this is a book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and experience and it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to Stress Control protocols related to focus and motivation and of course I provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included the book is now available by pre-sale at protocols book.com there you can find links to various vendors you can pick the one that you like best again the book is called protocols an operating manual for the human body if you're not already following me on social media I am huberman lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram X formerly known as Twitter Facebook LinkedIn and threads and on all those platforms I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content on the huberman Lab podcast again that's hubman lab on all social media platforms and if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a zeroc cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to three-page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep how to optimize dopamine deliberate cold exposure we have a foundational Fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resist distance training all of that is available completely zero cost you simply go to hubman lab.com go to the menu tab in the top right corner scroll down to news letter and enter your email and I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Roger schwell and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 34 ---
Video ID: hviHgpxjXcc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hviHgpxjXcc
Title: The Mind-Muscle Connection & Its Impact on Strength Gains
Published: 2025-02-22 21:10:13 UTC
Description:
I discuss the mind-muscle connection and explain that if you can contract a muscle hard—almost to the point of cramping—you’re likely to generate hypertrophy and strength gains more easily than with muscles you struggle to activate.

Transcript Language: English
- If you can contract a muscle very hard to the point where it almost feels like it's cramping if you can do that, even when there's no weight in your hand or there's no resistance against it so you're just using your mind muscle connection to contract that muscle hard and isolate it, chances are you'll be able to generate hypertrophy and strength gains pretty easily in that muscle compared to muscles that you have a harder time activating.

========================================

--- Video 35 ---
Video ID: rkFHdXo1O0w
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rkFHdXo1O0w
Title: How to Build Strength & Endurance
Published: 2025-02-21 15:38:05 UTC
Description:
Pavel Tsatsouline is one of the world’s top authorities on building strength, endurance, and flexibility.

We discussed a topic that I believe isn’t covered enough: how to get strong without necessarily adding muscle size. Many people don’t want to be much bigger, but most everybody wants endurance. It’s possible to train for both simultaneously. It also turns out that training for strength with low repetitions (two to five reps) is safer than training with high repetitions—if done correctly. That’s because higher repetitions fatigue the stabilizing muscles. Still, there’s a proper way to train heavy, and Pavel explains it.

Hypertrophy training, or training for muscle size, is far more draining to the systemic nervous system than most people realize. So if you struggle with post-workout fatigue or experience brain fog later in the day, you might try training with heavier weights and lower repetitions for a while, focusing on strength instead.

We also discussed the longevity benefits of training for strength and endurance. And for those who want to add muscle size, Pavel explains shorter workouts that can be used to augment a strength program while minimizing inroads to recovery.

Additionally, we covered how to build flexibility, all with minimal time investment. Pavel is a true expert and a no-frills instructor. There’s something for everyone in this episode—it definitely applies to both women and men.

Transcript Language: English
What are your thoughts about going into the gym in order to do the strength training, and then generating the endurance work elsewhere? To be blunt, how would one combine lifting and running in a way that allows one to get stronger and develop endurance perhaps simultaneously? If we're talking about right now people who are just active, people who are not athletes, there are several things they need to keep in mind. One is the timing, relative timing of strength work and endurance work. If the strength exercises that you're doing are primarily neural adaptations is what you're targeting, which means lower repetitions, heavier stuff, then it's important to be fresh when you're doing the exercise. It's not really... Doesn't matter as much what happens afterwards. So which means that you could do some heavy deadlifts, heavy deadlifts, and then a few hours later, you can go for your hike. On the other hand, if your lifting is more hypertrophy-oriented, it's less important if you come in tired. It's okay even if you just hiked in the morning and then you went, did your curls. But afterwards, for 36, 48 hours, it's ideal to restrict endurance exercise. So because you're really going to have a massive conflict right there, and it's not a good idea to do that. If you're doing our preferred work of let's say sets of five reps. Five reps, again, they address both endurance and strength. Well, (chuckles) I guess you better keep a window on both ends right there. Mm-hmm. There's always a conflict. Thomas Sowell said, "There are no solutions. There are only compromises." So you just have to decide which way you want to compromise. But that separation in time really does help. The other thing is spending different times when you focus on one thing versus the other. So the next two months, you're going to spend on hitting your strength hard and you're just going to do two hikes a week just for your health just to maintain. And then summer rolls around, and you put your lifting on the back burner, you lift less, not necessarily lighter, just less, and you spend a lot more time outdoors and do these different things.

========================================

--- Video 36 ---
Video ID: v4HRWgwjP_k
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v4HRWgwjP_k
Title: How to Optimize Testosterone & Estrogen | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-02-20 13:01:30 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I explain how to optimize hormones—particularly testosterone, estrogen, and related sex steroids—to enhance fertility and overall well-being.

I discuss the sources of testosterone and estrogen and how their levels fluctuate with age in both males and females. I also cover how behaviors such as exercise, cold and heat exposure, light exposure, illness, and breathing patterns affect hormones. Additionally, I examine specific supplements and replacement therapies, highlighting important precautions to consider when adjusting hormone levels.

Huberman Lab Essentials episodes are approximately 30 minutes long and focus on key scientific insights and protocol takeaways from past Huberman Lab episodes. These short episodes will be released every Thursday, while our full-length episodes will continue to be released every Monday.

Read the show notes for this episode: https://go.hubermanlab.com/srZp7sJ

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Hormones, Sexual Development
00:01:15 Testosterone & Estrogen Sources & Age, Adrenals 
00:03:34 Competition, Males & Testosterone; Dopamine
00:07:56 Testosterone Decreases, Expectant Fathers, Illness
00:09:59 Sleep Apnea, Testosterone, Estrogen, Cortisol, Tool: Nasal Breathing
00:14:25 Dopamine, Cortisol, Fertility, Tool: Light Viewing Behavior
00:16:56 Heat, Cold & Hormone Levels
00:18:39 Resistance & Endurance Training, Testosterone, Tool: Exercise Order
00:20:51 Estrogen, Menopause, Hormone Therapy
00:22:31 Vitamins, Opioids, Supplements, Tongkat Ali, Cancer Risk
00:27:02 Luteinizing Hormone, hCG, Fadogia Agrestis, Tool: Blood Tests
00:31:37 Recap & Key Takeaways

#HubermanLab #Hormones #Science #Health 

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to hubman Labb Essentials where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health physical health and performance I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford before we begin today just want to acknowledge that if you're watching this on YouTube yes I have a bandage on the left side of my face I was trying to cook something for Costello and I and I got burned burned myself it was cooking acccident I'm fine no need to dwell on it we can move on but I just wanted to let you know everybody's going to be okay he got a great meal I got a burn and a great meal today we're going to be talking about hormone optimization and we're mainly going to be focusing on estrogen and testosterone and their derivatives now estrogen and testosterone and their derivatives are what we call sex steroids but I just want to emphasize that estrogen and testosterone are present in everybody it's their ratios that the determine their effects So today we're going to talk about how specific types of exercise particular patterns of cold exposure as well as particular patterns Believe It or Not of breathing can impact sex steroid hormones both estrogen and testosterone so one of the first things to understand if you want to optimize your hormones is where they come from there are a lot of different glands in the body that produce hormones but when we're talking about the sex steroid hormones estrogen and testosterone the major sources are ovaries for estrogen and the testes for testosterone although the adrenals can also make testosterone now there are also some enzymes enzymes are things that can change chemical composition and the enzymes that we're going to talk about today are the aromatases mainly the aromatases convert testosterone into estrogen so in a male for instance that has very high testosterone some of that is going to be converted into estrogen by aromat taste the important thing to know is that prepub ENT females make very little estrogen and when we talk about estrogen we mainly talk about estrad which is the most active form of estrogen in both males and females so preu and females very low levels of estrogen during puberty levels of estrogen AKA estradi basically Skyrocket and then across the lifespan estrogen is going to vary depending on the stage of the menstrual cycle but as one heads into menopause which typically takes place nowadays somewhere between age 45 and 60 levels of estrogen are going to drop and then postmenopause levels of estrogen are very low as well testosterone will fluctuate across the lifespan testosterone is going to be relatively low pre pre-puberty in males during puberty it's going to Skyrocket and then the current numbers are that it drops off at about a rate of 1% per year so let's talk about other sources of these hormones and then it will make clear what Avenues you might want to take in order to optimize these hormones the other glands and tissues in the body that make these hormones testosterone and estrogen as I mentioned briefly are the adrenals so the adrenals right on top the kidneys and the release of these steroid hormones from the adrenals in particular testosterone and some of its related uh derivatives are mainly activated by competition it's pretty interesting there's a lot of evidence in animals and humans that competitive scenarios at least short-lived competitive scenarios can liberate testosterone from the adrenals so let's talk about competition because it turns out that competition is a powerful influence on the sex steroid hormones and the sex steroid hormones powerfully influence competition so most people don't realize this but most males of a given mamalian species never get to reproduce in fact they never even get to have sex at all and we don't often think about that but testo tone plays a powerful role in determining which members of a given species will get to reproduce which ones of that species will actually get access to females and so here I'm not talking about humans specifically but it's well known in species like elephant seals in species like antler animals and Rams for instance that the higher levels of testosterone correlate with access to females now one interpretation of this is that the females are detecting which males have high testosterone and selecting them they're more receptive to them but it's actually more so that the males that have higher testosterone forage further and will fight harder for the females and this is really interesting because there's very good evidence now that testosterone can reduce anxiety promote novelty seeking and promote competitive interactions and so before you leap too far with this in your mind and think about all these human behaviors just stay with me because there's a little bit of biology here that makes it all make sense and it turns out to be pretty simple we have a brain region called the amydala in Latin that just means almond but the amydala is most famous for its role in fear we hear a lot about fear and the amydala but the the amydala is really involved in threat detection it sets our thresholds for anxiety and what we consider scary or too much testosterone secreted from the gonads and elsewhere in the body binds to the amydala and changes the threshold for stress so I've said before on previous versions of this podcast and on other podcasts that testosterone has this incredible effect of making effort feel good but what I was really referring to is the fact that testosterone lowers Stress and Anxiety in particular in males of a given species testosterone increases generally lead to more foraging more more novelty seeking increases in libido and increases in desire to mate so it is the case that increases in testosterone promote competitive and foraging type behaviors in in humans and in non-human mammals but it's also true that competition itself can increase Androgen such as testosterone now some people have come to the conclusion that if you win your testosterone goes up and if you lose your testosterone goes down and to some extent that's true but that's not a direct effect on the gonads that's actually mediated by the neuromodulator dopamine we talked about dopamine in the episode on motivation and drive and dopamine and testosterone have a remarkable interplay in the body dopamine is actually released in the brain in ways that has the pituitary this gland that sits over the roof of your mouth release certain hormones that then go on to promote the release of more testosterone and indeed winning promotes more dopamine and later more testosterone however in the short term just competing increases testosterone independent on whether or not you win or lose so testosterone is driving the seeking of sex and estrogen is promoting the actual Act of sex from females so-called receptivity consensual receptivity in males it's interesting to point out the testosterone is promoting seeking of sex but it's also estrogen in males that's important for libido if estrogen levels are brought too low then men will completely lose their libido so it's not simply the case that high levels of testosterone produce a lot of sex and mating behavior and low levels of estrogen are good across the board you actually need both in both males and females it's just that in females the testosterone levels are always going to be lower than the estrogen levels and in males the estrogen levels are always going to be lower than testosterone levels so just as there are behaviors that can increase testosterone there are behaviors that can decrease testosterone and one of the most well-characterized ones in humans is becoming a parent so expecting fathers have an almost 50% decrease in testosterone levels both free and bound testosterone it turns out that these effects of reduced testosterone increase testr and reduce cortisol can all be explained by an increase in prolactin it is a well-known phen phenon that testosterone is going to drop prolactin is going to increase estrad is going to increase in males and females that are expecting children the other behavior that markedly reduces testosterone in both males and females and markedly reduces the desire for seeking sex and sex itself is illness and many of you might say well duh when people feel sick they don't feel like seeking out mates they don't feel like having sex but have you ever wondered why that actually is well it turns out that it can be explained by the release of what are called inflammatory cyto kindes so cyto kindes are related to the immune system they travel in the lymph and in the blood and they attack Invader cells like bacteria and viruses and under conditions of illness we make a lot of different cyto kindes some of them are anti-inflammatory but some of them are pro-inflammatory and the best known example of a pro-inflammatory cyto kind is il6 and it's known that il6 when injected into individuals will decrease the desire for sex and eventually will reduce levels of testosterone and estrogen independent of feeling lousy now isex doesn't just travel to the gonads and shut down the gonads it actually has ways to interact with some of the receptors that the steroid hormones estrogen and testosterone bind to and impact those receptors so that the sex steroid hormones can't have their effect in shorted and put simply inflammatory cyto kindes like il6 are bad for sex steroid hormones one of the main behaviors that's been shown to be associated with poor levels of estrogen relative to age match controls for people with ovaries or lower levels of testosterone compared to AG match controls for people with testes is apnea so what is apnea apnea is under breathing or mainly cessation of breathing during sleep so people are holding their breath and then they they'll suddenly wake up people people who are dramatically overweight also suffer a lot from apnea during sleep and it's well established that going into deep sleep and getting the proper patterns of slow wave sleep and REM sleep are important for hormone optimization breathing itself can be adjusted in the daytime waking hours in ways that can powerfully impact both sleep reduce incidence of sleep apnea and also help to optimize various hormones even just by breathing in particular ways while awake believe it or not being a nasal breather and avoiding being a mouth breather can actually positively impact hormones and in particular the hormones testosterone and estrogen although the way that it does that is by making you a better sleeper which allows you to produce more testosterone and the appropriate amounts of testosterone and estrogen but it does that in part through indirect mechanisms Because deep sleep supports the gonads the ovaries and and the testicles and the turnover of cells and the production of cells remember in the in the ovary particular cells and the Egg follicles themselves make estrogen and in the in the test in the testicle that the CI cells and the liic cells are important for the formation of sperm and for testosterone respectively so what does this all mean this means we have to be breathing properly to get your breathing and sleep right so that your sleep can actually be deep enough and you're not entering apnea States getting proper sleep can um really offset all the reductions in testosterone and estrogen and reductions in fertility that occur if we don't get enough sleep but seldom as it discussed how sleep actually adjusts things like testosterone and estrogen and it does it by modifying cortisol so the molecule cholesterol can be converted into testosterone or estrogen but there's a competition whereby the cholesterol will turn into cortisol and not test testosterone or it'll turn into cortisol and not estrogen if stress levels are too high so the simple version of this is getting your breathing right during the waking hours meaning primarily unless you're working out really hard or there's some other reason why you're maybe eating or speaking that you need to be breathing through your mouth you should be a nose breather there's really good evidence for that now and in sleep you also want to be a nose breather because that's going to increase the amount of oxygen that you're bringing into your system and the amount of carb di oxide that you're offloading okay so the simple version of this is get your breathing right so how do you do that how do you get your breathing right well for some people that have severe sleep apnea they're going to need the CPAP machine this is a machine that you actually put on your face and it helps you breathe properly and sleep in the daytime the best way to get good at nasal breathing is to dilate the nasal passages because a lot of people have a hard time breathing through their nose and one way to do this is to just breathe through your nose more and one way to do that is that when you exercise in particular cardiov vascular exercise most of the time provided you're not in maximum effort you should be nasal breathing now for a lot of people nasal breathing during exercise is hard at first but as you do it because the sinuses have a capacity to dilate over time you'll get better at it so my advice would be breathe through your nose while exercising unless you're in maximum effort pretty soon what you'll find is you actually can create more output than you would if you breathing through your mouth learn to a nasal breather has positive cosmetic effects it reduces apnea it offloads more carbon dioxide it increases lung capacity it dilates the sinuses and it prevents apnea in sleep so unless you have severe apnea and you need the CPAP Nas becoming a nasal breather can have all sorts of positive effects by reducing cortisol reducing apnea and indirectly raising testosterone and estrogen in the proper ratios the second piece of Behavioral advice relates to the viewing of light and many of you have heard me talk about this before and I'm not going to belabor the point that viewing Bright Light Within the first hour of waking whether or not it's from artificial light or ideally from sunlight has these powerful effects on sleep and wakefulness but we have to return to this if you want to understand how light can impact hormones because hormones light and dopamine have a very close knit relationship so much so that your light viewing Behavior can actually have a direct effect on hormone levels and fertility I think most people don't really understand how powerful this relationship is between light dopamine hormones and when dopamine levels are high as I mentioned before there's a tendency for more genotropin releasing hormone lutenizing hormone follicle stimulating hormone all the hormones that come from the hypothalamic pituitary axis and stimulate estrogen and testosterone release from the ovary and testes so how does this translate to a protocol if you want to optimize testosterone an estrogen you need to get your light viewing Behavior correct it's not just about optimizing your sleep which is also important it's about getting sufficient amount of light in your eyes so you have sufficient levels of dopamine so the simple protocols for that I've reviewed before but it means getting anywhere from 2 to 10 minutes of bright light exposure in your eyes early in the day it is not sufficient to do this with sunglasses unless you have to do that for safety reasons it's fine to where prescription lenses in contacts if you can't get sunlight for whatever reason you want to use bright artificial light but that is absolutely critical for timing the cortisol release properly limiting cortisol release to the early part of the day getting increases in dopamine that are going to promote the production of testosterone and estrogen to healthy levels the other aspect of light viewing Behavior that's extremely important is to avoid bright light exposure to your eyes in the middle of the night if you're viewing bright light in the middle of the night you are suppressing dopamine release if you're suppressing dopamine release you are suppressing pressing testosterone levels so you can't even begin to talk about supplements and other ways to optimize testosterone diet and its effects on testosterone and estrogen and fertility and reproductive Behavior Etc until you get your breathing right until you get things like your light viewing Behavior right so bright light early in the day and throughout the day is great and avoiding bright light in the middle of the night is not just about not disrupting your sleep it's also about optimizing the sex steroid hormones Okay so we've talked about breathing we've talked about light let's talk about a third element that there seems to be some excitement about lately uh for other reasons but that can actually have some pretty profound influences on hormone levels and that's heat and cold so as always rather than just offer a tool I'm going to tell you the underlying science as it relates to naturally occurring phenomenon because in understanding that and understanding the mechanism you're going to be in a far better position to understand the tools and mechanisms and how you might want to adjust them for your own life so now you understand the relationship between light day length dopamine and hormone levels and everyone should realize that temperature and day length are linked temperature and day length and sunlight those are all intimately related because of the systems that we evolved in right so nowadays there's a lot of interest in using cold as a way to stimulate testosterone sounds pretty crazy but believe it or not that and things like ice baz and cold showers can have positive effects on the sex steroid hormones what happens is there's a rebound in vasod dilation after cooling so cooling causes Vaso constriction and then after the cooling there's a rebound vasod dilation and there's more infusion of blood into the gonads put simply we don't know whether or not cold and heat directly affect the prod the production of testosterone and estrogen we only know that cold and heat can modulate those probably through indirect mechanisms like controlling the amount of blood flow by way of shutting down or activating the neurons now let's talk about particular forms of exercise and how they modulate the steroid hormones so what's interesting is when you start digging into the more mechanistic studies what you find is that heavy weight trainings but not weight training to failure where completion of a repetition is possible leads to the greatest increases in testosterone so anywhere from one rep maximum to somewhere in the you know 6 to8 rep repetition range in males or females increases testosterone significantly and it does it for about a day sometimes up to 48 hours now many of you might be endurance athletes or also enjoy exercise besides heavy weight bearing exercise and there are several studies exploring whether or not endurance activity can increase or decrease Androgen levels and whether or not you combine endurance activity and weight training whether or not that has any effect if you do the endurance activity first or second and the takeaway from all of this was that endurance activity if performed first leads to decreases in testosterone during the weight training session as compared to the same weight training session done first followed by endurance activity in other words if you want to optimize testosterone levels it seems to be the case that weight training first and doing cardio type endurance activity afterward is the right order of business now when these are done on separate days it doesn't seem to have an effect there is they showed no statistical interaction but it seems that if you're going to do these in the same workout episode that it's move heavy loads first then do cardiovascular exercise so there's a little bit of data looking specifically at how endurance exercise impacts testosterone and its derivatives and it's very clear that high interval training sprinting Etc which somewhat mimics the neural activity that occurs while moving heavy weight loads is going to increase testosterone there's ample evidence for that in the in the literature and that endurance exercise that extends Beyond 75 minutes is going to start to lead to reductions in testosterone presumably by increases in cortisol so now let's switch over to talking about estrogen so there are many people who are trying to optimize their estrogen levels and and one of the places where this shows up a lot and I get a lot of questions about is menopause so menopause as I mentioned earlier is this fairly massive reduction in the amount of estrogen that one is circulating in one's blood mainly because the ovary is now depleted of some estrogen production of its own the eggs are not being produced they've been depleted Etc so menopause is characterized by a variety of symptoms things like hot flashes things like mood swings things like headaches in particular migraine headaches there can be a lot of brain fog it can be very very disruptive for people so what are the various things that one can do for menopause well one of the most common ones is that Physicians will prescribe supplemental estrogen so this is hormone therapy where somebody takes either oral estrogen or they'll take they use a patch or a pellet some way to secrete estradi into the system and that has varying success depending on the individual some people respond very well to it other people really have challenges with it and there are a lot of side effects associated with it for some people not others in addition there's a concern always about supplementing estrogen when there's a breast cancer uh background in the family or there's concern about breast cancer for any reason because a lot of those cancers are estrogen dependent and that's why drugs like tamoxifen and an asrol and drugs that block either aromatase or block and uh excuse excuse me estrogen receptors directly were initially developed okay so now let's talk about the role of specific compounds some of which many of which can be taken in supplementation form to optimize sexo hormones it's very clear that certain collections of nutrients are useful for promoting testosterone and estrogen production in their proper ratios and those things are what I would call the sort of Usual Suspects vitamin D which is important for so many biological functions including endocrine functions zinc magnesium Etc one of the things that's been shown time and time again to have very negative effects on sex steroid hormones testosterone mainly in men estrogen mainly in women is opioids the opioids dramatically reduce levels of testosterone and estrogen and they do that mainly by disrupting The receptors on gonadotropin releasing hormone neurons these neurons with than the hypothalamus that communicate to the pituitary and in fact people that take large amounts of opioids or even take low levels of opioids for long periods of time will develop all sorts of endocrine syndromes that's been shown over and over again gyacom Masia or male breast development in males disruptions to the ovary in females it's really a a quite terrible situation so uh excessive opioids are very problematic for sex steroid hormones now there's an entire industry devoted to supplements and various things that people can take to increase testosterone some of which have scientific data to support them uh some of which do not and some of which have anecdotal support and some of which do not there are supplements in particular Tonga Ali which is has this other name it's sometime called tongat Ali sometimes it's called and the forgive me that it's hard to pronounce but uroma uh longifolia Jack this has been shown in several studies and you can find these on exam.com or you can go to PubMed if you like I've looked at these that it does seem to have some pro- fertility Pro free testosterone and subtle aphrodesiac effects it does also seem to be a slight anti-estrogen so um the reports of this people take this anywhere from 400 to 800 milligrams a day again I'm not suggesting you do that but that's kind of what's out there and there is some decent scientific literature uh to support the fact that it liberates some of the bound testosterone and allows more free testosterone to be available some of the reported quote unquote side effects are things like um excessive alertness and insomnia if it's taken too late in the day and so forth but I encourage you to explore that further if if an increasing free testosterone is something that you're interested in doing people with different backgrounds and conditions as we talked about for menopause and estrogen have to be careful because when you're starting to modulate hormones you're starting to modulate not just the tissues that thrive on binding of those hormones but remember um the reason why there's so much breast cancer and there's a reason why there's so much testicular cancer is that any tissue that undergos rapid reproduction of particular cells so there's a lot of reproduction of cells and shedding of uterine lining and the reproduction of cells and eggs in the ovary and in the testes there's the production of Li dig and CI cells and there's this kind of ongoing production of sperm that's why those tissues are particularly vulnerable to the development of cancers and many of those cancers are Androgen sensitive that's why one of the major treatments for prostate overgrowth or prostate cancer is to give anti-androgenic drugs it's really about trying to prevent testosterone from encouraging growth of tumors so I want to you know really emphasize the caution there um because it it's easy when thinking about optimizing estrogen and testosterone to just think oh more is better more is definitely not better any tissue that recycles itself is prone to cancers and those tissues thrive on androgens and estrogens to create more tumors so you have to be careful anytime you're modulating hormones especially androgens and estrogens and while we're talking about supplementation the effects of supplementation I would say in some individuals can be quite traumatic but they're always always always except in extreme cases going to be far more subtle than would be for instance just in injecting testosterone or injecting estrogen Etc so I think we should just be honest and upfront about that so thus far in terms of talking about optimizing hormones and in the discussion of supplementation I haven't really talked about things that actually affect the brain directly that increase the pituitary output and things of that sort we' mainly been talking about things that free up testosterone or that increase estrogen at the level of the periphery but if you remember way back to the beginning of this episode hormones are made in different locations in the body and then there are hormones promote the release and the production of of hormones from other tissues in the body and one of the main hormones for that is lutenizing hormone lutenizing hormone again comes from the pituitary circulates and either goes to the ovary to Pro promote various aspects of of egg maturation um as well as production of estrogen and to the testes to promote testosterone and sperm production and the prescription version of increasing luteinizing hormone is something called HCG or human chonic gonadotropin which has been synthesized and is now available as a prescription drug it's taken in various uh contexts for increasing fertility both by males and by females it can increase um for all the reasons that now make sense it can increase sperm production it can produce um ovulation frequency it can produce the number of eggs even that that are deployed in in a given ovulation although that's not always a good thing um it B basically is pro fertility Pro testosterone pro- estrogen depending on your background and what's interesting is HCG was initially uh synthesized um collected and synthesized from pregnant women's urine and believe it or not uh before it was synthetically uh made and sold as a prescription drug um there was actually a black market uh for pregnant women's urine where people would buy the urine uh I don't know I'm guessing that probably just um consumed it which is weird but in any case um human corion ganat tropin is now available as a prescription drug and it's one of the things that many people use to increase testosterone or estrogen for increasing fertility but there are certain supplements not many that apparently can increase lutenizing hormone and thereby can increase testosterone and estrogen and one of the more well documented ones is fogia agrestis that's f a o g i a separate word a g r s t i s which at least according to the literature uh that I was able to find can increase levels of lutenizing hormone and thereby levels of testosterone or levels of estrogen the side effect profile of fogi agus hasn't really been documented so it's a little unclear I just want to emphasize that anytime someone's going to start taking supplements that uh or modifying sex steroid hormones getting blood work done is extremely important um it for safety reasons and also just to know whether or not things are working and because all of these things are subject to negative feedback talked about this previously uh previous episode but if testosterone goes high or too high it can feed back and shut down lutenizing hormone which will then shut down further testosterone production likewise if estrogens are going too high or they're going too high at various phases of the cycle that can start to throw off various other hormones including um FSH progesterone LHH the menstrual cycle itself is a just absolutely Exquisite balance of feedback of L luteinizing hormone kept low and constant at least for the first 14 days of the cycle then midcycle there's a peak and that's typically when ovulation occurs that's why pregnancy is most likely during the middle of the 28 day cycle FSH kind of goes up and then down across the first 14 days so taking anything or really modifying one's estrogens or testosterone on on that background of the menstrual cycle is really going to disrupt the way those things interact and it's just such an Exquisite feedback loop so I'm not saying don't um do that but you definitely want to be aware of what you're doing and blood draws are one way to do that monitoring Cycles uh for ovulating females is another way to do that and in males having a good window into what's going on with testosterone DHT aromat taste estradi um LH Etc it's just vital and it's really um part and partial with the practice of thinking about optimizing these incredible things that we call sex steroid hormones estrogen and testosterone and their derivatives so once again we covered a tremendous amount of information I hope that you'll come away from this with a deeper mechanistic understanding of how the brain and body are interacting to control the output and the ways in which these incredible things that we call sex steroid hormones work and influence us I hope you'll also Come Away with some ideas of that you can do in particular behavioral practices that can improve sleep and your relationship to light Etc because those things really set the foundation not just for healthy steroid hormone output but for all sorts of health effects and for both the psychology and the biology of your nervous system in closing I hope you'll leave today's episode with a much richer understanding of the mechanisms that control the endocrine and nervous system in the context of estrogen and testosterone as well as take away various tools that you might choose to apply and as always thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 37 ---
Video ID: bAWUYuygS_U
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bAWUYuygS_U
Title: How to Make Better Decisions | Dr. Michael Platt
Published: 2025-02-17 13:00:47 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. Michael Platt, Ph.D., professor of neuroscience and psychology at the University of Pennsylvania. We discuss how our hormones and social status influence what we value and how we make decisions across various areas, from whom and what we find attractive to our political affiliations. We also explore how humans evaluate and exchange power in relationships and how our perceived place in a hierarchy impacts decision-making. Dr. Platt also shares new science-based tools for improving focus, creativity, and attention.

Read the full show notes for this episode: https://go.hubermanlab.com/CxJNlhA

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Our Place: https://fromourplace.com/huberman
Wealthfront**: https://wealthfront.com/huberman
BetterHelp: https://betterhelp.com/huberman
Function: https://functionhealth.com/huberman

_**This experience may not be representative of the experience of other clients of Wealthfront, and there is no guarantee that all clients will have similar experiences. Cash Account is offered by Wealthfront Brokerage LLC, Member FINRA/SIPC. The Annual Percentage Yield (“APY”) on cash deposits as of December 27,‬ 2024, is representative, subject to change, and requires no minimum. Funds in the Cash Account are swept to partner banks where they earn the variable‭ APY. Promo terms and FDIC coverage conditions apply. Same-day withdrawal or instant payment transfers may be limited by destination institutions, daily transaction caps, and by participating entities such as Wells Fargo, the RTP® Network, and FedNow® Service. New Cash Account deposits are subject to a 2-4 day holding period before becoming available for transfer._

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://go.hubermanlab.com/instagram 
Threads: https://go.hubermanlab.com/threads
X: https://go.hubermanlab.com/x 
Facebook: https://go.hubermanlab.com/facebook
TikTok: https://go.hubermanlab.com/tiktok
LinkedIn: https://go.hubermanlab.com/linkedin
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://go.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Dr. Michael Platt*
Lab website: https://plattlabs.rocks 
Website: https://www.drmichaelplatt.com 
University of Pennsylvania academic profile: https://psychology.sas.upenn.edu/people/michael-l-platt 
"The Leader’s Brain" (book): https://amzlink.to/az0C15in1FqOX
Cogwear: https://cogweartech.com 
X: https://x.com/michaellouispl1
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/michael-platt-21767539
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/michaellouisplatt 

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Dr. Michael Platt
00:02:12 Humans, Old World Primates & Decision-Making; Swiss Army Knife Analogy
00:07:52 Sponsors: Our Place & Wealthfront
00:11:01 Attention Allocation, Resource Foraging
00:16:40 Social Media; Marginal Value Theorem, Distraction
00:22:22 Tool: Remove Phone from Room; Attention & Urgency
00:25:23 Tool: Self Conversation; Visual Input, Attention as a Skill
00:29:29 Warming-Up Focus, Tool: Visual Aperture & Attention
00:38:57 Sponsor: AG1
00:40:13 Control of Attention, Tool: Changing Environment
00:44:07 Attention Continuum, Professions, Measuring Business Skill with Neuroscience
00:53:06 Theory of Mind, Covert Attention, Attentional Spotlights
01:00:05 Primates, Hormone Status, Brain Size, Monogamy
01:09:31 Monkeys, Neuronal Multiplexing & Context; Equitable Relationships
01:20:05 Sponsor: BetterHelp
01:21:11 Relationships, Power Dynamics, Neuroethology
01:29:34 Humans, Females & Hormone Status; Monkeys, Social Images, Hormones
01:38:03 Humans, Attractiveness, Value-Based Decision Making
01:44:32 Altruism, Group Selection & Cooperation, Selflessness
01:49:08 Males, Testosterone, Behavior Changes
01:55:46 Sponsor: Function
01:57:34 Oxytocin, Pro-Social Behaviors, Behavioral Synchrony
02:08:13 MDMA, Oxytocin, Anxiety; Social Touch, Despair & Isolation
02:17:12 Isolation, Social Connections & Strangers, Tool: Deep Conversation Questions
02:21:17 Bridging the Divide, Tribes & Superficial Biases
02:26:58 Testosterone, Risk-Taking Behavior
02:30:52 Decision-Making, Tool: Accurate or Fast?
02:38:31 Decision-Making, Impact of Time & Fatigue
02:45:23 Advertising, Status, Celebrity, Monkeys
02:52:19 Hierarchy; Abundance & Scarcity, Money & Happiness, Loss Aversion
03:02:47 Meme Coins, Celebrity Endorsement, Social Sensitivity
03:12:22 Decisions & Urgency; Bounded & Ecological Rationality
03:18:09 Longevity Movement; Mortality & Motivation
03:24:48 Retirement?, Serial Pursuits & Pivoting
03:30:17 Apple or Samsung?, Brand Loyalty, Empathy
03:38:15 Political Affiliation, Empathy
03:46:22 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Follow & Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Protocols Book, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science 

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Dr Michael Platt Dr Michael Platt is a professor of neuroscience and psychology at the University of Pennsylvania his laboratory focuses on decision-making more specifically how we make decisions and the impact of power dynamics such as hierarchies in a given organization or group as well as hormones on decisionmaking we also discuss valuation that is how we place value on things on people and what you'll find is that there are many factors that impact whether or not we think something is good very good bad or very bad that operate below our conscious awareness in fact today's discussion will teach you how you make decisions how to make better decisions in the context of everything from picking out a watch or a pair of shoes all the way up to something as important as picking a lifemate indeed hormones hierarchies and specific things that are operating within you and adjacent to nearby the things that you're evaluating whether or not those things are people or objects are powerfully shaping the neural circuits that lead you to make specific decisions so today you're going to learn how all of that works and as I mentioned how to make better decisions Dr plat also explains how we are evaluating the hormone levels of other people both same sex and opposite sex and the implications that has for relationships of all kinds it's an incredibly interesting and unique conversation certainly unique among the conversations I've had with any of my Neuroscience colleagues over the decades and I know that the information you're going to learn today is going to be both fascinating to you it certainly was to me and that it will impact the way that you think about all decisions at every level in everyday life before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme this episode does include sponsors and now for my discussion with Dr Michael Platt Dr Michael Platt welcome thanks it's awesome to be here I've been following your work since I was a graduate student and it's really interesting you're an anthropologist by training turned neuroscientist turned practical applications of Neuroscience and related fields to everybody as it relates to business decisionmaking social interactions hormones you've worked on a lot of different things the first question I have is let's all agree we're Old World primates yes right most people don't even think of us as Old World primates but we are all Old World primates and we share many similarities in terms of the neural circuits that we have in our skulls with some of the other Old World primates like maak monkeys for instance when you step back and look at a process like decision making or marketing out in the world or how people interact with one another and gauge value of objects relationships or even their own value if I may how much of what you see in human Old World primates do you think is reflected by the interactions of Old World primates like reesus maccak monkeys and vice versa I mean in other words how primitive are we Andor how sophisticated are the other Old World primates that's a great way of putting it because I think it's both I always like to say there's a little monkey in all of us right and I believe that going in you know having spent actually my my formative years uh you know study just watching monkeys and I worked at the Cleveland Zoo you know when I was in college and I took every opportunity I could get to go you know I went to to the field you know I watched monkeys in South America and in Mexico and I think we all get that but over the course of my career I'm astonished at how deep that goes and um basically for every behavioral cognitive emotional phenomenon that we have been that we've trained our lens on uh it looks almost exactly the same in people and monkeys now obviously we're not just monkeys and you know we can talk and we're doing this and that's a that's a big big difference but all the things that you talked about decision making social interaction our the the way that we explore the world um the the Fountain of creativity uh not only the nural circuits but the actual expression uh is so so similar we have monkeys and people do the exact same things in the lab and if I didn't label the videos the outputs of like the avatars and whatnot in games you couldn't tell the difference H um what's striking about what you just said is that I recall a I guess at that time it was called a tweet um and I think it was from Elon that said that we're basically a species that got a supercomputer placed on top of a monkey brain so in thinking about it the other way what aspects of Being Human this old world primate that we are you think is distinct different than say a maack monkey aside from language I don't know that anything really is I mean so actually it's it's an interesting time to have you ask me that question because this spring semester I teach a seminar for the psychology department uh at Penn called being human and the whole idea of that we each week we tackle a an aspect of who we are that has at one point or another been considered to be uniquely human or close to right and that could be something like art and creativity or um or theory of mind right or um you know economics and markets and things like that and when you take it take a look at these things through the lenses of Neuroscience and anthropology this is how we do it economics psychology neurology and on and on and on um you start to really see that um there's a lot more continuity than discontinuity and uh that's kind of pretty shocking and I want to go back to that Elon um tweet if I may uh because I think that's where we go a little bit astray to and thinking about the the brain is a computer right so it's well obviously it's not built on silica right it's it's um it's made of meat and fat and it's subject to all of the constraints that um that go along that go along with that and what I think instead is a better metaphor is that we've got a 30 million year old Swiss army knife in our head right so yes you can learn how do all kinds of different things but you've got a a brain that's got essentially specific Tools in it you know you'll have you know it's like having a knife and a cork screw which is the most important one uh you know nail file saw Etc and the monkeys got those too now ours might be a little bigger you know and sharper um but they they look and and they look pretty similar and they do the job in a very um similar way and I think once we appreciate that then uh that opens up a lot of territory for for applications not you know not just trying to understand how some of those tools might get broken or dull as a result of um you know illness or injury or disorders Etc but also how we can measure them and how we can develop them better because some of those are you know we use all the time say in business I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor our place our place makes my favorite pots pans and other cookware so surprisingly toxic compounds such as pases or forever chemicals are still found in 80% of non-stick pans as well as utensils appliances and countless other Kitchen products now I've talked before on this podcast about these pases or forever chemicals like Teflon which have been linked to major health issues such as hormone disruption gut microbiome disruption fertility issues and many other health problems so it's really important to avoid them this is why I'm a huge fan of ourplace ourplace products are made with the highest quality materials and are all pasas and toxin-free I particularly love their titanium always pan Pro it's the first non-stick pan made with zero chemicals and zero coating instead it uses pure titanium this means it has no harmful forever chemicals and it also doesn't degrade or lose its non-stick effect over time it's extremely durable and it's also beautiful to look at I cook eggs in my titanium always pan Pro almost every morning the design allows for the eggs to cook perfectly without sticking to the pan I also cook burgers and steaks in it and it puts a real really nice sear on the meat but again nothing sticks to the pan so it's really easy to clean and it's even dishwasher safe I love it and I use it every day for a limited time ourplace is offering an exclusive 20% discount on the titanium always pan Pro if you go to the website fromourplace decom huberman and use the code save huberman 20 you can claim the offer with a 100 day risk-free trial free shipping and free returns you can experience this fantastic cookware with absolutely zero risk again that's fromourplace decom / huberman to get 20% off today's episode is also brought To Us by wealthfront I've been using wealthfront for my savings and my investing for nearly a decade and I absolutely love it at the start of every year I set new goals and one of my goals for 2025 is to focus on saving money since I have wealthfront I'll keep that Savings in my wealthfront cash account where I'm able to earn 4% annual percentage yield on my deposits and you can as well with wealth front you can earn 4% apy on your cash from partner Banks until you're ready to either spend that money or invested with wealth front you also get free instant withdrawals to eligible accounts every day even on weekends and holidays the 4% apy is not a promotional rate and there's no limit to what you can deposit and earn and you can even get protection for up to $8 million through FDIC Insurance provided through wealth front's partner Banks wealthfront gives you free instant withdrawals where it takes just minutes to transfer your money to eligible external accounts it also takes just minutes to transfer your cash from the cash account to any of wealth Run's automated investment accounts accounts when you're ready to invest there are already a million people using wealth front to save more earn more and build long-term wealth earn 4% apy on your cash today if you'd like to try wealthfront go to wealthfront.com huberman to receive a free $50 bonus with a $500 deposit into your first cash account that's wealthfront.com huberman to get started now this has been a paid testimonial of wealthfront wealthfront brokerage isn't a bank the apy is subject to change for more information see the episode description so if we were to start at what us neuroscientists would call kind of more low level functioning even though it's pretty high level uh with something like attention you know we are very visual creatures for those of us that are cited most humans are cited um we rely on Vision to assess the world around us to assess emotions of others Etc and so are the other Old World primates yeah right um how do we allocate attention like like what grabs our attention and maybe in this discussion we could also touch on because I know you've worked on this what underlies some deficits in attention um so yeah if you could if we could just explore this from the perspective of okay you go into an an environment let's say it's a familiar environment you wake up in the room you wake up in each day what grabs your attention what keeps your attention and if we do in fact have control over over our attention which we do to some extent why is it so difficult for many of us to decide you know what I'm just going to put everything away and I'm just going to focus on this task for the next hour why is that so challenging for so many people regardless of whether they have a diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder okay there's a lot in that question many questions in there and let's talk about what attention is right it is a prioritization right or an amplification of of what you're focusing on right and we do that by where we point our eyes right and then that it gets turned up in the brain with a lot of consequences and and really why why do we have attention because you can't do everything at once right so so it's it's in the name of efficiency um what we attend to is a product of two things it's what we're looking for and what the world looks like right and that kind of what the world looks like part is importantly shaped by what our ancestors experienced and also what we experienced when we were developing when we were growing up so things that are bright or shiny or moving fast right or loud or whatever that grabs our attention things that stand out that are different um and for us as primates one thing that's super important and kind of really deeply baked in is uh other people so if there are our faces if there are people in the environment doing something then that naturally just grabs our attention unless we happen to be an individual who's sort of wired a little bit differently like folks on the autism spectrum disorder or you know schizophrenia things like that um where that prioritization is not quite um the same so so so that's kind of how our experience as primates you know and just the the design principle of of the way our brains work to overcome some of these limitations in this in the name of efficiency come about and then as you mentioned what we can control our attention to a certain degree and that's super important for a lot of I think overcoming a lot of the the challenges that we have and we can talk about that like in decision making for example because you or or learning because you because you can't control what you're attending to that gets turned up in the brain right and that affects what we choose and and it affects what we learn it affects what we remember um as well so now I'm trying to kind of go back to like then the the end part of your question oh so that had to do with multitasking or just things in the environment and that gets at this question uh or topic of in my view of foraging right and so uh I think that attention this is the argument we've made uh operates according to essentially the same rules and principles that um our bodies do when we are searching the environment for resources so all mobile animals uh search for food search for maid sear for search for water you know for the resources that they need to survive and to reproduce and um as it turns out that kind of decision do you know that that The Clash you know made you know very memorable should I stay or should I go uh that's the key thing so when you encounter something like the question is like do I take it do I stick with it even though it might be depleting getting worse or should I take a risk and invest time and energy and go look for something else um all animals have to do that it turns out there's an optimal solution to that which was written out by the one of the great mathematical ecologist Eric charnov in the paper in 1976 and so he he wrote this out and it's what's cool about is it's very simple it's basically you leave you abandon the the thing that you're um harvesting when uh what you're getting from it falls below the average for the environment that just makes sense the marginal returns right um this could be a social interaction could be a social interaction it could be food could be water could be the money that you're making in the moment could be the information that you're getting from uh a book or from a website or whatnot so uh and we from studies done over the last whatever that is now 50 years have shown that every animal that's ever been observed behaves as if they're performing that computation could you give an example in the context of let's say social media and as we um we're walking in record today we were comparing and contrasting X as a platform versus uh Instagram and it occurred to me now based on what you said a few moments ago that Instagram is very visual so you see faces yeah many accounts on X either the icon is so small or people even just have cartoons or whatever avatars there that aren't really faces in many cases and it does seem that on X there's a um kind of a elevated level of emotionality to what people write that's what tends to grab attention and I wonder whether or not that's because of the absence of faces I mean when somebody's on an Instagram post and they're kind of ranting a bit in fact I saw this yesterday um uh Tim Ferris another podcaster had the investor Chris on um and Chris was talking about the environmentalism and the fires and he had opinions about AI he's very very smart very opinionated guy but people were commenting I don't know how he felt how could I um but people were commenting he's so angry he's so angry and and he was just being passionate and emphatic maybe he was angry I don't know but he was clearly very very alert leaning forward into the camera and people were paying most of their comments were paying attention to the emotion behind what he was saying and whereas on X I I feel like if you just took the text of what he was saying and you put it there would be kind of uh below the average emotionality on X and so um when you say that we are uh drawn to faces or that faces are we naturally Forge towards faces versus other things um that feels very true and do you feel like elevated levels of emotion in faces are what harness the most attention and by parallel if you get a bunch of monkeys together and one of them is really upset do they all look at that monkey speculating a little bit here it's uh not thought about in the context of say you know X versus Instagram but I think you're I think you're you're right on I mean I think that's spot on um you're just combining like you're turning the volume gets turned up because there are faces there and if they're more emotional they're just going to be much more Salient to grab your attention and that's something that's really important to pay attention to because somebody who's very aroused right uh that's activation that's you know that's sort of preactivation before they do something like they they might attack you or they might you know take something from you who knows right something something could happen there but I want to take this back a little bit I'm older than you and I want to take this uh this idea of of um different sources like where you could place your attention take it back a little bit more in time because what's been shown and it's interesting computer science picked up on this marginal value um theorem from mathematical ecology uh around 2000 or so and began to investigate how people search the web and it turned out people would leave a website the moment their information intake rate fell below the average for sort of all the websites that they uh were encountering the average is determined by your behavior in what the preceding B bin of time like 10 minutes until you arrive at a site or within site so that that's less wellknown although we're now learning that it is it is pretty short term right so it seems to be uh driven by reinforcement learning processes that kind of are telling you how rich that environment is and so what one of the things about the martial value theorem I think is really really um profound for for understanding our current predicament is that it says that if you're in a really poor environment like you let's say you forge for apples right and there's one apple tree for the next 10 miles you in that apple tree until you picked every Apple rotten or not rotten not ripe right before you move on if you were in an orchard with apple trees everywhere you just pick the ones that are easiest to get and then you move on so now think about it in the context of um web surfing the web like when you were you know if you're coming up when I did uh you know I was in graduate school or or you know as an undergraduate the way I accessed the internet was through a dialup modem so it was very slow it was very poor environment you're sitting there waiting for the information to load up right it might take 30 seconds or longer um you don't abandon that you read the whole thing you might print it out put it in your file cabinet right now you get like super high speed internet yeah you can have 12 tabs open tab just so you spend like you know half a second or a couple seconds on anyone you don't you certainly don't scroll down beneath the fold right so it it totally makes sense now think about all the devices you might have in or it could be tabs it could be most people are sitting around with a TV on you know their phone a tablet a laptop whatnot I'm guilty of having have three I have three phones so you're just cycling you you are doing exactly what you're designed to do right which is to move between these resources um quickly and easily because it's so easy so in some going back to your question about like why is it so hard it's going to be really really deliberate you have to either reduce you know make it a harder environment I guess is the idea you would have to actually put things away or make the return rate that you're getting from any of them much worse like for example if you turn your phone monochrome some which we know works right it helps you to stop checking your phone and spend less time on it because what you it's just not as good as a source yeah the the information feels really depleted uh you reposted a a paper result recently and I I did as well after I saw it on your X account um that if you look at working memory the ability to keep information online in real time and work with it um it seems that working memory is worse when your phone is right next to you if it's somewhere else in the room that you're working then uh we're trying to do real work of some sort um your performance is slightly better than if it's right next to you but if the phone is completely outside of the room improvements in working memory are statistically significant in other words get the phone completely out of the room it's not sufficient to have it next to you turn face down or even in your backpack behind you it needs to be in a completely separate environment in order to maximize this effect yeah I mean it's completely consistent with what we're what we're saying here with regard to foraging but if I take my phone and I put it I don't have my phone here under the chair but let's say I did this result suggests that some component of our neural circuitry is operating in the background thinking well I guess something could be on there maybe I got a text or maybe there's a tweet I should look at or an Instagram post um it suggests that we are multitasking even when we think we are not multitasking yeah I I think you're absolutely right it's beneath our awareness right so that's and and that that's where I think the kind of comparative psychology comparative neurobiology is really important here because I don't necessarily um you know impute conscious awareness to all these Critters that are out there doing these things behaving exactly the same way we are and so to me that just indicates that you know all that Hardware those same routines are just running under the hood running under the surface and we're not aware of it so when your phone is somewhere within the sphere that could be accessed brain's aware of that and it's including that in the in the calcul ations about um that about what to do next and it actually um reminds me now of some it's actually a couple papers that we published some time ago on foraging and one of the things that's really interesting about it is that uh and is that as you are considering your options and you're you're experiencing sort of these depleting um Rewards or whatnot you see this urgency signal kind of building up in a part of the brain interior singular cortex that we know is important for moving on for switching for for for for searching for something new and it it does you know I I don't know what the emotional component of that is we never explored that but it seems reasonable to imagine that that's tied to you know this sense of like uh I really I really want to turn my phone over and check what's going on there are there any data that suggest that just being able to maintain a thought train independent of visual input can help us get better at maintaining attention so for instance this morning I woke up very early unusually early for me because I went to bed unusually early for me and I decided to try something uh which is uh something that actually our uh colleague in Neuroscience Carl di Roth had mentioned he does and a previous guest on this podcast joskin who is a former chess Grandmaster Champion has described something like this I decided to try it which was to uh keep my closed and just try and think in complete sentences not let my mind drift off topic for a while have a conversation with myself in my head but with the constant redirect of trying to stay in a thought train and it's it's actually much more difficult than I thought it would be right there's no other input my eyes are closed I was comfortable at the temperature the room was Etc I was well rested no phone no input and you know you get one sentence of thought out then the next it's a bit like writing except here no visual input so I would have thought it's a lot it's a lot easier because you don't have you know a set of tabs across the top or even a word dock with a like do you want to change it to bold Etc like no other input competing for one's attention and I found that after about 10 minutes it became pretty easy but it took me about 10 minutes to get into this redirective focus and then at one point I thought I better stop this cuz this seeming kind of weird but that was um very different I would say than sitting down to say um meditate and think about my breath which is a physical phenomenon that tangible at the level of feeling one's breath so how do you feel about practices that teach us to maintain attention and redirect our attention that are very deprived of visual input as a kind of training ground for being able to harness and maintain visual input when we need to get work done work on problem sets right um do like re what I call real work or Cal Newport would call Deep work so I've never tried that and it sounds fascinating and I I'm going to try to give it a shot you know tomorrow morning um at first I was thinking this sounds a lot like meditation right but there are a whole variet I'm not no expert on meditation but there are a whole variety of different kinds of meditation some as you mentioned you know you're focusing on on breath work physical stimulus but um but there are others that that are not and that are much more um kind of cognitively focused so um for example like uh loving kindness meditation is is one where you're you're kind of thinking about a particular person you're imagining them and you're imagining something really good happening to them right so it's sort of one of these um you know self-transcendent types of meditation which are not I don't think really tied to any external input coming in although it's an internal input right that that that's based on on your on your memory or or um awe based um meditation so maybe it's more similar to those but I that's like thematically anchored exactly exactly opposed to visually anchored like staring at a flame or concentrating on one's breath yeah I I didn't have a it was like free in terms of putting in language of foraging it's like I didn't have a plan I wasn't writing a paragraph it was just can I stay in a conversation with myself that's um where there's no moment that some external Voice or input or thought about something else in the room you know just can I just kind of stay in there can I just stay in there that that was really the question yeah I think that that makes complete sense because it it's kind of like you're forging for apples in that tree that's you know on the middle of the serengetti somewhere right and there's nothing anywhere around you and so you're going to stick with that and just keep mining it until there's nothing left one of the reasons that I brought up this example was um I noticed that anything that has to do with attention whether not it's visual attention or you know needing to write or um or cognitive attention and redirecting attention unless there's some high level of as you call it arousal or emotionality I find there's always a kind of warm-up period required and that this isn't taught to us in school and that so many people who think that they have a hard time maintaining attention uh I have this hypothesis that they are training uh non-attention or brief attention by you know scrolling through movies on a you know social media platform is basically training um redirecting your attention every couple seconds or or maybe every few minutes um so you get good at that you get good at scrolling you get good at what you what you do um but also I think it was always the case that sitting down to do something difficult or learn or write or pay careful auditory attention maybe even to a podcast that there's a kind of a warming up period what is the evidence that neural circuits in the brain are kind of um here I'm using very top Contour language uh in front of a you know another card carrying neuroscientist but that that neural circuits are kind of uh more dispersed in their um in their activation patterns but that over time we can drop into a trench not just of attention but that then the signal to noise of that circuit required for attention and the other components of the task gets much greater compared to the background noise do is there evidence for that in the same way that warming up to work out no one expects to walk in and and train with their work weight or to run at the speed that they would in mile three right you know that you warm up it's like it's a but this notion of warming up the brain for specific cognitive activities doesn't seem um as abundant out there and I think part of the reason might be and I'd like your thoughts on this that we are all familiar with something super exciting or scary grabbing our attention in this but then I would say well you can Sprint into the street to save your kid from getting hit by a car you didn't warm up for that but that's not how you exercise because there isn't the same level of urgency that's a deep question I think um and I you know it's funny to me too because it it I don't warm up often before I work out and that's like so you seem to be in great shape no but it's like funny you know I've been in CrossFit for like 17 years oh wow and you're still uninjured you're one of the few I've got plenty of injuries I you know I've had uh you know couple hernia surgeries and um maybe maybe just like five or six minutes of Mobility work you know we have a lot of episodes on this the mobility is really good and I I actually what I what I have you know periodically it's like take like you know many months off to do just purely Mobility PT because um and like I did pilotes intensively for a year and a half after um after one injury and and I loved it and it it's cool to see what it does to your body cuz it totally refashioned it I was cuz I've always been like big guy up here and then you do Pilates for or yoga for a long time I went through through a yoga period too and suddenly it's all core you know you become like a very different um very different human yeah so this issue of warming up you don't like warming up which explains your I like warming up it's just it's more a question of time the reason why and that's why got him to CrossFit in the first place was because I could do a workout in 10 minutes or under that um left me you know dead on the floor super awesome I'm telling you 100 jumping jacks just like in PE class is still the best warm-up I'm aware of it's amazing like people laugh at me you know it's like so old school but you do 100 jumping jacks before you do any kind of cardiovascular resistance training and I I don't I haven't run a study on this but you greatly diminish your chance of uh of injury probably because of just raising core body temperature but so the question is what okay well then let's pose it in this parallel fashion what is the equivalent of the 100 jumping jacks for cognitive work right for me it's like internally going like what's wrong with you Andrew why is it so hard for you to like punch out these 10 paragraphs um but if someone on my team says hey we need this in eight minutes I could do that anywhere unless I'm actually driving a vehicle I can work anywhere anytime but I would say we don't have the the equivalent of 100 jumping jacks for cognitive work but we need it we need that I think people need that and they need the understanding that it can help them get into that trench of attention I have a bunch of disconnected thoughts on this please so one would be the converse of that which is the the which you kind of alluded to earlier which is the not warming up but the opposite of warming up like the distraction so so there have been some really interesting studies done in uh in sort of more business settings management settings um about that that looked at foraging okay and uh think of it this way it more like a measure of creativity your your proclivity to explore to try new things to go to you know to to be the opposite of focused okay so um and you can measure that uh for example like like an anagram task so you get a bunch of letters make as many words as you can at some point you got to you decide to dump them and get new letters right and so that's sort of an you know you're taking a risk and you're exploring and you're getting a new a new set you don't know what's going to happen right um and really cool studies showed that uh if you precede that task with a task where people are foraging for points on a screen there's there's hidden it's like a visual kind of thing and you're you're just looking for stuff if the uh if the points are really dispersed and spread out then people we don't know how long that kind of after effect less but then people are way more kind of hyp explorers with the words in the later and if they're doing a if they have to like decide if they're playing virtual fishing and the number of you know the rate at which you catch fish in a pond is declining and you can press a button and take a time out to travel to another Pond people are much more willing to to move on okay when when they do that whereas if you put all the points kind of together which is essentially related to what you're saying um cognitively warming up by focusing literally instead of having your uh your filter you you know your aperture your lens like this it's now like this even though it's a different task that you're going to do oh I love this then you you're much more focused on that okay I I I've sat here and done many many podcasts and I have to say it's rare that I say I love this probably the first time I absolutely love this because as a person who's worked on a variety of topics in Neuroscience but visual Neuroscience has really been my first home um and continues to be the way that think about a lot of this you know there are a couple of really interesting papers um that have led to some practices mainly in China where students focus on a fixation point before they sit down to do cognitive work um and it improves their attention and performance on cognitive work and it sounds so silly to people people think oh okay I'm going to stare at a DOT and you're going to like stare at a DOT at the given distance I'm going to do my work how lame is that well I think it it's incredible because what you just said fully supports this idea that we well we all agree here and there's two of us that we're mainly visual even those of us that like to listen to music and things like that we're very sematic you know very visual creatures and that where we place our visual attention and the the size of the aperture of that attention whether or not we're looking at a small box or a big box not metaphorically but literally determines the aperture of our attention going forward in other words I think this is such an important thing because when we look at a horizon or we walk through a city you know there's information flowing past us you know and all kinds of you know um without us placing our our uh our eyes on any one particular point and that people don't notice until they do this and they hear this but that's very relaxing we look at a horizon it relaxes us and that's because panoramic Vision non-foliated vision is um it It's associated with a decrease in autonomic arousal so has this been leveraged toward teaching kids and adults how to attend better um because I think this is immensely valuable I mean this is uh behavioral behaviorally driven pharmacology as I like to call it because clearly there's a change in our chemistry when we do this sort of thing I mean other than what you just said about the the work that's done in you know what what they're doing in China which is entirely consistent with what I just said I'm unaware uh of any any utilization and I think um it could be I mean I I love that phrase that you just used right which is we understand the underlying um neurochemistry let's say uh that's great but you're you're not going to go in and directly manipulate people's neurochemistry no but if you can change the environment they're in or you can change uh the state that they're in behavioral State cognitive State emotional state then um that's an effective potentially effective practical ethical right way of of having the kind of same or similar impact I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor ag1 ag1 is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink with adaptogens I've been taking ag1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring this podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still take ag1 is because it is the highest quality and most complete foundational nutritional supplement what that means is that ag1 ensures that you're getting all the necessary vitamins minerals and other micronutrients to form a strong foundation for your daily health ag1 also has probiotics and prebiotics that support a healthy gut microbiome your gut microbiome consists of trillions of microorganisms that align your digestive tract and impact things such as your immune system status your metabolic Health your hormone health and much more so I've consistently found that when I take ag1 daily my digestion is improved my immune system is more robust and my mood and mental focus are at their best in fact if I could take Just One supplement that supplement would be ag1 if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 with your order of ag1 again go to drink a1.com huberman to claim this special offer yeah I think that so many people including myself think okay what's a way that I can increase my level of alertness and attention well I have this gallery of caffeine actually the middle one's water for those that are just listening I've got a mate gourd here plenty of caffeine in there I had a cold brew mate plenty of caffeine in there I had several actually and then water in the center but um caffeine raised as our level of alertness and thereby attent attentional capabilities but I think that most people are not familiar with using Behavior as a way to increase their endogenous release of the neurochemicals that increase arousal and attention and um we just tend to over rely on pharmacology and I'm not against that I use it obviously um but what do you think it is I mean now I'm asking you to be a bit of a of a cultural Anthropologist um what do you think it is that uh has led people in the United States and and you know Europe to mainly focus on this idea that if you can't attend easily that it's a pharmacologic issue that behavioral tools are not as useful because what the experiment you described is so cool right look at dots that are close together you're then cognitive space becomes kind of um more bundled into a tighter bundle um look at dots that are more dispersed and you tend to you know kind of disperse your cognition it becomes almost like more of a creative exploration right maybe this is why my my friend Rick Rubin whose name is sort of synonymous with creativity because he wrote that amazing book the creative act is so into sky and clouds and sunsets and space open space rarely have I ever heard Rick say Hey you know you should stare into a little you know Soda STW um I'd love to for you to just kind of Riff on on what you think some of the better tools are for improving attention and focus um and whether or not you think we're really as challenged in that as many people assume well I I I don't think we're that challenged I think as I mentioned earlier our brains are just performing the computations that they have been endowed with by millions of years of evolution which is to allocate attention to allocate Behavior to allocate Focus uh according to how rich I'll call it rich you know uh or poor the environment is how many different sources are there and so uh that's those are the rules your brain lives by and you're not really going to change those I mean you could kind of modulate up and down a little bit whether that's through neurochemistry or other kinds of things but ultimately it's in this case the brain in the environment that it's in so from my perspective the best thing you can do is just just change the environment put those devices away make to to enable you to focus right and um so any I don't know if I had that much more to say on that topic no I think I think what what's great about this is you're essentially pointing to the fact that we have control we're not somehow um deficient or messed up if we find ourselves having a hard time directing our attention because we've been training ourselves to uh to scroll we've been training ourselves to redirect our attention constantly to new things I mean as you can probably tell I'm a big fan of um intervening in that process so that one has the ability to drop into focused work I do feel as if progress in life it you know scales fairly directly with the ability to focus on one thing for some period of time um for sake of you know learning in school for sake of sport for sake of relationships the ability to have like a real connection to somebody um you know and we're going to get into a discussion about social interactions in a bit um but when it comes to foraging do you find that people uh fall out into different kind of clusters of how they forage for information and what are some of the themes of of that uh the or or kind of signatures of the different groups yeah that's a great question we I we haven't really approached it with the idea that there are clusters but rather that um there's let's say a Continuum uh and of being either you know most people are somewhere in the middle of course but some folks hyperfocused right and you might just metaphorically imagine them at the the extreme like like obsessive compulsive almost right you can't get unstuck from a routine and the other end would be folks who explore too readily right so folks who we would say have attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and so folks fall somewhere along that distribution now we've seen that there are differences between species in terms of where they are on that difference is a function of uh age uh in humans so you kind of move from being more hyper exploratory toward more focused as you get older oh good um and that also one of the things that we've um talked about a lot is that that variation where you are on that continu Continuum might make you more or less suited to different types of careers different types of jobs it's not to say that people can't change but think of it this way uh for you've got a dial that goes from Super Focus to a major Explorer and that and creativity goes along with that uh one person might come with their dial set at three another person at seven and you could help that person at a three maybe turn Theirs to five but probably to 10 right a person is a seven you could turn them up to nine right so through through various kinds of practices and so I think it's really important to just recognize that people do vary um and that variation uh we pick up on in the sort of um neurological context of of like issues problems that people you know experience like with focus in school Etc like that people are are no doubt wondering well if I am good at dropping into a trench and focusing my attention for long periods of time maybe it's more obvious what types of careers would let uh that person would um be better at you know maybe it's programming or writing or who knows painting um but when you have somebody whose attention tends to flp between different things uh what sorts of professions uh do they align well with yeah that aligns with creative professions so and also being entrepreneurs actually if you look at the data on um entrepreneurs uh the rate of attention problems is 2 three 4X uh the general population you also see that um it's often comorbid with other issues related to uh anxiety bipolar Etc so they're kind of like all all cluster there with a with a a real issue um on that sort of focus and uh we work with um with a with a team out in Berkeley actually that provides support to entrepreneurs so that um so so that they can do their best do their thing which is to be like wildly creative right and to and Innovative I should say um but when they need that Focus so they can have it and we have we have a a a big research project going on right now looking at entrepreneurs in California and also MBA students at Wharton to just kind of try to identify you know the prevalence of these issues and then to potentially Provide support for them and that support could take any number of different forms it could be true psychiatric support in the sense of like maybe um you know attention focusing uh uh Pharmaceuticals drugs like like Ridin Aderall which can be used appropriately um but that doesn't Rob those individuals of their Mojo but in other cases it's going to be more like changing their you know providing an ecosystem right so where they can learn uh focusing practices as we've we've already talked about uh where when they build their teams they can um build complimentary strengths in the people that uh surround them so that they're much more likely to be successful and our economy depends on those people being successful right so that's where the vast majority of economic activity is coming from is people who start small businesses who are entrepreneurs and who are who are innovators so it makes all the sense in the world um to do that but I think we've been neglecting all this now actually the thing wanted to kind of say earlier about this and that where I think Neuroscience gives us a new tool to approach a lot of these business questions is that uh let's imagine you're hiring right and you're hiring you we need a creative type okay so you you put an ad out and uh you get you know resumés and responses and people come in for interviews how do you measure that creativity typically when you going say oh how creative are you and you're like you really want the job so you're like yeah I'm super creative you know like or you give them a personality test for example or you like Myers Briggs or something like that and um we know those are not particularly accurate and self-report can be not only uh inaccurate but but biased and biased by the context why am I here who's asking me a question how is that question asked whereas the Neuroscience Neuroscience gives us tools to kind of measure those things directly MH and in some cases you could measure it directly from the brain and we do that but that's not going to be practical not going to be scalable right um not going to be something a lot of people want to uh you know Embrace let's say as as applicants but find ways to interrogate the brain that are not asking people to assess themselves for instance what what would uh a small number of questions be that question one of the things that we've done is develop games like brief little very engaging games that are based on specific tasks that we know interrogate specific circuits in the brain like foraging for example uh where you know people are they're literally harvesting berries let's say okay and they're and they're going along and the goal is to kind of get as as many as you can and from their behavior we can figure out exactly where they are on that Continuum U mathematically and say okay well in the dashboard that we create like okay you are a little you are pitched a bit more toward uh being an innovator and creative type Explorer and and less so less likely to be say a good manager who would need to be you know sort of have a higher degree of focus and we do that for um for a number of different aspects of of you know of of cognitive emotional performance so things like uh uh like for in terms of social competence for example and so we have a little actually a little game it's it's mimic soccer and we've had monkeys play it humans play it we know exactly what it what it kind of uh elicits from the brain and what circuits it relies on and that allows us to numerically you know identify like your strategic planning abilities or your something like theory of mind getting in the head uh of an opponent and those games we found it's it's really uh been very gratifying to uh demonstrate that those predict performance in you know a number of different jobs in high performance jobs like soccer play actual soccer players but also in the military in um in cyber operations um and so we're now exploring and and we're helping we've helped to stand up a startup company uh in Philadelphia that is actually you know that's that's their mission is to go out uh and and try to use those tools to see if they can do better than basically a whole bunch of questions yeah it certainly goes Way Beyond um kind of typical Myers Briggs or anagram type personality tests which I think has certain value if nothing else they uh you know people like to know about themselves and um I I do think categorizing oneself a little bit according to it like are you a three on the anagram or a four or an eight you know what um certainly gives you a a a frame of reference but it yeah it doesn't seem very useful for the kinds of uh work environments that that you're describing whereas what you're describing sounds much more sophisticated um you mentioned theory of mind we should talk about theory of mind because here we are back to visual Neuroscience but I I have the understanding you can tell me if I'm right or wrong that as Old World primates one of the more impressive features that uh We've developed is the ability to attend to a location with our eyes but pay attention to something else in the periphery people used to refer to this as the uh the other cocktail party effect the the cocktail party effect is the ability to pay attention to a conversation while there's stuff in the background but this is the other cocktail party effect that uh sort of uh with sometimes Chuckles um gets described as you know you're out to dinner with somebody and you're listening to them and you're paying attention to them but you're also paying attention to the conversation next to you or maybe someone else at the bar um you know you can fill in the blanks there um this is an amazing ability regardless of what it's used for that a lot of other primate species don't have I mean as far as I know no other species have so this is this seems to be but we know maccs can do this for example and humans do this routinely we we assume all Apes do this um and the Adaptive explanation is is I think exactly what you're alluding to which is the fact that like when you live in a complex multi-level Society with differentiated relationships where the things that matter to you are like your family uh your rank your status right your friends your enemies all those kinds of things that then creates a really uh complex you know environment for as you said devoting your attention because uh you know where we look right is the focus of our typically that's the focus of your attention and what's turned up and other brains know that MH right and so now let's imagine you a baboon right and you're you're not the highest ranking baboon and the high ranking you know the alpha is over there and so you train your Gaze on that Alpha baboon but there's a really attractive female over here that you want to know where she's heading because you know that's a good mating opportunity later so it's that ability to kind of split attention from um your covert attention what your gaze is pointed at and covertly what you're amplifying uh and tracking um in the environment and there is this you know to tie this back to theory of mind um there's I think it's it's reasonable and and and consistent with some of the data that theory of mind which is a sense of being able to infer what somebody else knows um what they can see right what they what they want there state of mind which might be different from yours that it develops through the the way that as as infants and young children are experience of first um gazing at a caregiver maintaining attention with them and then learning to follow their gaze when they look somewhere and they say hey that's a you know that's an apple or whatever that you do the same thing and that gaze following then is a precursor to Joint attention and Joint attention being really important for the development of this uh of of theory of mind which is our our sense of being able to understand make predictions make inferences about what's going on in somebody else's head I feel like the the uh overlap of covert attention and theory of Mind as you described um comes from this assumption that I have which is that we have effectively two spotlights of attention and that we can merge them so I can place all my attention on you and what we're talking about in your face Etc I can SP split my attention between you and you know something over there in the corner or I can take that second Spotlight of attention and place it on myself like oh you know like I'm I need to move to the side because I've got a little you know you know maybe an itch on my thigh or something like that so but I don't think we have three spotlights that we can work with very easily anyway maybe we could train that up but that we don't naturally have more than two spotlights of attention we can merge these two spot lights of attention and I feel like and I've done some practice at this just CU I'm a neuroscientist and I like to try things of ramping up my level of focus just trying to really like like I'm doing it right now I'm looking at you and like the Contour of of your shape against the background like I can really decide to emphasize those borders I'm not really doing anything behaviorally that's different than I was a few moments ago but then I could also bring that Spotlight of attention kind of down a little bit in an intensity so I feel like we have two spotlights of attention that we can ramp up intensity and we don't normally do this so consciously normally we're more in stimulus response and I think about this a lot nowadays because and forgive me for referencing previous podcast but we had this brilliant absolutely brilliant 84 year-old psycho analyst yungan analyst named um James uh Hollis on the podcast um and he talked about you know what it is to be human and to create a life and it boiled down basically to two things which was to acknowledge that we're in stimulus response a lot of the day and how to be functional in that domain was a lot of that conversation but that there's this essential aspect to life which is to get out of stimulus response and bring that those spotlights of attention Inward and to think and to reflect and then go back into stimulus response and when we just sleep wake up and go into stimulus response all day or if we go meditate all day and are not in stimulus response neither is good so it's that balance and so this notion of two spotlights of attention I'd love for you to tell me this is like complete BS or that it works I I don't need to be validated here I I was more putting it out there as a hypothesis because it feels true to me but that's obviously just a feeling well I think that feeling is as far as I know is consistent with what we understand about how attention can you know how it amplifies the visual signals or other signals that are coming into our brains and the ways in which we can kind of I don't know if it's divided purely or if it sort of bleeds over you know what that really you know exactly looks like but the landscape let's imagine it's a landscape of neural activity and you can kind of raise up two humps or just one hump and it doesn't feel like you can go beyond that uh that's really really hard to measure um and I think you know our our best data on that comes from you know recording the activity of neurons in MAA and monkeys while they are uh doing attention you know these sort of visual discrimination tasks and and I I I think that'd be really really hard to like actually uh elicit that kind of um of behavior from them well we both agree I know because we were talking before we started recording that um certain types of stimula really grab our attention and influence our decisions and our valuation of things out there in the world so talk to me about monkey porn Okay we never called it monkey porn but a lot a lot of people have said that uh you know essentially you know no matter what else I do in my career that's going to be on my Tombstone um this man worked on this man unpacked the neurobiology of monkey porn Okay so let's go back in the way back machine you know and and so back when I was an anthropologist I'm going out I'm watching monkeys and and um it's very clear that there are certain uh things in the world that are important to them that they prioritize and those are very Sim they're the same things that that we do so they pay attention to each other to their faces um but also to other cues and these cues um seem to make adaptive significance right that they're they're relevant for your ability to survive and reproduce which is the name of the game for evolution that's all that that really counts okay and what are those things well they're cued to status like so who's dominant who's subordinate who can take my stuff who do I got to watch out for who can I you know Dominate and take stuff from and cues to how you know to sort of mate quality mating opportunities and if you look at non-human primates they display those things very conspicuously right so uh you know males have these big canines and they have sort of you know physical dominant features very square jaw all that kind of stuff and um and and females for example in Max display their state uh they their hormonal State how receptive they are to mating and and likelihood of of ovulating at that time through the sort of the swelling and coloration on their perineum here's a good here's a good word for your listeners perineum which we we introduced I think into the Neuroscience literature um and that's just the the sort of anogenital region so that's where they're putting a lot of someone else on here signaling Tain listen another another card caring researcher um Dr sha Shaina swan shaa Swan excuse me came on here to talk about um phalates and microplastics and endocrine disruptor she spent a career working on this she's a serious scientist and she talked about how taint sizes are diminishing in males by virtue of endocrine disruptors accessing the fetus during pregnancy this is a statistically very robust effect I know we're going to get into a discussion about fertility later um because you've worked on this issue as well so we can say the perenium taint and now everyone knows what we're talking about so um the females display their perenium region um differently when they're ovulating yeah so it becomes redder Fuller Etc so if you go you know go to the zoo and you just you could say you see the monkeys with the red butt big red butts they're the ones who are the females who are it turns out the males do that too so uh males um signal kind of their circulating testosterone levels by how red their taint is and actually even you can just see the physical size of their testes is is is a pretty good proxy in a Q and then in in Reese's Max there's also kind of these signals around the eyes that um they get a little bit darker uh the theory is that um humans so for a long time people said oh humans don't display their their anything about their you know their hormonal biological State uh you know to promote monogamy and all kinds of stuff like that even though it seems that monogamy is not the monogamy does not seem monogamy in terms of mating does not seem to be the dominant um strategy in humans let's let's call it that yeah ju but just to make sure that I'm clear on this it used to be said you are saying that it used to be said that humans don't signal their hor hormonal status and the reason people were saying that is because it was a promotion of monogamous Behavior which is actually not true in here humans well so um this goes back to Darwin really who who who sort of theorized that that humans during human evolution that um as monogamy became more adaptive for whatever reason you know it's all speculation right that uh that these sort of cues were hidden um so that you know IND males couldn't mon you know you wouldn't be encouraged to find other maing opportunities outside your monogamous relationship um and so it would kind of keep the focus to get back to that you know on on your uh partner but you know all the data that's out there both from you know like when societies were encountered by Western scientists like whether poyy was practiced or not um to just what we understand about extra you know extra pair matings like an offspring Etc that that that you know strict monogamy does not seem to be the the do you know to have been the dominant um strategy now that's also consistent with the observation that you know we're we are a sexually dimorphic species so if you know when you look at the animal kingdom or and primates in particular those that are obligate pair bonded monogamous primates males and females don't really differ much like we look at Marmet or Tamarind in terms of body size body size coloration you know conspicuous ual um characteristics brain structure as well it's another interesting point which we can Circle back to but even you just look at well we can even if you just look at brain size relative brain brain size relative to body size um that uh is is smallest in um pair bonded uh monogamous species the difference in brain size not between males and females but just overall and it sort of uh scales up with um with group size and group um complexity it's slightly different but there's a point there which is that well pair bond and monogamous species look very very different right it's it it different I'm sorry I'm I'm Different it's very usual let's just say this so it's is very unusual right um in mammals overall it's very unusual in primates there's only a few you know monogamous primates monogamous obligate pair bonded primates um and in general their behavior is not as complicated or complex MH as individuals that live in societies where there's a lot more going on in terms of strategizing to attain mating opportunities through um you know either through sort of physical challenge or through um you know being sneaky or you know or making friends etc etc there's a there's there's this sort of proliferation of different strategies that requires a lot more mental calculation apparently that um that goes hand inand with an increase in brain size cortex size uh which makes sense from the standpoint of like more prefrontal cortex more context dependent strategy setting and decision- making and it could be based on it seems that with more prefrontal cortex one can um a species can incorporate uh different valuations of mates it's it can be about hormonal status and I want to make sure we get back to that how humans signal hormonal status um but it could also be about uh you know reproductive potential as it relates to Resource allocation or um whether or not they'll be a good caretaker I mean a lot of additional factors can be incorporated um in and working with more variables flexibly requires more neural real estate mostly in prefrontal cortex right you uh absolutely although I will I will u based on a paper we published last year in nature I would say that our Notions of sort of the breakdowns of like where stuff is in the brain and how it's encoded I think is going to change a lot and there are a number of other studies that have come out in the last year or so that that Echo this and so this was a paper in which we did something Unthinkable I think you know in the sort of history of Neuroscience which is all about reduction let's let's make the this the the uh the experiment as simple as possible only VAR one thing right and we're going to find where that one thing is in the brain and that's the tradition going back to Hubble and weasel right hub weasel folks are my scientific great grandparents no we were bound to do it sooner or later they won the Nobel Prize for their understanding for their their parsing of the of the neural basis of vision neuroplasticity Etc um torsten's still alive I think he's like a 100 now last time I saw him he was 96 and he was still jogging and doing art David passed away amazing you can look it up H&W we call him he will res they're they're among are um uh they're on the Mount Rushmore of Neuroscience and we'll get back to this so um please yeah explain to us um what this paper showed and then uh we will then talk about how humans signal their hormonal status we'll go all the way back to monkey porn I hope because oh we won't we won't monkey porn we won't leave monkey porn in the past so near and dear to my heart um okay so human weasel you know let's let's we're going to really simplify because you know that that's that's how we figure out exactly how it works but it's not what our brains do that's not the environment our brains are in when you're out there in the world you've got this Welter this this just just incredibly complex visual environment social environment and what you do in any moment depends on what you experienced recently what you think might happen next what might have happened last week in a similar circumstance it's super complicated and it reflects all these different competing interests and values and that's true for monkeys too okay and so we did the dream my dream experiment from back when I was an anthropologist which was to get rid of the lab okay and instead we uh recorded wirelessly from thousands of neurons in the brain uh in prefrontal cortex which you mentioned and we we tend to think of as being you know important for decision- making and kind of setting goals and the context and also the the sort of high level visual area uh in the temporal lobe that's important for sensing objects and and um you know maybe faces and things like that so seemingly you know one at like an input level and one at like a higher order level we did this mostly because of the some of technological limitations but it turned out to be really like a good thing in the end because it it it told us something really unusual so what we did then is we let monkeys just be monkeys with each other okay so uh we'd have a male uh with his female friend uh or alone with a female friend uh on the other side of a you know a sort of plexiglass divider and then there could be other monkeys present like as observers like who are like watching what they're doing or not and then we also introduced challenges to them like so basically my my graduate student would come in and like you know threaten one of the monkeys and that solicits a lot of agitation and arousal how you threaten monke monkeys you know look we're just like big kind of not as hairy monkeys um to them and and you know that that makes to threaten them you look at them directly yeah so if you go to the zoo folks and you look directly at a monkey and you smile that's a threat if you want to be friendly with the monkeys lip smack it's an affiliation thing it almost looked like we were blowing kisses at one another you notice we both looked away probably where it comes from that's right probably so this so you got a naturalistic exper a natural experiment and so rather than having one you know varying one thing these monkeys engaged in like 27 28 different kinds of behaviors okay they they you know they they would Forge they scratch they groom each other they threaten they mount they do everything that monkeys do right and then we also you know as we were varying the context as well and so that's like blows the lid off of the typical the complexity in a typical experiment and what did we find we found that neurons in both these areas and they were indistinguishable uh were modulated they were affected their firing rates their activity was affected by the behaviors that the animals engaged in and what the other animals engaged in too also who's around who's watching me is it like male you know X or female Y and that and what what was really surprising so first of all you see these signals they're basically the same these two parts of the brain are supposed to be very very different and um the the average neuron uh cared about you know something like seven things rather than you know like one or two okay like a grandmother cell you know which was kind of one idea for how the brain encoded things like there's one neuron and it only responds to your grandmother right something like that Jennifer Aniston cells Jennifer Aniston cells very famous Barack Obama cells Obama cells and now there's this question about whether or not they're in a relationship so that's why I brought but that was actually in the paper there were there were neurons in cortex that responded to Jennifer Aniston specifically Jennifer Aniston sells Barack Obama specifically I'm guessing there are Donald Trump neurons probably quite a few right and there I'm guessing there were Biden neurons so maybe maybe so it's uh you're saying that two very distinct brain areas can respond very similarly to the same things and that so that's one interest interesting finding and the second interesting finding as I understand is that neurons are paying attention not just to what you're looking at or the monkey is looking at but also who's looking at them um who else is around what the goal is so individual neurons are multitasking they're they're multitasking and and or as we say multiplexing but it's really the same thing as as multitasking and that raises a lot of really interesting question why why why are these signals all over the place um which it seems to be the case right uh and one idea that's out there is that because the you know if you let's say it's a visual area those visual neurons might need to know the context in which something is happening in order to um appropriately like encode that stimulus right because it matters the meaning of that stimulus it's another monkey like when I'm looking at you it matters that we're in this setting here in California and I flew out here yesterday and all that stuff might be really really important for what my brain does with that information like what I how I how I encode it what what I put into memory Etc so that's sort of one um hypothesis that that that I think that we're all entertaining cuz it would be I mean it would be heresy to say that like actually it's a more like another Dame drop Carl Lashley kind of view the brain that it's just one big mush that sort of so in 30 seconds Carl Lashley ran a really critical experiment where it was the equ potentiality of Cortex experiment where basically uh there had been a Decades of experiments with um people lesioning a given area of the brain and seeing it some deficit in Behavior Lashley decided to do the same experiment and found that regardless of which area of the cortex this is important that it was the cortex specifically that he scooped out lesion got rid of set it an addition x to the his case I think it was rats um he didn't observe deficits in that behavior at least that persisted but you see this in the monkey and human data you can lesion a brain area see a huge deficit I know I'm telling you what you already know Michael but um I think most people don't realize this a a brain lesion can lead to a huge deficit in behavior that is recovered later over time through plasticity unless you start digging into the deeper stuff of the brain where lesions lead to permanent deficits unless some intervention is yeah the cortex seems to be maybe a little bit I don't want to say equip potential but it's it's very plastic it's very flexible uh and very adaptive so um this was a really cool finding I thought and you know we could decode from the population of of neurons exactly what each of the animals was doing and who was around and who's watching right I mean which I mean to me was very gratifying but the thing that was most exciting to me the most exciting I think that finding is really cool for neuroscientists but for the primatologist the Anthropologist and me the finding that was most exciting was that we discovered the account the mental account for our social relationships okay so um for monkeys this a large fraction of their the way that they build and maintain relation relationships is through grooming each other so when they go and they pick through each other's fur and um that's how you make friends okay that's how you make allies and the um what has been observed going back to when monkeys were you know first being watched is that uh they tend to be really Equitable right they like if I invest two minutes in you you will eventually invest two minutes back in me it might not happen right away but we're going to balance out it's going to come even and that raises the idea which most people thought was like ridiculous that wow they're actually tracking and and keeping notes on all this they've got a ledger for their Investments and withdrawals in this social relationship so to make it more more uh Salient for the listeners like think of it as like when you're texting and you text a friend and they text you back and then you text them and you text them again and you text them again and you're like am I getting ghosted what the heck's going on here why are you not Tex you start to feel that sense of of like urgency betrayal like and I'm not going to text you now I'm going to wait I'm going to wait until you text me back it's the same kind of thing we have this sense of and in fact when we think about now all the stuff that's going on soop politically you know in terms of Equitable relationships I think that that this this Bears on that so we did something had never been done before which is we tracked every single grooming interaction that ever happened between these monkeys over months CU we could we had cameras on them and we we used computer vision to to to do all that tracking and yeah they were perfectly Equitable but sometimes it you know sometimes it would take minutes to balance it sometimes it took weeks like you owe me you owe me and then it would come back what we found is that in the brain the brain in these two both of these brain areas we're carrying that mental account that precisely tracked who owed whom what amazing how much grooming they you know that blew I mean that blew my mind it's like cuz we all feel that right it's like the one of the most Salient things there is in our lives I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor betterhelp better help offers Professional Therapy with a licensed therapist carried out entirely online now I personally have been doing therapy weekly for well over 30 years initially I didn't have a choice it was a condition of being allowed to stay in school but pretty soon I realized that therapy is an extremely important component to 's overall health they're essentially three things that great therapy provides first of all it provides a good rapport with somebody that you can trust and talk to about pretty much any issue with second of all it can provide support in the form of emotional support and directed guidance and third expert therapy can provide useful insights better help makes it very easy to find an expert therapist with whom you resonate with and that can provide you those three benefits that come from effective therapy also because better help allows for therapy to be done entirely online it's super time efficient and easy to fit into a busy schedule there's no commuting to a therapist's office or sitting in a waiting room no traffic no parking issues ETC if you'd like to try betterhelp you can go to betterhelp.com huberman to get 10% off your first month again that's betterhelp.com huberman this explains um occasionally I'll get a text from a friend that says nice conversation which means they texted me a bunch before and I didn't respond yeah and part of that has to do with i for me the way that texts are archived they can kind of drift down and then they're hard to find and you know and and I'm a known long latency response person but then I barrage not intentionally I'll like get on a plane and be like oh that's right I'm going to get to these texts from a couple weeks ago and respond to them or a couple days ago and um I find voice memos to be a good solution to this I have a couple of people in my life with whom I mainly communicate through voice memo but it is very interesting that you know like my team here we we have a what feels like a very consistent Cadence and um balance of accounts like the like the even the text duration like you know like I'm fine with a one-word uh or even one letter text and I'm fine with an essay like but certain relationships you just don't do that so what is this just because I can't help myself uh what is the brain area that's tracking this account or is it a network it's a network okay great then we don't have to Lo people down with people with brain areas well this is amazing I mean I think that um rather than you know people talk about love languages right like people is it physical touch is it um acts of service I think you know there some of your uh words of affirmation I'm guessing that some people are tracking these very carefully too um in in humans and and balancing the account and that kind of love language idea seems like like our our five acts of of uh support or or five physical uh contact uh events whatever you want to call it I know I'm really sounding like a scientist um a nerd um are those equivalent to you know five sentences of affirmation I I what I'm gathering is that the brain is probably calculating these things on an individual basis so and so it's not like five sentences equals five acts of service so but that maybe it is that there's some like internal valuation that is like very mathematical you're trying to balance the check I think it is very mathematical but you I I think I want to point out that in in the pairs of monkeys we've now expanded this to multiple monkeys in in a big open field but they're equal kind of Partners right so it made sense that that balance was was sort of one for one and we know that um studies of you know wild monkeys wild primates that um the sort of conversion you know like you know dollars to pesos or whatever uh is not one to one if the if there's something else in in that relationship so if there's a power differential it's like if you're beta male um and you're grooming alpha male right it might be a 100 minutes of grooming that alpha male that you get like one groom back or more importantly you groom that alpha male for months and years on end and then he comes and saves your life when you are in an aggressive encounter with with another individual so you see how that there is this I I think that's what you're getting at me with the Love Languages which is that there there's um there is this underlying currency but the value of that um currency for each individual like varies depending on what they I don't know where that variation comes from but um depending on what's most important what's most Salient for them and then also probably what that relationship uh is like and if there's a power differential if there's any other kind of differential as well the math of power dynamics online is really interesting to observe uh on X where people tend to be a bit more combative at times not everybody but I've noticed this like you know this notion of like don't feed the trolls right like someone says something that's insulting and you know you don't honor them with a response you just let it go by that that would be somehow completing some sort of reward circuitry because what they really want is not to harm your reputation but to be acknowledged that their opinion matters and social media as long as people have access to an account effectively levels the field although then there's this prioritization of like high follower accounts and what used to be that when blue checks became purchasable right that a lot of people were upset because it was essentially like you know equaling the status playing field somewhat right but it's very interesting to see how this stuff plays out you know like do you honor somebody with a response or like ignoring somebody's insult that the classic uh Madmen Dawn Draper response you know in the elevator that has turned into a meme that well I don't think of you I don't think about you at all being the ultimate sort of display of his power that um in in terms of a you know not even allowing his neural circuits to to keep track of an account it's like zero for zero for you you know is essentially what he was saying so is is it the case that power dynamics are tracked across uh for Conflict for collaboration we talked about love life languages which is a collaboration um you know are some people do um seem in life to be very transactional is the word we we assign to it they're tracking like what you did this and I did this no you know you paid last time I paid this this kind of thing um or they're they're elevated by the idea that oh yeah you know they did this and this therefore that the relationship must be much much tighter than perhaps the other person in the relationship thinks it is these are complex features but the idea that we are Old World primates and that there's a brain Network tracking this stuff to me makes really good sense and I think it's wonderful that you've identified a physiological anatomical substrate for it I think it's it's lends a lot of support to like thousands of years of observations well thanks no I I I I think you're you're spot on there um in the in the sense that and at some point it's it's all really transactional in the calculus of evolution right so in ultimately it's if your calculations do the right thing so that you get resources and mating opportunities and translate that into Offspring and that they do that into Offspring as well then those whatever the biological substrate was that did that is going to proliferate and potentially become um honed and and really uh uh specialized uh for doing that job and that's actually the argument one other argument for why you know we study primates um because we are so closely related to them we share all these features of our our biology and our Behavior but also because and and this is where I think for example personally I find it much more um compelling to study animals like Reese's Maca as opposed to say marma sets which we talked about a little bit in the sense that um if we're thinking about the the forces that have made us who we are right uh which we just talked about you see it displayed on X every day like attending to all these things tracking all these different relationships deciding whether or not to give somebody your attention you know the purest form of generosity as it was said um that's what monkeys have to do too and so this this argument from um what we call neuroethology and ethology being the science of basically trying to understand Behavior as a product of of evolution right that it it it um that it's it's designed just like physical features just like the you the wing of a bird right that um are mental processes and the underlying mechanisms are designed to serve very specific um functions and so if we want to understand how we got to be the way that we are we should look toward animals that had you know seem to be doing the same kind of things facing the same kinds of pressures uh in the environment in particular the social environment which which seems to be the one that's most important for us how do humans signal their hormone status is on a very different end of the spectrum yeah but um you know everything we're talking about which is fairly high level um and in the brain exists as I like to think about it on a on a on a kind of a water level or a tide that's set by are levels of autonomic arousal like thinking feeling action changes when levels of autonomic arousal are very high AKA stress alertness versus when we're sleepy um and hormones certainly influence autonomic arousal and a bunch of other things too hormones is a broad category but let's just stay with the ones that most people are familiar with so um what are the data on how females signal um let's just say you know testosterone estrogen and um other you know uh relevant hormones and for males as well what are the what are the external signals or behavior or behavioral signals yeah so there so they that there that's a really important point that you made because they both you know those things go together so uh it's been most controversial for females but you know in my view the data is pretty clear and it you know aligns I think with our own intuitions um just from from daily life which is well some things are are apparently not consciously perceptible it's like hard to report but um but through studies where you just ask males for like okay is this you know how attractive is this woman Etc um that there are changes in the face for example and that's been one argument is that this is going to sound funny but that the signals that in non-human primates are in the rear are because we're walking upright you can't see that really so now it's kind of in in the face and so these changes that um happen that the ovulatory cycle is reflected in the turgidity how how tight the skin is in the face because it gets a little plumper and a little bit redder and we may not be consciously aware of that but the that that it's there right and it shows up in sort of preference data when when when you ask heterosexual males you know do you you know how attractive is this woman Etc so that that seems to be the case um and also um behavioral you know so so uh sort of flirtatious Behavior um increases around the time of ovulation yeah yeah yeah yeah there's there was a classic study that um that exotic dancers strippers um would actually get bigger tips more tips when they were ovulating than when they're not ovulating interesting uh so there maybe and it could be by it could be by virtue of their their behavior their but it could be the way they they dance proximity to the uh to the what I guess The Observers clients whatever you call them I I I don't recall that being um Quantified but um but it suggests that there's there's a latent signal there and that uh men are uh unconsciously processing this they're not saying oh her cheeks are particularly exactly uh uh plump and red right now they're that um but that if you measure their ratings or their scores of of attractiveness when she's ovulating it's the these features that are that might be drawing out that response correct we can take this back to the monkey porn studies which is was our first real foray into trying to quantify the uh the value of various kinds of social information for guiding decisions and we already came into this uh with a sense that like yeah things like status physical prowess mating status um you know are you are you um you look like good mate bad mate are you in in mating condition you know you Etc and so when you know you think about that like how do you ask a monkey that question you could ask them they not going to tell you because they they can't talk but you have to develop a behavioral way to elicit that and so what we did I think it was pretty clever was to Riff on the studies that you know I had already done uh looking at varying the expected value of two options so this was the work I did as a postto with Paul glimcher where we um revealed uh economic signals in the brain in the in the parietal cortex an area between where visual signals come in and where you make a choice um to to to make a behavioral response and we varied like in this case monkeys don't work for money they they'll work for juice okay it's been actually it's really fun you spend a lot of time figuring out what juice they really love best and to then economically you would vary like the size of the juice reward that each of the two offered or its probability while maintaining size constant that when you combine those you multiply those together you get expected value that's the first model of economic decision-making that was really ever developed right you compute the expected value different options you choose the one has the highest value it it you know doesn't work all the time but it's sort of a rough proxy and we showed that yeah neurons and PR cortex signal that monkeys are good economists they choose the one that has a higher expected value okay so now take that experiment I'm going to have monkeys choosing between two options that vary and how much juice they pay out but I'm also going to pop up a picture when they choose one of them okay and they don't know what picture is coming up but the picture is going to be it could be it could be a nothing burger just like some gray Square it doesn't mean anything or it could be the the the perum or of a female if it were males that we were studying we did this with males uh sorry females making choices eventually as well could be a face of a dominant male face of a subordinate male face of female ET what's the equivalent of of the uh swollen taint of a female monkey um for if you reverse the experiment and it's the female monkey who's making a choice about male monkeys what do they what do they find really attractive in a male monkey yeah so it's the taint of the male monkey because it's providing a signal about how much monkeys looking at taints how much testosterone is circular you know that they've got on board basically which is a good predictor of their status um it's a good predictor of their you know fighting ability all that kind of stuff and and if you're a female and that that's that's a reasonable kind of choice to make because if you have male offspring and females are predisposed to choose that then they'll your male offspring are going to do pretty well so that's what we did and uh we varied how much juice so sometimes monkeys would get paid they'd have to give up juice to see the pictures sometimes they get paid more to see the pictures and what we did then is we we we construct a choice curve and we use the different IAL if that if it's not 50/50 if it slides one way or the other it tells us that monkeys are are paying x amount to to see certain kinds of pictures or you have to overpay them right and so what did we find it was really I think scientifically revealing but it's pretty fun people got it immediately uh they will pay juice juice they will give up juice they will pay it to see pictures of the perum the the hind quarters of females this was original study was in male monkeys they will pay to see the faces of dominant males and you had to pay them to see the faces of subordinate males okay so so so females will give up juice to see the taints of testosterone Rich male monkeys and male monkeys will pay juice to see the swollen taints of female monkeys that are because of the swelling indicates a better reproductive competence yes better you know DS the time the time is ripe okay to to to M but it just in general it's a signal that is like what we would say is it's important it has value something you should track and in fact yeah they're paying for it so you know this just blew up on the Internet even back then it was like suddenly Mill every websit was like oh you proven monkey porn blah blah blah um it was kind of a fun ride it did it was a New York Times uh idea of the year uh in 2005 which was um again kind of shocking you know this like well on that but but people it makes sense and the thing I want to point out is that um we ran the same experiment in people not with uh unclothed humans so we used and we used only well no it was it was and we had to create our own stimulus set because all the stimulus sets that were out there for visual studies of humans were like like a bunch of you know German people looking very D they were very well controlled and we wanted something that's was more natural so we downloaded thousands of photos from this website hotter.com I don't know if you recall that but it was a website where you could upload pictures and people would rate you I mean now that like probably wouldn't be allowed now I remember I remember rate my pet rate my pet Rate My Professor I think which is still around when you're saying rate rate yes rate rate with a t at my pet yeah but this was hotter not.com so you get all these really natural looking and then we had this was really funny though too um so we had uh a group of separate groups of Raiders uh from the people who we actually test in the experiment so we had you know a group of males heterosexual males rating the female photos and vice versa and um that was interesting in its own right so we were just trying to establish like we're not saying why they're attractive or anything like that just like let's measure it okay and it was really fun because um you know by the and it took was hard work you're having to do one every 3 seconds and it took like an hour and the uh you know when the women were done rating they're like okay I'm glad that's over uh the hours over and our male Raiders were like do you have any more um you know can I I I'd be happy to sit here and rate more photographs for you interesting um so women got sort of like uh they got tired of rating males for attractiveness males did not Tire of reading females for attrac they did not at all which is that's anecdotal but it's still I think it's revealing then we ran the pay-per-view experiment just like in monkeys uh on humans payview and we also uh ran a couple of other economically you know econ standard economic tasks one would be how long are you willing to wait so that's a delay discounting like and generally you you will wait longer for a bigger reward a smaller reward and also how hard would you work and we the work was like you had to alternate pressing two keys on a keyboard it was really just menial laborious you know Etc so um the two interesting just sociologically it's interesting what comes out of this uh our female subjects um basically wouldn't give up money they were working for money they were hearing the sound of coins coming out of a slot machine which is proportional to how much money they actually got choice money if you ignor the pictures you'd go home with like $17 extra compared to if if you were influenced by them and the females did really well economically so they pretty much kind of ignored the pictures of the males even though they were rated even the ones that were super hot they were not very uh concerned with that for the males it was the exact opposite so the males are giving up essentially they're paying and they they had thousands of Trials they're paying somewhere between a half and three4 of a cent to see images of women who are rated in the top like third of of attractiveness they also would wait significantly longer and they would work really hard it's like rats pressing for cocaine quite literally to keep those pictures up on the screen okay so that's the setting we've established in monkeys and in people similar economic principles uh that are guiding social you call it attention social valuation whatever so we're like okay let's go look in the brain so we did an MRI experiment fmri experiment to measure measured blood flow to you know different parts of the brain um in we only tested males um because they were the ones who displayed uh you know differential preferences there and what we found is that um kind of parts of the visual system that are involved in encoding faces but then the reward system was activated and tracked linearly how much money these guys were paying to see uh images there basically the trade-off value the currency the translation of pictures into money okay then in monkeys we studied all the same areas but now we could record from Individual neurons in those areas rather than looking at blood flow which is a crude proxy and we found exactly the same thing which is that you know neurons in the reward system uh were spontaneously and strongly activated by the those um pictures you know that um and that made sense right so the pictures of the pera of females um by uh dominant male faces um and that correspondence I thought was pretty compelling right so these are brain areas that are involved in value based decisionmaking yeah not unlike the value-based decision making of tracking how many grooms uh grooming events one received versus needs to give yeah or texts one has received or gives or acts of service one trades for some other love language I mean I'm here I'm extrapolating to a lot of different themes but um I mean talk about transactional I mean this implies that our neural circuitry while flexible we can you know trade two of those for one of those or we can decide you know I'm just going to be a selfless Giver um that that's a decision and that altruism well it certainly exists I mean we fortunately see acts of altruism a lot probably not as much as you know Humanity would be served by but it exists altruism exists uh but nonetheless there's a formula that's maintained in the brain like I'm going to do all this for nothing and the the the circuit kind of understands that versus I'm going to do this but there's an expectation maybe with a long latency that at some point it's going to be payback I I expect to be paid back the idea of altruism has been very controversial within kind of evolutionary biology uh for a long time um because it's kind of hard to imagine a a scenario in which being purely selfless um could persist if there was a genetic uh you know part of that right if if it were heritable so that's why we have ideas of like kin selection like I will give up my life for you know eight of my cousins for example well right in I was saying in in parenting and taking care of young like we give selflessly but there's this like unconscious or semiconscious backdrop which is you want your own offspring to prolif to survive and and flourish and so it's not quote unquote really selfless although in the in the short-term it can appear selfless that's I guess suppose the real evolutionary biology argument I would say that in terms of um just pure acts of giving where we don't expect anything in return I think most people that do that um say certainly I've had this experience right it feels good so there is a return on investment it's just that the return doesn't come from somebody else doing something to reciprocate in the same domain but it feels good you know there's nothing more impressive than an anonymous donor right you know actually uh I don't want to take us too far off track but there's this idea in a lot of Europe that if somebody donates a lot of money to a cause that you know they're doing philanthropy that they're like trying to hide something whereas in this country that tends to be not the case although it's sort of growing this idea that oh if somebody's giving a lot of money to a university they want their name on the side of a building they're really looking to kind of either hide other features of their life Andor they want respect right they they want they want um uh no uh fame um so it's it's kind of interesting I I like to believe in pure altruism I just it feels good to me to believe in true altruism so I I you know I don't think this is settled and I think this is where uh there's another feature of of human and maybe human evolution that humans and human evolution that's relevant here which is that we may be one of the only organisms in which something called group selection might happen right and that's this idea that like groups are competing with each other in addition to individuals competing and and and and collaborating and competing and so that an indivi evolution might favor groups in which there are certain individuals who are in a sense wired to be selfless and um there's one of my colleagues at um Penn guy named Duncan Watts has done these really interesting experiments where he'll he had he ran these massive online like prisoners dilemma games where you know people are having to decide whether to um you know to either support you know their their partner or or um defect essentially and uh but what was unusual about these games is he let people played them over and over again hundreds and hundreds of times what typically happens is once you've experienced the fact that like if you cooperate you're going to get screwed eventually then everybody just says I'm just gonna I'm just screwing the other guy from here on out but he identified that there's a population like 20% of people I think something like that who are assistant Cooperators who cooperate no matter what their experience and that is resonant with this idea kind of from group selection that groups that had individuals who were Cooperators who were selfless no matter what might outcompete other groups right and that I think that's a really interesting idea I want to Circle back to what you were saying about the feel good like when you give there's a real substrate to that if we can engage in a little reverse inference which is that and this and this was um shown actually a couple decades ago by by a neuroeconomist named Bill Harbaugh for the first time which is that um when you give to like a charity that you love you see activation of reward circuitry that looks just like if you got the reward yourself right so so it's like if I give to whatever March of Dimes or something and and that's what I love then it it in essence feels good to me and that reward system activation right is the thing that uh through dope mean reinforces Behavior so when you have that warm glow it makes you more likely to do that again uh in the future it's a self-reinforcing signal I love that those sorts of circuits exist because they seem to serve the greater good and I'm not you know trying to you know uh rub away our more um I don't know harsher features of prime brain wiring but they're all in there so um speaking of which are there external signals besides muscularity uh jaw shape Etc that relate to levels of testosterone in male humans that um are transient you know the male hormones don't cycle as robustly uh as female hormones because of the lack of a menstrual cycle uh they might change with age Etc but um is there anything that signals um testosterone or free testosterone level um certainly stress hormone level is signaled um quaking of hands uh that kind of thing um but what about testosterone signaling that is independent of the the kind of like uh Vigor display stuff that we normally hear about it's a good question I think it's it's important as you pointed out that it doesn't vary too much over you know weeks or months or anything like that it's it's pretty stable but well one thing we can think about is work done by my colleague giddy na who is um who's in the marketing department uh at Wharton and working with Colin camer actually out out here at um Caltech and they did a number of studies not where they were measuring testosterone but doing very well-controlled uh Placebo you know Trials of applying testosterone gel versus you know something that you know people you know you didn't know which which arm you were getting so testosterone versus placebo versus placebo yeah and measuring things like uh um desire for uh you know conspicuous consumption so buying you know luxury cars or things like that or um other things are uh they're cognitive reflection like they're really bad at uh you they start to fail on things that require not just giving the simple answer uh they become more risky taking uh so there's a number of features that we kind of I think collectively anecdotally think of as being like hyper masculine associated with testosterone like you want a signal like you're a big guy you take more risks um and and you're less reflective you play more and you're less reflective so that you know that and I'm going to screw it up right now if I actually tried to give you the the question you know but it's like you know a bat and a ball cost A110 together how you know I'm going to screw it up and then you're going to say well you know you lack C reflection but let's just leave that aside but then they're much more likely to give the wrong answer go to the jump to the conclusion which seems obvious but it's wrong so higher testosterone more um impulsive with uh responses less reflective tend to be wrong more often yes um but more confident but more confident um more risk-taking that kind of that's kind of a kind of a okay fully expected one um and and I guess the purchasing you know uh items that signal um wealth or status it's a display so you know I think of as like the chimpanzee so when when when researchers first went out to studi chimpanzees you know in in Africa and then they they had like generators or whatnot around and they had these big gasoline cans or whatever and the male chimps uh one of the male chimps you know discovered that he could take these cans and run around uh the group banging them together and getting a lot of attention you know which is similar you see them up in a tree TRG display Vigor display displaying that yeah just grabbing I think so much of its attention just look at me look at me look at me um and I think that's what you've got going on with this sort of you know buying a jaguar or whatever you know it's like uh it it or people are trying to Signal what they don't have actually have right I mean it's it's it's It's tricky because we um now you can buy things on like you know the there a bunch of jokes about Los Angeles that can be made here you know my my I grew up in the Bay Area and there are areas of the of the Bay Area where there's a tremendous amount of wealth my dad used to always say you know you know appear like wealth is really kind of hidden back in in the trees literally you know you go to La and there's all this display through stuff it depends on where you are in La um but it's largely true you see let me put this way you see a lot more yellow Lamborghinis here than you do in pora Valley but I'll be willing to bet that there's far more money in pora Valley than there is uh in all of Rodeo Drive in Los Angeles if you really just looked at actual net worth not an experiment I want to run right but I I'd be willing to bet one entire limb of somebody's choice to run that experiment and so there is this kind of strange thing where the display of vigor is is so flexible in humans right like um right it's like uh you know nowadays there's a lot of discussion about billionaires signaling more um traditional or primitive forms of vigor like fighting ability or muscle um versus you know like it's almost like and I think part of the reason for that is that um the concept of a billion dollars is very hard for most people to conceptualize as like a like an operational thing like what they would do with it and how it would impact their level of happiness which is probably actually very little Etc but we we can assess physical qualities so readily like and so um anyway I guess that this this is really just my way of taking us back to this idea of valuation like how we place value on a potential mate or a friend or a co-worker it sounds so transactional but clearly the brain is performing these operations all the time and it's highly uh variable depending on who you are the social context you live in and yet these hormones especially testosterone and estrogen seem to really be playing with the the the volume or the gain on all of this stuff yep that's exactly how and in fact that's how I think about all all all you know we can think about oxytocin the same way as like a volume knob for pro-social uh interactions in general in testosterone it's so so I think that works I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors function last year I became a function remember after searching for the most comprehensive approach to lab testing function provides over 100 Advanced lab tests that give you a key snapshot of your entire bodily Health this snapshot offers you with insights on your heart health Hormone Health immune functioning nutrient levels and much more they've also recently added tests for toxins such as BPA exposure from harmful Plastics and tests for paases or forever chemicals function not only provides testing of over 100 biomarkers key to your physical and mental health but it also analyzes these results and provides insights from Top Doctors who are expert in the relevant areas for example in one of my first tests with function I learned that I had elevated levels of mercury in my blood function not only helped me detect that but offered insights into how best to reduce my mercury levels which included limiting my tuna consumption I've been eating a lot of tuna while also making an effort to eat more leafy greens and supplementing with Knack and acetal cysteine both of which can support glutathione production and detoxification and I should say by taking a second function test that approach worked comprehensive blood testing is vitally important there's so many things related to your mental and physical health that can only be detected in a blood test the problem is blood testing has always been very expensive and complicated in contrast I've been super impressed by function Simplicity and at the level of cost it is very affordable as a consequence I decided to join their scientific Advisory Board and I'm thrilled that they're sponsoring the podcast if you'd like to try function you can go to function health.com huberman function currently has a weight list of over 250,000 people but they're offering Early Access to hubman podcast listeners again that's function health.com huberman to get early access to function let's talk about oxytocin we hear about it as the love hormone the affiliative hormone folks it's a neuro hormone so it somewhere in between a neuromodulator and a hormone let's set all that aside all the mechanistic stuff and um love to know your knowledge about like what changing levels of oxytocin does to perception to behavior yeah humans and so yeah oxytocin I mean we've been interested in it for a long time because as you said it it seems to be a dial that uh can turn up or turn down certain aspects of social behavior and other other aspects of of mental uh and emotional function it's important to point out that oxytocin and its sister neuron hormone um vasopress Arginine vasopressin um which is sort of maybe a little more important in males than in females and females oxytocin little more important but they they're in both and and they've been around a long time they've actually you know there a very early in in vertebrate evolution in mammals oxytocin has the primary role right of um helping to build bonds between Mom and baby so um oxytocin is released during child birth it's released when Mom is nurs and it seems that in humans and some other social you know really really social creatures it's now been co-opted to kind of have that similar kind of role in the relationships you have with other people who are not your Offspring or your your parate right so because oxytocin for example is released uh you know when you orgasm and so then that's you know thought to be why that sort of Pillow Talk afterward is you know like it's more engaging and you know people feel things um at that time that they might that they're different from what they would have felt it Fosters attachment Fosters attachment EXA that's a good way of putting it so oxytocin levels are hard to measure right um You can measure at at a distance in the periphery in the blood but it's not exactly like one toone correlated with what's going on in the brain and in general we don't want to put like a a you know a pump or a little thing in your brain uh that we could measure how much is in there so uh um so we can look at instead what is often done is to look at what happens if you introduce oxytocin more oxytocin that you normally have like into the brain you can't inject it or anything like that and the way that it's typically applied is to squirt it up your nose and or inhale it uh intranasally so it then is taken up by the nerves that are in your sinuses and whatnot and then goes into the brain that was what it was thought to I think that we were the first to show that that's actually how it Works um we did all the work in monkeys where it's uh all these things are just sort of easier to do and the behavior is a little bit less complex so it it our readouts are are I think a bit more straightforward in the human studies there's a lot of Vari you know there's it's controversial because there's a lot of like there's some crap studies and there's just a lot of variability in the effects across studies I think some of that's just because you ask people to squirt it up their own noses and so there's a lot of that introduces variation in in just how good they were getting it in the right place with the monkeys what we did instead is we used what's called in nebulizer aerosolizer like I had noticed when like my kid had like pneumonia and I took him to the ER they put this mask on them and they you know they they missed this albuterol which opened up his Airways oh we could do that with oxytocin too so that's what we did with the monkeys it makees sure they get like a really good dose and then we show that that gets right into the brain okay now that puts us in a position ask questions of what does it do um one of the first things that oxytocin does is it relaxes you so just overall um you know you were talking about autonomic function it's a it's a relaxer it's an um analytic so it uh and in in monkeys what that does is it reduces their vigilance to sort of any threats so they're just a lot more chill uh so that's sort of a primary thing and then we've looked at how it affects their behavior in males and females separately because as I said before they sort of first of all males and females have different strategies and and behaviors and and the the expression of where where oxytocin receptors are in the brain Etc and vasopress recept is a little bit different in in male monkeys it's super interesting because you know we've been talking about how you know dominance and they really like recent Ms this really steep hierarchy and one of the things we found right away is that you give oxytocin and it just flattens the hierarchy so the dominant male monkeys become super chill and friendly and the subordinate ones become a bit Bolder um perhaps because you know when if I dose if I dose my own or I've dosed you with oxytocin would change your behavior which would change my behavior so it reverberates across individuals so so it flattens the hierarchy they spend more time making eye contact they pay more attention to the other individual and we've shown that um it's burning man yeah it's true I've never been to burning I've never either but this is what I hear no I think it's that that's the right point and I'll I'll Circle back to that because we also showed that um uh in a task-based situation where a monkey can choose we gave monkeys choices where they could give a reward TOS to another monkey to a a bottle that could collect reward you know in case they just like to see juice dripping out and they would become more pro-social so they're much more likely to give a reward uh to another monkey they're more altruistic um as you you know you as we talked about earlier so that's like it looks like a real pro-social kind of thing right which I think is is super interesting in females is it's a little bit different they um females become kind of nicer to each other and we see that greater eye contact Etc but they come more aggressive toward males and we speculate I think it's the hypothesis that um because oxytocin is released when you've got an infant basically for females uh males are a bigger threat then because in many primate societies and other mammals uh males sometimes can be infanticidal because if they kill off a female's infant that's you know then that will bring that female into uh receptivity for mating much more quickly and so so that's sort of The evolutionary yeah it is brutal The evolutionary rationale behind that so that's kind kind of our supposition um the other thing I thought was really uh interesting as well is we find uh a greater or an increase in the synchronization of behavior so when I do something you know this idea of mirroring um which has been talked about in in business context for a long time you know it's a real thing and it's a marker of a good relationship a strong relationship if you have good rapport with somebody you tend to adopt the similar move movements and postures and if you do those things shirts shirts exactly we didn't coordinate clothes you just happen to be a great dresser well you know same here um so so when you have that you know actually if you do those things if I subtly mirror you you're and I'm in a job interview I'm more likely to get the job going to get a higher salary Etc all those sort of good things so oxytocin turns up behavioral synchrony and one of the things this is like something I've been fascinated in for the last decade and we and a lot of other people have been working on is that this synchrony at the behavioral and neural level physiological synchrony uh is kind of it's this black magic of of social behavior it's the glue that um allows us to live and work together so the observation is that if you and I we have a good rapport here let's say if we were measuring uh activity in our brains right now we'd see that they were coming into alignment so they might have been very disperate when I arrived here and you arrived here today and as we've grown closer um and we've discovered things that are similar about us that the you know our mindsets and our emotional sets are more overlapping so we see this world more similarly we feel more similarly about it we're more likely to take similar decisions and um and then that rever the coolest thing is this reverberates down to your body so uh if I if our brains begin to align our hearts actually begin to beat together even if we have different resting heart rates uh you to breathe together and you start to move together you start to look at the same things in the environment we've talked about attention when you look at something the same thing you're getting the same data and that a feedback loop which I think now you can see that that is a way to coordinate behavior and that is the essence of sort of that's our secret sauce as a species which is that we can collaborate and do things together and it seems to like oxytocin vasopressin are involved in this as a way of kind of turning up the dial on synchrony it seemed to turn up the socalled social brain Network and then that synchrony is is the glue and it's a biomarker a biological marker of a close relationship that predicts better communication increased trust better teamwork you know uh whether your marriage is going to last I mean the things that it predicts you know group decision- making so we showed that in like in a business context text uh committees that are more in sync with each other that their hearts are beating together are more likely to reach the right decision in a really difficult problem than committees that are not the cool thing is that now that you have a biomarker you can hack that right in the sense that now we can start looking at all those trust building exercises or anything else that you know was supposed to turn things up turn up the dial on teamwork or communication and we have a readout we could say yeah that's working that's actually doing the thing it's not BS right you should invest your time and energy in that rather than something else and there's like now we've been working through this list as well as others there a whole host of things that seem to actually turn up synchrony uh and that's a shortcut to team chemistry so interesting um I'm sure you're familiar with the molecule um uh MDMA AK ecstasy never Tak in I have high on my list yeah I have um it's an illegal drug but it if you um are part of a clinical trial exploring MDMA then you can do it legally um if you're not you're breaking the law right so um methylene dioxy methamphetamine is it's very interesting because it dramatically increases dopamine but not nearly as much as it increases serotonin and it also leads to enormous increases in Oxy oxytocin and it's not really a classic psychedelic it's uh an empathogen um and it has unique properties um in that it raises dopamine and serotonin simultaneously that's unusual among compounds like amphetamine dopamine epinephrine uh you know psilocybin serotonin you know they broadly speaking there's a really nice experiment that was done trying to isolate the effects of dopamine versus serotonin versus oxytocin on the pathogenic effect and by administering different drugs and in the case of oxytocin oxytocin directly what they basically concluded was that oxytocin has very little if anything to do with the Imp pathogenic aspects of um of MDMA but if I recall correctly and I have to go back and look at this but if I recall correctly it had a profound impact on as you pointed out the um reducing anxiety and that reduction in anxiety brings us back to this idea that you know as we change the tide of of autonomic arousal Things become more or less available to us in terms of emotions and behavior so I I find oxytocin to just be like spectacularly interesting compound for so many reasons but perhaps for that reason um uh more than all the others that it it's like it's our own affiliative as you said anotic is that I pronounce that correctly yeah yeah um to uh I never actually said that word out loud I've written it many many times but it's kind of when I said it I was worried that like maybe I'm saying the opposite or angiolytic or is it Ang anyway reduces anxiety folks um chills you out chills you out and I think that's so interesting that oxytocin can be evoked by all these different types of stimuli yeah so as you mentioned it's like postcoidal or post-orgasmic it it's uh but it can be elicited by um nonsexual affil affiliative touch by um uh there's actually really interesting evidence that and this led to this question about whether or not cesarian sections versus um you know uh tra vaginal births are are you know are are they truly equal in terms of their effect on the fetus um and it does seem to be at least in rodent models that The Passage through the vaginal Canal during birth helps stimulate oxytocin that it has a bidirectional effect on the mother infant relation ship well is there any evidence of that in primates as well uh I know the evidence that you're talking about I don't know of evidence uh in primates for that um but I think I'd like to Circle back to what you talked about in terms of social touch which I think is a really especially right now today uh I think is a very important topic to consider so we like other primates um we have these uh they're actually unspecialized sensors in our skin uh the hairy parts of our skin like your arm whatever your and they provide input essentially to A system that releas the system that releases oxytocin directly and that's basically all they do they're really bad at telling you exactly where or how you know what's being done or how much pressure but they operate best at um body temperatures so you're being touched with a body temperature stimulus and in a way that's very what we would consider to be very pleasant like getting tickies you know it's like grooming like this is the same thing as grooming in uh in monkeys and so um it tells us that this is an ancient part of our heritage to building relationships which is actually through social touch right and it's been said and I think reasonably that we're living through an epidemic of the loss of social touch for a lot of good reasons right because of raising awareness of inappropriate touch Etc but now it's almost as if we've swung the pendulum too hard in One Direction which is that we're being robbed of this very natural intrinsic signaling mechanism for building bonds that humans would normally uh you know normally would you know in the past have benefited greatly from and it's you know it's not clear how we move forward in terms of like replacing that um but I do think it's possibly part of the constellation of forces of losses that uh is is making us very sick as a species and as a society you know namely the loneliness epidemic the the uh the sort of antisocial Century um which with concomitant you know with basically all these fallons in terms of anxiety and depression and despair despair exactly despare it's such a great word captures so much um couple of Reflections about this because I think about this a lot never forget when I was um traveling overseas in 2019 so this is like pre- lockdowns and all that um you would see in certain areas of the world uh men walking holding hands right um and you know I didn't know their sexual orientation but my assumption was that they were heterosexual men holding hands cuz it was like just very much part of the culture over there um the other thing was if you and I have gone to South America you'll see a school kids walking home all holding hands boys and girls just walking holding hands it's very you know casual um you know non-romantic handholding right um a lot more hugging a lot of like like like I wouldn't say long firm Embrace but I'd say like like like vigorous Embrace upon meeting kind of thing yeah and um and I grew up in the era of you know like fist bumps and and side hugs you know that's like a thing over over here and um as you pointed out I I think that uh the lack of physical Touch of that sort meaning just whatever is culturally acceptable um consensual casual physical touch um definitely according to the literature that I'm aware of signals to the rest of the nervous system and body isolation even if we're surrounded by people and I watched that chimp Empire series on Netflix um where they talk about this allopathic grooming this collaborative grooming like I'll trade you know five you know pick pick your back for a while you pick mine and when they decide that they're going to ostracize a a given member of their troop for what whatever reason sometimes it's because the the the chimp misbehaved other times it's more diabolical than that they're trying to really get rid of they're trying to adjust the Power Balance in in the troop um for other reasons uh they basically just leave that chimp to try and groom itself and then the parasites start to eat away at it it develops these immune issues and then they often just go off on their own and die it's it's an incredibly hard thing to watch um and what the underl reasons are in each case are are not made completely clear but um I think about this whole thing of like deaths of Despair and you know not long ago you were talking about group selection I feel like um these two themes might be related I feel like right now politically and culturally in this country and now starting in Europe as well it really is it has become an US versus them kind of scenario there doesn't seem to be a middle at all it's like a big trough yeah and even the suggestion that somebody could kind of switch between groups is kind of like a no because they believe and have said and done this no because they believe in us that have done this and very strong opinions from both sides so um I don't think we're in a just hug it out kind of uh landscape right now and um so I'm curious what forms of non-physical affiliative Behavior exist out there there are social media accounts out there like Upworthy which you know just consistently puts out positive content there's there are people who are very positive in their you know in their online Behavior but and there's encouragement is exists online but it seems to be swamped by these like high salience like attacks like what's the deal what can we do yeah I mean this is a this is a fundamental question for our age I think and we're on a trajectory toward um well I mean I I don't want to give the pressure I'm a complete pessimist but I could I was about to say toward Oblivion um between like the despair that's drive has been driving uh people to uh to either commit suicide or to you know develop severe mental illness or um physical health issues cardiovascular disease diabetes Etc that are I think uh a consequence of being in some cases a consequence of being isolated because you are not interact that's that's part of who we are as a species and we don't Thrive I mean the you the work is very clear that like being isolated being alone is worse for your health than smoking 15 cigarettes a day I mean it it's just really really bad and it's it scales it's almost linear uh to how many contexts you have you know per week or per month so that's all really bad and I do believe that's also driving um that's a big driver for not just the deaths of Despair but like the lack of coupling and the lack you know and crashing of fertility which is is also a real thing and is happening and if if we don't counter it's it's it's going to be bad getting back to synchrony one of the most effective ways to get in sync with somebody that you're out of sync with or that you don't know right who's different from you is through conversation but deep conversation okay and there's a couple parts of this you have to make the time and the space to do this you have to have an intentional mindset and we and other scientists have worked with there there are these structured sets of questions that have been developed there were there's one called Fast Friends developed by the erands in the late 1990s there's commercially available decks online that you can get and they're cool because they each question you know you can kind of take it a superficial level or a deep level but they're designed to kind of like break the ice and then get you really fast into like really deep questions is this like a 100 questions to fall in that was published in the New York Times yeah it's very similar to that um but in this case it's a about uh connecting like deep connection I think it's more about deep connection than sort of romance part of this and um what happens during that and and my my good friend and colleague Emily Faulk at at um the anenberg school uh had a really nice paper recently that showed that by measuring brain activity itself in people who don't know each other as they work through these questions and their brain you know one brain is in this space another brain is this space and they over time come into really close uh alignment and that's associated with all this good stuff like I like you more I feel closer to you I value you more etc etc and once you're in that kind of alignment now you're set to sort of do things together and now I think that gets back to your question like we can't hug it out but we have to somehow create space and when I say space like give people the space to do that like I'm going to talk to you know somebody from the other political party or from the whatever um that's not a bad thing right in fact that's what we need to do but instead we are especially online reinforcing and making the barriers harder to have those conversations which are the necessary thing I think to establish the glue that keeps us together yeah I I feel like unless there's a organized effort to try and create a bridge it ain't going to happen I just feel like there's um I don't want to take us too far off course but maybe is a good segue into the Neuroscience of decisionmaking and uh value-based decision-making which is so much of the work that you've done but I feel like there's this property of the human brain that there's evidence for I've seen in beautiful neuron paper showing that like confirmation of our beliefs leads to a a reward-based activation of a reward-based mechanism basically we're getting a little bit of dopamine for confirming our biases essentially about others and then of course if we then experience more affiliative behavior from our group we feel more protected and then there's a tendency to do more of that and um I feel like with the knowledge that we have about dopamine incentive schemes group uh group selection Behavior there ought to be a program that could be established that isn't um hug it out but that is designed to um again that word exploit is so so loaded to leverage the same neural circuits that led to the Divide to try and Bridge this divide and you know what what it has to do though is it has to break with the value system of of both groups I me let's just be frank we're talking about the left and the right here I don't want to like I don't want to dance around the margins you know and and somehow acknowledge that there's good and bad within both of those groups which itself as I say is like a heretical statement like people are going to mean there's just so many assumptions made just on the basis of that but create a new uh value based system that is self-rewarding and allows for group selection to you know fill in in the gap or at least come up with a third option if not politically then um in terms of Sociology yeah so the solution is Independence Day you know that movie um so we need an alien invasion so there's an out group that we can all um you know findi identify with each other as okay we have to come together to fight you know because I think that's really at the root of this which is that because of group selection humans are sort of very tribal by Nature we are wired to connect to glue together with the people who are in our tribe but that means almost by definition there's another tribe right so so that uh we are over here and we're defending ourselves against them not it's not like complete right people have been engaging in long-distance trade for you know 100,000 years plus uh you know there is interbreeding between Homo sapiens and Neanderthals and denin um so there's you know some flexibility in those rules but in general yeah I mean uh to have an ingroup that means you have to have um an outgroup and if we want to take the left and right and put them together in some ways it's like the easiest way to do that is if we had a third outgroup that we needed to unite against such as um drones from over New Jersey or or you know aliens or uh you know who knows what but these go back to Classic psychology experiments right as I recall where if you know the best way to build affiliations have a common common goal uh or Andor enemy yeah like that's unfort unfortunately being under attack when two opposing groups are both under attack they form alliances so it's the the classic minimal group experiments of Zion in the in the 60s which I I love and I teach on this all the time because it's it's relevant for all these tribal biases and so and what he did was like you take the random people off the street and you go like okay you're on the red team you're on the blue team you're on the red team you're on the blue team okay uh in five minutes you're going to have to compete against the other team and immediately the people on the red team are like I don't like the people on The Blue Team they're stupid and they're ugly and you don't know anything about them right but you end up immediately forming a tribe uh even though you might not have had anything in common and um what I think is really interesting and relevant here is that any number of different biases that are sort of superficial based on um uh race or ethnic group or whatnot which have been you know shown to you know even though people say like oh I feel you know if I see you in pain like you're getting stuck with a needle like oh I feel the same for anyone doesn't matter but it tends to be selective for your own tribe when you measure the brain activity but if you now put the emphasis on team like literally do that science experiment that minimal group experiment and I put you in a red or like we're both wearing black t-shirts and so you're going to work with the other people's black t-shirts doesn't matter who you are that and I think the way it does this is through attention is put my attention on what's shared rather than what's different so now we're on the same team and now that kind of recovers restores um that uh that the empathy that I didn't feel toward you uh before and that's interesting when you think about say in the US the first places the first groups that became integrated were like military and sports right and what's what what's common amongst those they wear uniforms right so the uniforms say we're on a team that takes your attention away from the things that are different and the Stanford prisoner famous zimbardo experiment where you know sign people The Prisoner versus guard and that led where it led exactly that occurred not about a short distance from where my my lab was so we have this um anxiety lowering pro- affiliative oxytocin thing activated by touch affiliation and it's bidirectional like it promotes more touch which promotes more feelings of safety which lowers anxiety further and um and then we have testosterone which signals certain things about others and um seems to play a role in the hierarchy and you mentioned that when um oxytocin is given that it kind of flattens the hierarchy and my understanding of testosterone from Robert spolski and others is that testosterone tends to exacerbate existing traits in people it doesn't turn nice people into jerks or um jerks into nice people but rather it turns jerks into Super jerks and nice people into super nice people which um fits well with my idea that testosterone makes effort feel good and what type of effort feels good depends on a lot of complex features within within us as humans like like too many things to explain by by molecules yeah um so I feel like the primate literature and the human literature map so well to one another and and I think this is a good segue to take us into value-based decision making because I do recall a paper published I think it was in proceedings in the National Academy of Sciences USA should point that out there are other proceedings in other countries um that showed that you know if day Traders or or people on the stock market floor took testosterone or um they tended to be more aggressive in their uh and impulsive in their um decision-making or if you just looked at performance and then you measured testosterone that it tended to fall out on a pretty nice uh correlation between higher testosterone and basically more aggressive decision-making more risk-taking so is that all still true is that I mean that's my read of literature that's that is still true and um you know it does raise I think a worrying Spectre of you know cuz like I don't know how much of a phenomenon it is now but there it was the case um maybe a decade ago or so that like you know a lot of guys who were traders who were feeling like they were losing their Mojo after they you know after 40 or whatnot you know declining testosterone so they decide they're going to start um you know juicing okay put some AndroGel on and if that is then have you know that's like taking you above typical you know levels then what might that do in terms of markets if like enough people are actually or even if they're juicing just for physical performance right and they're engaged in you know in trading um that could have a lot of a lot of bad effects right as it cascaded through the market yeah I would say that probably the dominant effect of of exogenous androgens um and all this trt nowadays is it it's very clear that it allows people to maintain moderate to high testosterone levels even if they're not sleeping as much uh it enhances recovery so if people have their behavior is Right their nutrition their sleep Etc it really does give them a you know significant advantage if they don't have their behaviors right it gives them the significant advantage of not having to deal with the normal fluctuations caused by minimal sleep Etc but the decisionmaking process like to say yes no maybe or maybe later is reliant on things like good sleep being rested things other than testosterone like like this is the idea of a of a committee as opposed to one individual you know recklessly driving decision based on state of mind or androgens so if we could zoom out and in for a moment on some of the work that you did with um Paul glimer when you were a post talk in his lab but also in your own laboratory when I sit down and make a decision should I do something should I not do something um let's say I have some general sense of what the the potential payoff is within a range the potential payoff of not doing it within a range and I always think of like some like kind of tension or pressure as it relates to time like for instance I've been considering buying a house I really like the house it's a bit of a reach for me for a number of reasons um and I'm trying to make this decision right and I'm trying to gauge whether or not other people are looking at this house also what do we know about how we start to establish an internal representation of that and I and I give that example as just one example this could really translate to any number of different scenarios about whether or not to get married or not whether not to stay in a relationship or not whether not to move whether or not to have another kid and on and on and on what are the core mechanics of of value-based decision making as it relates to outcomes and time yeah so we I think we understand this system pretty well at this point so the last 25 30 years have been enormously productive so we have a good sketch of the circuitry that does this and essentially what happens is you're confronting a situation and it doesn't really matter whether it seems to be the same process matter whether you're trying decide between eating a doughnut or an apple or buying this house versus renting an apartment or marrying this person you know proposing or not it's it's sort of all the same system and what happens is you you you you you come to the situation and your brain uh takes in evidence about the Alternatives what are the options that are available to me um what do I know about them from their stimulus properties and from um you know maybe prior encounters or just other information and it takes that evidence and it weighs it against um stored information about uh things you've done in the past other decisions you'd made and then begins to assign value computes the expected value of those different options in terms of what it will return to you and then essentially that is the basis along which that decision ision gets made so uh it's you know it's a soft Max function as we say so it's not like a hard deterministic one so there's there's some statistical noise in there for some you know we could talk about what that reason might be you make a choice and whenever you make a choice in any any behavior that you're engaging in your brain is making a forecast of what's going to happen next as a result of that and your brain then uh determines computes did things go exactly as predicted right is it better than predicted or is it worse than predicted and then that signal gets fed back into the system to update it so that it hopefully performs that job better in the future right so like oh actually that was it went way better than expected you should um assign that a higher value and and do that thing um again this process of weighing up the evidence takes time and that's why we have this speed accuracy tradeoff in decision-making where we observe that the faster you go the more mistakes you tend to make been there exactly we've all made split-second decisions that uh we regretted later oh yeah or sleep or slightly sleep deprived sleep deprived exactly the more time you take the more evidence you can accumulate and when you you have to recognize that the data your brain is taking in from the environment is noisy right it's not perfect it's noisy because of the environment it's noisy because the wet where the brain is statistical and and biological so you can make the wrong choice by virtue of the noise dominating the signal and that happens when you go too quickly right and one of the things that's so so there's a good Mantra from that you know which is if you want to make really good decisions or if it's really important you kind of have to decide ahead of time like do I need to be accurate or do I need to be fast and if accuracy is important you need to slow down take your time take as much time as needed to get it you know the most information that you can and even in the moment um that doing like simple strategies like uh breathing or having a you know a mantra that says like you know it's not what matters you know every little decision do is not what counts but it's the long run that helps to turn we've talked about arousal a lot here and that turns down arousal one of the things you think of arousal is doing when you keep talking about volume knobs it's like a volume volume volume knob for the stuff that's coming into your brain that could be signal or noise so it can turn up noise too so you could count as evidence toward the value of an option something that is not actually you know evidence and then you make the wrong decision so by turning down arousal slowing down you're relying more on evidence than than on noise does increasing arousal increase the likelihood of false positives that is thinking something's there that's not generally speaking um as well as false negatives you know um thinking that something's absent when actually it's present I haven't thought about it that way before but it seems to me like that's uh yeah that seems consistent with my understanding just by way of example uh one of the things that's been really different for me in the last few years is how quickly you move to publication when you podcast or when you're um when you're doing social media um you just click it's out in the world uh versus you know the way I was weaned was you know spend two three four years on a project maybe it doesn't go anywhere maybe it does goes to multiple papers gets reviewed so by time it comes out you know it's been proof read and you've read the proof so it's been vetted by a number of hopefully expert sources usually really good sources um of feedback um as opposed to nowadays where you can just kind of move immediately to publication and um I I used to have this saying which was uh in the lab because sometimes you know you have two months to do a revision or something it's never really two months it always takes five times as long um I used to say I go as fast as I carefully can and I used to tell my students in posto that we go as fast as we carefully can because the moment you start going fast you start making mistakes you start making mistakes you definitely pay for it later and the mistakes that I've made podcasting were a product of going fast M Andor fatigue and the two things kind of relate to one another um or occasionally somebody will highlight conflicting evidence and then nowadays you can go back and and repair things with AI you can you know you put things but um but I feel like so much of life in terms of decision- making is trying to make decisions when most of the time we think we don't have more time but most of the time we do have more time unless somebody's hemorrhaging we usually have more time but then there are some real things where we don't always have more time I mean we are biological aging machines and there there is such a thing as too late yeah yeah so how do you think these systems change as a function of you know playing a game for some money in the lab we can or we can get caught up in it but there's this like tremendous backdrop of context you know $100 might be fun for one person might be the difference between making rent and not making rent for for another person um you know the decision to stay in a relationship or leave a relationship when you're in your teens or 20s is fundamentally different than when somebody's for instance at the um near the transition zone of of having versus losing their fertility I mean these are like yeah and those change all sorts of these pressures are so real and yet if we only have one system in the brain that handles this similarly to the reward system it seems like we ought to learn in school how to uh like um work with and update our decision-making process based on immediate term shortterm like all the different time scales to be able to do that seems really important um are there any ways to train that up yeah I think it's a so so there's a few things in in here that um I think are are worth unpacking um I mean one is what you brought up about fatigue which I think is um really critical and we we did some work with the wrestling team at Penn um coach came to us and I I had had a few of the wrestlers working in my lab and he said you know we're having this problem which is that um and I don't know if you've ever wrestled I wrestled my my middle son in one match the worst six minutes well I didn't quit because I lost that match and I did lose that match this seventh grade I quit because uh my dad gave me a choice I could either continue to wrestle yeah or I could play this other sport I really wanted to play he said you can't do both yeah because it was gonna impact my grades negatively and so I opted for the other sport what was the other sport soccer okay yeah okay and just yeah and I I love soccer um and um but you know losing that one wrestling match was informative the guy just dead fished on me the whole time and he deserved a win like it was a really good strategy he just like dead fished on me uh you know and I I like couldn't couldn't Gumby out of there but it is the worst six minutes of your life you're you're exhausted Within like 30 seconds it's it's incredibly grueling and what uh what the coach observed was that um their guys it was the men's wrestling team was they were performing very well in the first two periods and they got to the third period and they started making really dumb mistakes bad decisions and so we so he said what's going on I said well it's about this speed accuracy trade-off but we have to investigate how it's related to fatigue so uh what we did this was a really fun experiment so we go to the wrestling room and uh we wire these guys up they got wearable EG heart rate monitors the whole nine yards and what we do we gave them like this simple little um decision-making impulse control task it's just like a controll response task there's a you know a trade-off if you go too fast and you make mistakes okay so it's like there's it's like a go no go and uh so they do it then we run them through two minutes of CrossFit exercises really brutal then they come back off and they have to do the same thing again we do that three times and then they have to wrestle each other so it's cognitive and physical yeah not on like chess boxing which is not a sport I recommend have you seen this where they play around they play some chess and then they literally fight and then they it's crazy it's like switching between these two very different states of it's insane but also somehow really appealing you know it's well I think for the neuroscientist in you and me and I think we're all neuroscientists to some extent we want to understand the brain and ourselves so this notion of very disperate um behaviors boxing and playing chess being associated with very disparate sort types of arousal mhm and um and how those map on to one another I think is interesting I think the uh the the Confluence of uh chess boxing is fencing uh which is very much like chess my my youngest son fenced for a number of years and so mentally it's like that but it has the physicality or jiujitsu my friend JSU Brazil you tell me that it's like there's an infinite number of options that become constrained in certain yeah Dynamics and you yeah yeah yeah very similar so this this was really cool because what we found was that uh speed accuracy trade-off the more fatigue they got the more calories they spent um the faster they would slide down to emphasizing speed over accuracy they just started like just like just going just got to get done just got to get I don't know what they're feeling but that they were just not deliberating not really being focused they just lost the capability uh of doing that and aside from the you can say well we could help you guys you you could become more physically fit maybe when fatigue is fast but they're about as fit as they could be they said well why don't we do this why don't we offload the decision in the third period to the coach as soon as you in the third period you're going to just look at the coach um uh at at you know some Cadence or whenever he's going to yell at you to look and you do what the coach tells you so and I think this is really interesting because you think about it in like other contexts like in a business context or something when if somebody's really fatigued or your unit's fatigued maybe you have an external person then who takes over uh making the decision that you are just um you just execute in a sense right um the other thing I want to say about this all too which I it gets to your point about well in the lab it's like you know it's one thing you're you're you're you got an undergraduate gambling for 10 bucks over an hour and that's how do how well does that map on to the real world where there are all these other things going on and I think that um that's the challenge all the you know when I teach business school or you know classes MBA students or Executives through exec Ed they all want to know like give me the fstep formula you know and it's like that's supposed to apply how do I take into all and it's like well we mostly know about one this Dimension or that Dimension or that Dimension and not how in the real world you know on a real complex environment to put that all together so that is a I think that's a gap that's a and one that we're trying to fill which is to study decision- making whether it's individual or Collective decision- making in real world environments right to where all of these um factors you know context and the various priorities that are coming in uh are more you know more natural they're not controlled and how then I mean we think we know how that works but we haven't really proven it yet so often we think that we know how we feel about something but some of the work that you've done in monkeys and in humans has really highlighted the extent to which we base our valuation of other things and People based on things that are in proximity to those things and people could you tell us about this experiment and um I swore I wasn't going to say the words highly processed foods um during this episode episode but I think we got to talk about monkeys and Doritos ah all right I thought this could have gone there's a number of different and I I will I do want to bring up one study that I think uh people find interesting that gets at this difference between what we think we know and feel and what our brain what our brains are actually telling us so we talked about how monkeys and people their uh brains are I don't want to say hardwired but they're they're tuned tuned to uh value social information and particular kinds of social information like information about high status individuals right and information about um sexy individuals attractive individuals right and it and it's baked into the same circuitry or attention circuitry or reward circuitry and that once we had observed that of course it led me to wonder well okay there's this really weird phenomenon in humans that that in marketing right that we use celebrity you know status celebrity and sex to sell two people like why should they ever care about uh you know Brad Pit likes this thing or Jennifer Aniston likes SmartWater when in the world who you're never going to meet them are they do they really know a lot about you know water or whatever like what what's the point of all that and if George Clooney selling espresso yeah who cares right but now when you think about it in the context of like oh our brains are wired tuned to attend to and process more deeply and value uh information about others that are essentially High status celebrity sexy you know whereas like George Clooney all of those things um put together now that starts to make some sense and so we thought well given that monkeys are humans monkeys and humans are so alike in this regard I bet we could run an advertising campaign on monkey it's based on sex and celebrity so that's what we did we just basically had monkeys you know they were just sitting there in in their home colony and we had a you know television monitor computer monitor in there that would display like uh you know the Doritos logo next to you know High status monkey a and maybe the Cheetos logo next to low status monkey b or um uh you know Coke next to like sexy monkey butt and you know know Pepsi Next to You know the front end of you know or backside of monkey that's not so sexy okay so you just do that just do it just pairing and so it's just just Association simple Association and then what we did is we then gave the monkeys uh choices between um brand logos that had either been endorsed by you know essentially celebrity monkeys sexy monkeys or peon monkeys right and they got the same reward no matter what no matter what they chose they always got the same banana pellet but the monkeys favored the brands that had been paired with celebrity and sexy monkeys just like you see in people you know I just keep saying this there's a little monkey in all of us I'm shaking my head because it says a couple of things to me but one of the things says it that says to me as a neuroscientist is that it's almost like the bins like the map of valuation in the in the brain there there's overlap of I'm going to get into lingo here for a second and then I'll explain of the receptive Fields so like you mentioned Hub visel H&W and I mean they basically won the Nobel Prize for a couple of things but not the least of which was the identification of like what are the specific qualities and positions of light and shapes of light that activate a given neuron which eventually led to the Jennifer Aniston right Barack Obama cells and by the way their coexistence in the same sentence does not mean that they that I have knowledge of their dating I have that paper was that study was done a long time ago right but it but it speaks to the same principle which is that when we see two things next to one another sometimes there's a uh there's a merging of those in our cognitive space or our memory when in fact there's no overlap conceptually right in you you know you where you see this uh very uh dramatically is that if there's a podcast with a man male and a female guest host pairing I guarantee that 25% of the comments are theories about their dating and or sleeping together right it's it's just it's incredible it's like people see male and female together right and they just like start doing this thing of like oh they're dating or they're with you know they see flirtation where it may or may not have existed you know it's just wild and so that when I hear about this experiment that you did a pairing products yeah with sexy monkey or non-sexy monkey or high status or low status monkey I can't help but feel that the area of the brain that's involved in valuation is just taking visual images conceptual images because it be visual it could be any number of things and that there's just overlap in the maps of these in the brain and then that the effect is born out of that overlap that's one interpretation the other interpretation I suppose and they're not mutually exclusive is that we want to go up the hierarch key and that's kind of an assumption that maybe we could just like poke at like a couple of nerd academics for a second because like I like my life very very much there are people that live near me that have far more resources than I do and I never for a nanc wish for their home or my home I've tried to make it a point in life to either have the life I want or be aspiring to the life I want you know have the things I want or aspire to the things I want but I I've never found myself in a mode of like oh I want to be working on that experiment or I want to be living Liv in that house if I see a beautiful house or or beautiful thing or some feature of someone's life it inspires me to want to go try and create something similar and so I I'm not it's not that I'm without competitive spirit in me I am like anyone else but I feel like that's so far and away different than the notion of a hierarchy where for me to move up someone else has to move down and for somebody to be above me in any domain that means that you know uh I'm quote unquote below so that so can we talk about hierarchies as they exist in Old World primates like the cxs versus us because I I don't want to map this on to anything political but often times they this will get mapped onto the political some people live through the lens of abundance there's plenty to go around some people live through the lens of scarcity their win is my loss their loss is my win that kind of thing do you see this in monkeys too again it's really hard you know you can ask the monkey but he won't necessarily tell you because he doesn't know what you're asking them but I you know I I think it is well first of all across primate species there's different degrees of the steepness of hierarchy so in Reese's maccax they're really despotic they have a very steep hierarchy um in like barar maacs which live in in North Africa um and in jalter uh very relaxed uh Society even though they're maacs they're all they're all the same genus so why that's so we don't really know the general idea is it has something to do with uh how rich the the the environment is the resources that are available and how monopolized um they are so if if you can monopolize resources then that can help to create a um a a steeper hierarchy if they're not monop like let's imagine you you eat grass for a living um you know you're like a cow or whatever and there there are some monkeys that do that eat grass uh like I can't hoard all the grass to myself it's just everywhere and so everybody can just spread out and kind of eat grass it's a very boring life and you spend all your time digesting and fermenting in your you know in this extended gun which is kind of a gross thing to do in aside but I think you can see that like that that that spans a Continuum of what you're saying from uh abundance to scarcity and has a lot more to do with whether it's sort of monopolize and does that make sense so if you can monopolize something then you then you have something that other PE other monkeys need right and you're creating that scarcity yeah so let's drill into this because I think this is everybody is operating from a certain frame in this context and so for instance uh there are billionaires hundreds of some people like Elon has hundreds of billions of dollars doesn't seem to care much about money for money's sake or I think he sold all his homes or whatever you know he's motivated by clearly other things as well if money at all um and then there are people who are destitute poverty I think many people will say why does anyone need that much money kind of thing they'll say this about billionaires um what's been interesting is one of the more prominent themes in Psych pop psychology that is supported by research is this idea that past a certain level of income your happiness doesn't scale upwards linearly with the increase in income or maybe at all and the the number that's thrown around is like past $75,000 a year you know your happiness doesn't grow I would argue that indeed money can't buy happiness but it absolutely can buffer stress or certain kinds of stress let's just give an example of a single mother with three raising three kids on her own versus a single mother raising three kids with three night nurses when they're infants and nannies different different level of output required like you just can't argue between those two now whether or not one is happier than the other is a discussion different discussion altogether excuse me but I think you know the cow example makes a lot of sense the hierarchies within primate troops make sense but as humans I think that you I observe tremendous variation as to whether or not people say oh wow this person is a millionaire or billionaire but I'm good with what I've got or this person has so much more and I resent them for it and I I guess um we don't really think about there being a limited amount of money in the same way that we think of as like grass or resources now if we were to talk about mates and that that's very that's a whole other thing um but you just have to go to a bar with a with a particular uh bias towards having more men or women and then you know like that starts to play out immediately right um but let's keep it simpler do you think that this whole stance about abundance versus scarcity is dynamic meaning like if you're surrounded by people that make more or less the same amount of money as you do you feel better than if you're surrounded by billionaires that have yachts and I I I think the fundamental Drive is to to climb the hierarchy is more or less kind of baked in again with a lot of variation across individuals and probably across cultures which um I'll get to in a moment going back to that 75,000 being kind of like where you know it just the asmp tootes there's a number of papers that came out from colleagues uh at Penn and Wharton um so a guy named Matt Killingsworth showed in a famous paper five or six years ago that in fact it actually continues like happiness just keeps going up with income and and then there was a back and forth with Danny comment about that and then they they worked on a paper together and what it looks like is this it kind of goes up flattens out for a while and then like above another level wow happiness really goes up when you got a lot a lot of money so ah so that study isn't discussed as much so that's new well it's new it's like in the last year or two so so being very very wealthy does increase your level I think yeah I mean and for variety of reasons right so you know sure it's a buffer of stress but it also allows you access to lots and lots of uh different things that can make your life just easier right so um so that's that's that's I think part of it but the other part and I think this gets back to that question of what makes us human is that we can intentionally just like you said about yourself it's like well I'm just going to chill I'm happy with what I've got and there's lots of you know aesthetic Traditions um in a variety of cultures especially you know Eastern cultures that um that that have taken that approach or even even in the west like you know early Christianity Etc and um I'm trying to remember the name of the book that was uh recommended me I haven't read it yet but but that in for example in India in you know in among some of the most extreme poverty uh in the world you have people who are kind of ecstatically happy and they're they're very very happy with with being alive and being alive where they are when they are and um with the people that they're happy with how does that happen I don't know but here's my guess or part of my guess I guess which is gets back to what we talked about in terms of attention so what you attend to is being turned up in the brain and what you're not attending to is being turned down it's kind of like glass half full glass half empty and if you're paying attention to the sort of good things then those are getting kind of priority of access to your brain so you're kind of getting like oh every it's magnifying every little small positive surprise is Amplified in your brain and you get a bigger dopamine hit for that um rather than the the sort of small negative surprises now I'll put that into another context which is we've done a number of studies on loss aversion right loss aversion is this observation that if I give you a 50-50 gamble like win some money lose some money um in general for most people I have to offer them a lot more to win than to lose for them to take the gamble which doesn't make any sense you know rationally and economically it should be it's it's it's even chances so people are loss averse and there's been a lot of theories about why Danny Conan famously uh you know thought that people feel the pain of loss more than the pleasure of winning right so and I think that's true we investigated that using combination of modeling computational modeling we and we looked at people's behavior we did ey tracking because we're measuring where people attend your average person most people attend to what they might lose rather than what they might win and the longer they focus on what they might lose the more loss uh of they are and that tends to be associated with people who have like negative affects so if you're anxious or you're depressed you're in a negative State then you're you're looking more for what you could lose than what you could win so that sets up a really interesting um test causal test which you're like well you know where you look is a function of what you're looking for they're looking for what might hurt them and also what the world looks like so let's just manipulate the visual display we made the winds bigger font or brighter than the losses okay when you do that that attracts people's attention they look at the winds what they could the good things they could get rather than the bad things just by changing the font just by changing the font size or the brightness they look at it more this gets turned up in the brain and now they're not lers anymore now they're willing to take the gamble so that's what I'm talking about in terms of like what you focus on so if you and that's a way to do it I mean obviously that you could take advantage of people by doing that but with their consent so for example we started that work on behalf of a financial services company who is saying we're having trouble with our customers older customers to get them to take good risks like that could really pay off for them because they're they're too afraid and so we did some basic work and then we tested that we could actually causally change that we could shift that like um so with their consent yeah if we Amplified we just make just put the put what you win instead of what you could lose in a make it more obvious people pay more attention to that and then that will subtly shift the decisions that they make wow we are so malleable when it comes to changing the context and thereby the variables that shape our decision making but I'm always struck by the way that it comes in below our conscious detection this might be this is the appropriate time to ask about meme coins ah right because you know we all grow up learning about you know the US dollar or Euro or whatever backed by something right backed by the FED but also you know backed by real world physical objects of gold yeah that's what we're told anyway right you know and this is you know why just printing more money is never the solution right because um meme coins born out of the kind of uh larger theme of cryptocurrency and Bitcoin are an interesting kind of um derivative of of uh cryptocurrency whereby you're pairing reputation of a person or in some cases a Shibu Uno dog right with a currency that has no intrinsic value except for the person's reputation plus whatever backing whatever value backing it's obtained when people in decide to purchase that coin so I don't know how many listeners you know track cryptocurrency and I am by no means an expert on this but you know one thing that people get excited about is how much money is flowing into a coin not just the value of the coin you know on a given day so you know essentially how much has been invested in that coin as something of potential value so when we hear about um hakua girl coin the hakua coin or um there's a trump coin now I think um there's a milania coin um there's a doge coin that was developed long before the idea of Department of government um Doge um the Shibu coin um is this all just exploiting again there comes that word leveraging um this proximity between reputation and value so I think it's that's partially it but it it may be even simpler than that which is it's leveraging it's harnessing our wiring to attend to what other people are doing and what they're getting or losing so we care a lot about you know when when we're in a group The behaviors of other people so let's let's think about how we learn something the value something if you're a simple animal you learn from direct experience and that's reinforcement living you know enforcement learning driven with the dopamine system Etc you can also learn from what you didn't choose counterfactual effictive learning and then in groups you have this rich source of of information what other people are doing like I could watch you try that food and if you die from eating it then I won't eat it right so that that's that's we're deeply wired to pay attention to the decisions that other people are making and if they look good or if they you know then we start to copy what they're doing and you see this in it's not just these meme coins but like meme stocks you know like um GameStop this is very similar to the to the FTX phenomenon debacle where celebrities joined in and people had trust in these celebrities admiration of these celebrities and invested a lot of money and what turned out to be you know in the end a failure so how often is this happening in advertising like if we really step back and we go like is the BMW really the better choice compared to the um you know compared to the Range Rover like like are we really basing our decisions on the thing that we're purchasing as much as we think no I don't think so at all there there's a few things we could kind of unpack there I think in terms of meme coins meme stocks there's probably two things a Confluence of two things going on so one is this sort of celebrity endorser and we have studied that also as well we talked about the monkey stuff but um we looked at we did eye tracking studies of people making choices amongst products and brands that had been endorsed either by celebrities or not just paired with them right and one of the things we found is that when people uh chose uh a product or brand that that was sort of unfamiliar to them if it had been endorsed by celebrity that uh that pupils their pupils didn't dilate normally they would dilate because that's like a overcoming your default and mental effort and arousal goes up because it's sort of surprising and so the pupil staying silent is an indicator of kind of enhanced confidence and Trust if you will that I'm not making a mistake I'm putting a lot of words here but like you know you're that that that that was the impact in a very subliminal way of that celebrity endorser so I think that could be going on as well as the the um the this other process I was talking about in terms of what we pay what other people are doing which seems to be a major driver of bubbles in stock markets like that goes all the way back to like Isaac Newton losing his fortune in you know the South Seas trading Market you know he famously said like you know I you know I can I can Divine the mechanics of the the planets in the heavens but I can't understand the minds of men or something like that um he just couldn't help himself he got out first and then he got back in when he saw his friends were making continuing to make money and then he he got wiped out so we were like super interested in this and we ran experiment with MBA students uh at Wharton and they were playing a stock market game actually it turns out it's a stock market we developed for monkeys we had monkeys play the exact same stock market they're buying selling they you know they've got a portfolio that they can they can trade in for juice the humans get money for this okay uh this was based on some some studies that Colin camer and and his colleagues had and and benedetto D Martino did a while ago in the MBA students we used a standard psycho psychometric um uh scaler you know a questionnaire that's used to test people for sort of social uh impairments okay and then what we did is we looked at uh how their likelihood of getting caught in a bubble Market related to social sensitivity how attuned they were to other people and basically the more dial in you were to other people the higher your likelihood of losing everything uh in a bubble and it was those people who were like you know socially impaired who did the best they never got sucked into bubbles now what was cool is we found the same thing in monkeys okay so uh monkeys in the same stock market okay if they're playing alone they're making pretty good decisions okay as soon as you put another monkey in the market that they can see they see they watch what that monkey did that monkey buys um GameStop or whatever then I buy GameStop and he sees me do that and then he does the same thing and it just goes back and forth back and forth they create this bubble and then and then you get this crash it was like really phenomenal and we found that um the brain circuit that is essentially involved in theory of mind that but is about controlling your attention to others and registering what they're doing is driving that okay and it it was really funny it was like the bigger the portfolio and balance between what I've got and what you got the higher the signal in you know in this area the monkeys are like well I don't know if I can say that but you can say whatever you want on here well I'm losing relative to you so I'm going to I'm paying even more attention to what you're doing and what you've got in your portfolio and I'm going to be much more likely to uh to copy you and do what you're doing so again like there's a little monkey in all of us uh I see very little difference between what people are doing you know with GameStop and what monkeys are doing in that market so when we hear about these for lack of a better phrase pump and dump type things where um like I'll never forget in 2017 a friend who's a spectacularly successful investor um said you should put 2% of your investable earnings into Bitcoin and I was like well you know I don't know about that and then not long after that um there was some press releases about who was buying Bitcoin and the price shut up and then um I said went back to them and said I have to be really careful here and said uh you were right they said yeah you know um but you know whenever you read about who's buying Bitcoin it's not clear when they bought that you know a lot of those purchases were likely made a long time ago so there are there are ways that people you know kind of um kind of it like build some hydraulic pressure through social interaction on these things right yeah he's not a you know it's very different than like someone picking up the phone and you know the whole like notion of like insider trading right very different yeah um you know if if people kind of create a swell around something this is great or that let's make it real estate it's a little more tangible for people like that neighborhood is is really terrific we're all going to move there and then you know people to like you know start moving there then you realize that they've actually owned that very inexpensive property for a long time right and they're actually the seller right you get a very different impression of of the the advice that you got so um and I'm not a finance guy but you know I I think about these things in terms of the neuroscience and the human psychology I mean it just again I'm just struck by how our notion of valuation is adjusted in the short term by virtue of proximity probably also in the long term but that how we kind of lose ourselves in these things that we we just become less than rational um based on things like arousal um the relationship between hormones and arousal what I love about what we're doing today is in case people haven't caught on aay that we've got multiple mechanisms and themes here that are starting to converge yeah as arousal goes too high it's mostly what we're exploring you start making you start speeding up you start misjudging information you you you think noise is signal and you start correlating things that are like not correlated in reality and then you can quickly find yourself down the path of bad decisions I think one of the best advice I ever got was if somebody ever wants you to make a decision very very quickly and it's not clearly an emergency like you don't see them hemorrhaging chances are it's a scam like if anyone you know this is the best thing to tell um anyone that's uh older let's say um because they'll get these calls from people it's like this is urgent this is the the urgency uh us is suggestive of it being false like like using time pressure on people like I need I need this money now I'm going to miss my bus and my kid's going to be waiting for me this kind of thing I mean and you like pulls on you right you don't want some kid waiting out in the middle of nowhere but if this is somebody you don't know then you could say well maybe five bucks I'm willing to lose it maybe that that's probably the calculation I would do I'm willing to lose it um I don't if if they're lying okay if they're telling the truth great but when it starts getting higher Stakes gets kind of kind of kind of scary I think we should uh address the word rational rational rationality they used which is like oh we're make we're being irrational it seems like we lose our rationality um that that's a you know that's a word that's that's bandied about a lot right and especially in economics and that you know kind of makes the assumption that we are you know essentially a computer um and just kind of weigh things up dispassionately and uh we have complete access to all information um here and now and into the future there are other Concepts here one is called bounded rationality which uh this this guy gerd gigerenzer kind of came up with and which is the idea that there's there are constraints there are brain constraints that are built in we've got energetic constraints we've got you know which which actually limit how much information we can process which is why we fall prey to Choice fatigue and decoy effects and things like that why we see visual Illusions in some some way is um and then there's another uh concept of uh ecological rationality which takes that bounded rationality and it puts it into what you might call the environment of evolutionary adaptation which kind of we've talked about before like what's the environment our brains are designed for and it's not the one we're in right now so our brains are designed for I mean probably 13 million years ago but let's say 200,000 years ago our species right um Homo sapiens and what did what was that environment like well uh we lived in small groups with face-to-face contact of somewhere between probably 20 and no more than 100 people you saw you knew all of them uh you know you talk to them every day uh things didn't really move faster than an antelope or change faster than the seasons MH okay uh there was very little uh wealth inequality okay people are Physically Active uh all day long and they uh ate natural food right and so what are we like now we are in this so-called weird environments Western um educated industrialized Rich Democratic but but you we in these industrialized societies we have money we're in markets we're interacting with thousands of people perhaps millions of people their behaviors their thoughts everything are impinging on us stuff is changing super super fast right we sit on our butts all day long we're not active right you only it's it's like you have to be intentional and have enough resources uh to be active and we eat garbage and you know for those reasons I think that's the source of like a lot of the misery that that we have is that now now I'm not saying we should go back to being subsistence you know hunter gatherers or horticulturalists maybe we should it'll be a painful process to get there and we may end up getting there given some of the trajectories that are you know we're we're on but people who live in those environments seem to generally be you know healthier and and happier for example you know like uh studies of um you know brain and body in subsistence uh hunter gatherers horticulturalists uh people who are in their 70s look like people you know westerners in their 30s or younger they're like incredibly fit lean no evidence of cardiovascular disease no evidence of anything like you know dementias um major cognitive decline and we're always trying to hack that we're trying zones and then people say well it's the diet no it's the the wine by the way it's not the wine um now now finally after years I'm not going to say I told you so but alcohol is not good a little bit maybe every once in a while but not more than a little bit I'll respond to that in a minute the uh but the social component seems critical yeah um what are your thoughts on the longevity movement if you will like I always assumed if I do well yeah that I'll probably live to be somewhere between 85 and 102 and my hope is that um my last five years I like the Peter Atia thing like what is the quality of your final decade right right will be um at least as vigorous as my dad's my dad's 80 gosh he's 81 and he's doing great um mentally physically um he was a guest on this podcast actually he's a scientist yeah we it was it um and so but he's always been very very moderate about his drinking he'll have like a half glass of wine now and again he just never ate too much he never exercised too much he worked 9 to 5 n to six just consistently but he never was a you know like burn the midnight oil type but he's just his consistency is what's so impressive um so I think that might have something to do with it but um what what are your thoughts on the economics of decision-making as it relates to um live fast Die Young versus um be more monastic and try and um live a very long time well that's a personal preference isn't it so I you know that and that kind of is that's interesting because it maps on to Concepts in ecology they typically we use to describe different species which are like our selected and K selected I don't know if you've heard of this before but R selected are species that are limited just by their pure reproductive rate think about weeds or rabbits you know something like that and K selected are like oak trees and um you know I don't know whal whales and humans are sort of like this mix right and I and so that's where we are very um plastic and flexible so in some environments you can be more our selected like especially if conditions are really not very favorable toward investing in the long term then it's kind of like kicking up your reproductive output but if conditions can be favorable right that you that that investment is worthwhile then you you know then you can do that and be more like the whale or the oak tree or something like that now you know yeah you're right I think that does map on to economics in a certain way because all you know certain people by virtue of what they know and what they have can invest in trying to live the longest healthiest life and other people who may not either have the wherewithal or the knowledge are going to be invested in survival in until the next day right and so humans are sort of you know exist in that whole space in between my dad died at 55 so outlived him by two years you know so for me every day is like gravy um but I also don't have this sense of a longtime Horizon which is you know just being a little weirdly self you know just introspective may be uh you know part of my drive to like work a lot and it might have served you well I mean I've read and listened to Steve Jobs's um biographies by Walter isacson several times in part because I grew up seeing that stuff happening because I was born and raised in the South Bay and Steve used to come into the um toy store skateboard shop that I worked at to get new rollerblade wheels and so like I would like see him around and see him at this little shop called um Shady Lane which is like little Trinkets and like he was around town a lot and so then of course he became jobs right and um or he was Steve Jobs and he stayed Steve Jobs but um in that book he talked about where it was talked about him that he humans knowledge that we are going to die someday can be the ultimate motivator right mean I think I I look at some of the mistakes I made um with you know bringing myself to places of of physical risk in my life and it's not like I thought I was Immortal but I didn't really have a good sense of time and I think as I get older I'm 49 now so I can finally say that um I think my sense of the passage of time and mortality is is much more visible to me in my psychology yeah um so yeah this is the ultimate time scale over which one has to make decision make decisions um so actually let's talk about this so if your dad died two years younger than you are now do you have the assumption that you'll make it to a given age or are you just trying to maximize on the day the week the month what's your what's your unit of of time scale so I think I did not anticipate like 55 was a magic number for me the Double Nickel you know like Michael Jordan uh I didn't know what I would do or think about when I um if I got past that and I got past it and I was like okay I got past it but now I'm kind of I'm I'm it I'm confused I guess I mean physically I show no evidence of like like rapid decline no you seem you appear very you appear very healthy um uh not just for your age but you're like very physically fit you're cognitively fit clearly so that started to you know I think that I'm I'm opening up and I'm trying to uh look at some wisdom that's out there about like hey yeah you know probably got a lot of life ahead of me and if I keep doing what I'm doing what do I want to do that's another another part of it because probably because of the focusing on that 55 and I'm like oh God everything that's come my way every opportunity that's come my way I've taken it and I just keep adding I've never I don't subtract so we could talk about this I keep adding more and more things you could look at the diversity of papers that I published or the other things that I'm doing and it's just getting wider and wider and I keep taking more things on and reluctant to give anything up but at some point I think that's not the recipe for Success like there's going to have to be some winnowing uh and I you know okay 57 so when's that going to happen uh I don't know 62 65 I mean I you know I don't plan on retiring although you know also that was like Wow people in my family never got the chance to retire they didn't live long enough this is but that's the short way to death though I think too and decline is like retiring if you don't do something else so I might have a solution for you good thought about this a ton and I think about time perception yeah constantly and people can laugh because I'm always late but that's cuz I'm really enveloped in whatever I was doing previously like I'll be thinking about this conversation tonight and tomorrow morning when I wake up for sure right um okay couple of Reflections and then ideas about this so previous guest on this podcast Josh whiteskin uh Grandmaster chess champion at a very young age then realized at some point started asking the question of whether or not his um love for the game was gone or whether or not it was taken away from him was it the fame was it the because a lot of things came to him Young when that around chess and he spent two years asking himself that question and then cut ties with chess forever never picked up a chess piece again but pivoted into martial arts investing now foiling you know this like yeah um but then had a had a near-death experience um he had a drowning event survived fine decided then to move his family down to Costa Rica where he now F spends four and a half hours a day or more foiling raising his sons um I you know that struck such a chord with me I've been involved in a number of things I don't want to make this about me but like you know early on it was like fish I was obsessed with fish then Birds then skateboarding then firefighting then eventually it was like neuroscience and then now I do this and so I would say I've read a lot about people who are need something to bite down into they can't retire and it seems to me my informal read of this is that the ones that are happiest who don't die young or in their 50s like Steve Jobs did um tend to be for lack of a better way to describe it kind of Serial monogamous as it relates to their uh Pursuits which is the way I would describe myself like I I'm you know like super into whatever it is professionally and then after about anywhere from five to 15 years it's like done and kind of um move forward some of the elements and the learnings from that into the next thing but Josh Whit skin is the ultimate example of this of of achieved like world champion status in multiple things and then now seems very very much to achieve world champion status at like family life yeah and he's got his his his uh you know economic and professional life intact from the previous stuff but also he's still involved he's you know like he coaches for the Celtics and he's not the head coach but he coaches and so on so I feel like the serial monogamy version of this is the ultimate and then the question is when to when to cut and and and pivot into the next thing yeah but I'm not telling you not to go with bread but I was looking over your CV and your papers I was like this is going to be a really interesting conversation because you have worked on a tremendous number of different things adding in more isn't the thing but then again maybe some of us are just designed to be involved in a ton of different stuff and your Vigor is undeniable right like like you're super fit mentally and physically so I don't know I'm not going to tell you what to do I just I get I offer Josh as an example of one extreme you're sort of at The Other Extreme I suppose and then um and I suppose I'm kind of in the middle so I think well I've done a bit of that uh over my career and the way that has happened is through external leadership um opportunities not really opportunities I was like you need to do this like you know so uh is you kind of you know broaden portfolio is getting bigger and then somebody says I want you to direct this thing and then I would say well then I have to I have to cut some of this out and then go back and narrow again and then the problem is then I start to do this again and then okay then I move to you know pen and and I got the narrow again but now it's bigger than it ever has been so the question is like at some point does that just fall apart or can I I think intentionally you know at some point and may maybe some of those decisions you know the other thing the other thing one can do is just allow the universe to um to make some of those decisions for you right it might be the case that some of the research I do will not be fundable at some point right and then that decision is made for me I know I have lots of other things I can do um you know we have you know for for example if like outside of the pure Neuroscience basic and clinical and Technology development you know we've got all this corporate um facing work funded work uh through Wharton which is a totally new space a new opportunity so if you know if one you know I don't want it to be taken away but if it is then you know there's there's plenty left to do well you're clearly one of the few people that I'm aware of that is you know a true card caring research neuroscientist highly respected in the domain of like real Neuroscience who's also involved in like business school type stuff and you know people on both sides of that take you really seriously because there's real rigor there and the Vigor uh perhaps goes along with it's hard to know uh what's caus yeah which comes first but um any about it maybe we parse this over coffee sometime um Apple and Samsung o Apple and Samsung I'm an Apple guy me too um but I heard that the cameras on the Samsung phones are pretty cool how much do you love your iPhone how how what's your loyalty what's your brand loyalty for Apple I grew up near the original Apple Store it was in a different location um gosh I love Apple products um I don't like that they keep changing the the PS I know that's an super annoying um but they seem to be like hovering on USBC now um I love the ease and simplicity and yeah I have a bit of a kind of like a historical South Bay relationship to it so yeah I would say could you get me to um use a a Samsung phone Noah yeah so I mean this is the interesting observation like loyalty for let's let's just talk about smartphones and Apple and Samsung are the dominant players in the US market they're basically the same device you know I mean they're they're both handheld computers that can do a million things and uh amazing stuff and yet the Loyalty amongst the Apple users is through the roof it's near 100% year in year out and that's not true for Samsung despite Steve Jobs passing away yeah despite I mean just a legacy right but I think that reflects a lot of the the design and and the emphasis I think that he put into um the product but also like trying understand it through the lens of the customer right so that's like an empathy I mean there really is empathy this was one of the first questions I got when I you know when I came to business school I was like what the hell accounts for empathy for a brand it's not a person or this connection like why do I have loyalty to a thing that's not a human being you know a product and a brand a company right what in the world is that all about doesn't make sense and there's this idea in marketing that actually and it makes sense is that we're what's happening is we're applying or we're getting uh leveraged the hardware in our brains that's used to connect to people and now it's connecting to Brands into the brand community and you could see that kind of in like the words we use to talk about brands for example that's a rugged brand the creative brand you know we use personality words to talk about them say I love my brand I hate that brand whatever and Steve understood this he talked about the Apple icon needing to look a certain way that it was like friendly but technically right but you know balance I me this is um the idea that objects or images could look friendly when they weren't objects or images of faces or or bodies is a very interesting concept yeah yeah so so we decided to test this idea so we brought people in lab we've done now like I don't know 10 studies on this brought people in who are Apple or Samsung users um and the first experiment we did we was a brain Imaging experiment and uh first we just asked all the standard marketing questions how how how many how long have you had the product how much do you love it what's your loyalty what's your identification with it you know Etc and it was equivalent Apple and Samsung they they said the same things about their brands okay so now we bring them into the lab put them in the MRI machine and we're going to expose them to news bits about each of the two Brands like something good happened to Apple something bad happened to Apple or Samsung Etc and we ask them to rate it how do you feel good neutral bad about that and then we go through the whole thing we scan their brains take pictures of what's going on in their brains and um it was really interesting because what we found is that behaviorally in terms of their responses they both expressed empathy for their brands which hadn't been really measured before I feel good for good news about my brand bad for bad news about my brand and for Apple customers they said yeah that's really true for Apple but I don't feel so much about Samsung Samsung customers said yeah I feel really strongly about my brand oh and they had reverse empathy or shod and Freud of for Apple which was is part of the story so they felt really good when something bad happened to Apple and they felt really bad when something good happen to Apple talk about tribalism that's that's that's tribalism right there when you look at their brains is totally different so in apple apple customers show empathy in their brains for Apple you get activation of areas that are active uh for reward for myself reward for my kid winning spelling be for good news and the extended pain Network pain for me pain for my loved one for things that happen to Apple if I'm an Apple customer and Silent for Samsung you look at Samsung user you know customers and if you're the CMO of Samsung you should be worried because they show absolutely nothing no feelings towards anything that happened to Samsung the only thing you see is this shot in Frey this reverse empathy so you see like pain for good news about Apple and and and joy for bad news about Apple so the first take- home message is it's all about Apple like apple customers choose Apple cuz they love apple and they want to be part of something bigger and I'll get to that in a second and Samsung users choose Samsung because they don't they hate apple right so that's that's sort of that or they hate winners they hate winners whatever there's a whole thing they don't want to be part of the community uh they don't want something bigger than themselves there is something too in our data that essentially apple is like kind of like a cult you could say it's a family I would say it's the dominant culture now though they're not the niche like thing Samsung's the niche thing right they're yeah well what's what's really fascinating now is that um and this is by virtue of of things that Apple smart things Apple has done to reinforce this sense of in group be part of that Community like the um the you know the green text bubble thing so now it's like 91% of teenagers are choosing Apple over Samsung because they don't want to be left out they don't want to be ostracized now we talked about synchrony before and synchron is this marker of community and closeness and and we're all on the same team so we used EEG uh to measure brain waves uh in people while they're um in in a number of conditions while they're reading getting news about Apple and Samsung also while they're watching the commercials you remember that spectacular Apple commercial where they they crushed all those beautiful instruments and what not and turned into a iPad or whatever and then there was the Samsung response to that so we measured EG activity and what we found is that Apple people are all in sync with each other their brains are humming along at the exact same rhythm to News of the World to ads about Apple and Samsung each Samsung person is like an island unto themselves they're just not in sync at all there these are like the incels of Technology you said it I didn't say it probably going to catch a lot of for this but but look the data is the data and so Apple's this sort of extended family and they're all in sync with each other right they're like they're like a real team and um and you don't see that in in Samsung so Apple people are seeing the world through similar eyes right and feeling similar um things and beyond that I said well if this is all true maybe is it it's a question of now like are Apple people wired that weight you know at Birth in a sense you know or how much what's the balance of like what what who they are versus what Apple has done uh you know through their marketing and and design activities I I can't we can't do that experiment is really hard but when we looked at the structural MRI data we found something really interesting which is the parts of the brain that are really intimately involved in Social managing our social relationship so the parts that are like involved in theory of mind and empathy which are exact so those are physically larger in apple people than in Samsung people they're physically larger in monkeys monkeys who have more friends those same brain areas are bigger than monkeys who have fewer friends please tell me you've run this on politically leaning left versus politically leaning right so we started to do that experiment and then the pandemic hit so we haven't gotten that excuse I know it's an excuse we haven't gotten that back off kiding true I would be too afraid to run that experiment not because I'd be concerned about the the result or what people would say if I shared the result but here's why I feel like um when I was growing up it was like if you were a rebel you were associated with anything like Indie music punk rock Rock like you were associated with like hip hop anything was kind of outside the mainstream which at the time this was like the 80s and 90s we had a mix of Republican and Democrat um governments at that time you know depending on which four-year segment we're talking about but there was this idea that like if you liked anything about the government you know you're this is kind of the carryover I think from the post from the Vietnam era and the post Vietnam era that if you liked anything associated with government that you were a conformist yeah and if you didn't you were iconic class right yeah now I feel like it's become very issue specific right like who's in power basically that the party like politics has it was always split into two it used to be you agree with the establishment or you don't agree with the establishment now it's like depending on who's in power people say Well they're The Establishment so the the it's like the game has changed it's sort of subdivided itself and changed and so if one were to run the experiment of um kind of like affiliation I would I would assume my prediction would be that within the right there's a lot of affiliation within the left there's a lot of affiliation but that you wouldn't necessarily see a difference in terms of activation of affiliative neural circuitry it depends on on with whom they're sitting absolutely which is very different than the phone situation that the Samsung versus Apple thing is a lot more like when I was growing up um and it's complicated because what used to be Niche and rebellious inevitably becomes mainstream yeah like I remember the movie Revenge of the Nerds of course which of course was about like the Nerds being marginalized and then you know and then being like the popular ones and and on and on everything was like a John Hughes film jocks versus you know rockers versus you know nerds versus that things really Blended together for you know 20 years or so and then now it's very divided along the lines of politics yeah whereas before it was politics versus non-conform right now it's like depends on which C like literally color it's like gang Warfare yeah yeah it's like Blues it's Blues versus Reds and jets and sharks Jets and sharks so it feels very um like like the experiment that's why I'd be afraid to run the experiment I I wouldn't know how to design the experiment yeah I mean I I I think well it would be interesting just at the outset to demonstrate uh that like well very easy way to elicit these sort of empathy signals is like just create a video that's fake is what something a former postdoc of mine did in some studies uh you just like a fake needle stick to the cheek and uh you you get you know generally um this sort of activation of empathy signals in the brain um but it tends to be tribal specific or ethnic group specific which is like even though people say I feel just as much pain for these two different people um the brain signals which we know or what actually predicts what you'll do next you know it predicts your behavior the brain signals are specific to within your group so I think that's what that was in fact the experiment we're going to do which is like people are going to be you know we'll have these videos of like uh proud Republican or proud Democrat whatever you want to say on the hat and then they're getting stuck with a needle um and then we me we ask you what you feel and we measure your your brain activity and you know I think it would be obviously very highly specific you might say you feel pain for that person who's from the other political party maybe you wouldn't now anymore maybe you'd be like yay um you see a lot of um a gosh you see a lot of people take enjoyment in other people's suffering um when the person's suffering is uh sort of perceived by a lot of others as a winner yeah we saw that with the fires with with rich people's houses burning down and and a lot of people piling on oh yeah you know right well the media was very skewed there like we're like we were hearing about people's you know first of three homes burning and that's hard for people that have very little to um at the same time you know for anyone experiencing loss it's loss yeah it's a it's a tough one it's tough It's a tough one yeah man this conversation has given me a ton more to think about which means it's a great conversation I have to say you know in our business of research science um there's that term you know um he or she is a serious scientist I feel like there are very very few serious scientists doing experiments in the real world or trying to map to the real world I probably just offended about 300 scientists but Hey listen we only have a limited number of guests we can bring on here anyway so no I'm just kidding um there are others certainly but I have to just applaud you for the range of things that you've embraced and and taken on at the level of neural anthropologic sociologic psych psychology like you know Endocrinology this is this is a big field that you're trying to get your arms around a big a big set of questions and yet it's clear you are a serious scientist you do like real experiments with isolating variables and all all the necessary controls that are required to really tease out mechanism and larger theme so whereas a few minutes ago we were talking about maybe you taking on less I I'm not I would say first of all who am I to tell you what to do second of all um and I'm not hope I didn't give that impression um and second of all like what a service to the world you're doing because certainly in researching for this podcast and um even with guests you know oftentimes it's really a struggle to try and figure out how to talk to someone who's really down at the level of mechanism who's not working on small animal models or even if they are how to map that to Everyday experience and today you know we've been talking about potential mate valuation um meme coins uh politics um hierarchies uh decision-making time scales I mean all through the lens of real serious science so first of all thank you so much for coming here and spending these hours with us educating us and right alongside that thank you for doing the work that you're doing it's it's really spectacular I I knew we were going to get into a number of these things but I I didn't really um anticipate just how much was going to geys her out of this in terms of changing my way of thinking and I'm certain that's changing the way that other people are thinking now and are going to think about their decisions and just kind of themselves and the world i' be very grateful if you'd come back again and talk to us about the next round of amazing experiments before too long well I would love that um and thanks for having me and this has been a really stimulating conversation I've enjoyed it there is a lot more um that we could cover which would be super fun surely and um your endurance is uh something to behold um thank you please do come back again thank you for the work that you're doing we will provide links to all the resources and places to find out more about your book the work that you're doing and some of these tests that you were talking about earlier yeah where that go beyond like standard personality tests so that people can answer those critical questions about where they are you know perhaps best placed in the landscape between creativity and you know strategy implementation in a different way so thanks so much this this was a real thrill for me thank you thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Michael Platt to learn more about Dr Platt's work and to find links to his books please see the show note captions if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please click follow for the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to festar review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics you'd like me to consider for the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast for those of you that haven't heard I have a new book coming out it's my very first book it's entitled protocols an operating manual for the human body this is a book that I've been working on for more than 5 years and that's based on more than 30 years of research and experience and it covers protocols for everything from sleep to exercise to Stress Control protocols related to focus and motivation and of course I provide the scientific substantiation for the protocols that are included the book is now available by pre-sale at protocols book.com there you can find links to various vendors you can pick the one that you like best again the book is called protocols an operating manual for the human body if you're not already following me on social media I am Hu lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram X formerly known as Twitter Facebook LinkedIn and threads and on all those platforms I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content on the hubman Lab podcast again that's hubman lab on all social media platforms and if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a zeroc cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as what we call protocols in the form of one to three page PDFs that cover everything from how to optimize your sleep how to optimize dopamine deliberate cold exposure we have a foundational Fitness protocol that covers cardiovascular training and resistance training all of that is available completely zero cost you simply go to huberman lab.com go to the menu tab in the top right corner scroll down to newsletter and enter your email and I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Michael Platt and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 38 ---
Video ID: FCFQx3cA0Lg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FCFQx3cA0Lg
Title: How Hormones Shape Sexual Development | Huberman Lab Essentials
Published: 2025-02-13 13:00:19 UTC
Description:
In this Huberman Lab Essentials episode, I explain the crucial role hormones play in shaping the sexual development of both the brain and body.

I discuss how biological masculinization and feminization depend on factors such as genetics, hormone ratios, and receptor availability. I also explore how hormones like testosterone, estrogen, and other steroid hormones influence sexual characteristics and brain development. Additionally, I examine the impact of environmental factors—such as herbicides like atrazine, cannabis, alcohol, and even cell phones—on hormone function and reproductive health.

Huberman Lab Essentials are short episodes (approximately 30 minutes) focused on key science and protocol takeaways from past Huberman Lab episodes. Essentials are released every Thursday, while full-length episodes continue to be released every Monday.

Read the full episode show notes: https://go.hubermanlab.com/Do6MuHz

This Huberman Lab Essentials episode is from the full-length episode, available here: https://youtu.be/J7SrAEacyf8?si=2vEAZemRXJBAAy5l

*Related Episodes*
The Science of Healthy Hair, Hair Loss and How to Regrow Hair: https://youtu.be/6ZrlsVx85ek
Dr. Shanna Swan: How to Safeguard Your Hormone Health & Fertility: https://youtu.be/i5611OvTFGM

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://go.hubermanlab.com/instagram 
Threads: https://go.hubermanlab.com/threads
X: https://go.hubermanlab.com/x 
Facebook: https://go.hubermanlab.com/facebook
TikTok: https://go.hubermanlab.com/tiktok
LinkedIn: https://go.hubermanlab.com/linkedin
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://go.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Huberman Lab Essentials; Hormones, Sexual Development
00:01:25 Chromosomal Sex, Gonadal Sex, Hormonal Sex, Morphology
00:06:06 Steroid Hormones, Sexual Characteristics
00:09:10 Primary & Secondary Sexual Characteristics, Dihydrotestosterone (DHT), Kisspeptin
00:13:23 Masculinization of Brain, Estrogen
00:14:41 Herbicides, Atrazine, Hormone Effects, Sperm Counts
00:20:29 Female Sexual Development, Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome
00:24:03 Cannabis & Aromatase Activity, Gynecomastia; Alcohol & Estrogen Activity
00:27:00 Cell Phones & Gonads
00:29:46 Beard & Hair Growth, DHT
00:33:04 Hyenas, Hormones, Androstenedione; Plants  
00:38:06 Recap & Key Takeaways                     

#HubermanLab #Science #Health #Hormones 

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to hubman lab Essentials where we revisit past episodes for the most potent and actionable science-based tools for mental health physical health and performance I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford today we're going to explore hormones what they are how they work what leads to masculinization or feminization of the brain and body body what we're trying to do today is really get to the biology the physiology the endocrinology and the behavior hormones by definition are a substance a chemical that's released in one area of the body typically from something we call a gland although they can also be released from neurons but they're released often from glands that travel and have effects both on that gland but also on other organs and tissues in the body and that differentiates hormones from things like neurotransmitters which tend to act more locally examples of tissues that produce hormones would be the thyroid the testes the ovaries Etc and then of course there are areas of the brain like the hypothalamus and the pituitary which are closely related to one another and release hormones that cause the release of yet other hormones out in the body so let's start with development sperm meets egg everything that happens before that is a topic of the next episode but sperm meets egg this is mamalian reproduction and that egg starts to duplicate it starts to make more of itself it makes more cells and eventually some of those cells become skin some of those cells become brain some of those cells become muscle some of those cells become fingers all the stuff that makes up the brain and body plan in addition there are hormones that come both from the mother and from the developing baby the developing fetus that impact whether or not the brain will be what they call organized masculine or organized feminine and as I say this I want you to try and discard with the cultural connotations or your psychological connotations of what masculinization and feminization are because we're only centering on the biology so typically people have either 2x chromosomes and the traditional language around that is that person is female right or an X chromosome and a y chromosome and that person will become male now it's not always the case there are cases where it's xxy where there are two X chromosomes plus a y chromosome there are also cases where it's x y y where they're two Y chromosomes and these have important biological and psychological impacts so the first thing we need to establish is that there is something called chromosomal sex whether or not there're 2 X chromosomes or an X and Y chromosome is what we call chromosomal sex but the next stage of separating out the Sexes is what we call gonadal sex typically not always but typically if somebody has testes for their gonads we think of them as male and if somebody has ovaries we think of them as female although that's not always the case either but let's just explore the transition from chromosomal sex to gatal sex because it's a fascinating one that we all went through in some form or another so this XY that we typically think of as promoting masculinization of the fetus we say that because on the Y chromosome there are genes and those genes have particular functions that suppress female reproductive organs so on the Y chromosome there's a gene which encodes for something called Mulan inhibiting hormone so there's actually a hormone that's programmed by the Y chromosome that inhibits the formation of mulian ducts which are an important part of the female reproductive apparatus that's critical because already we're seeing the transition between chromosome Y chromosome and gonad and other genes on the Y chromosome promote the formation of testes so there are genes like the sry Gene and other gen gen that promote the formation of testes while they also inhibit the formation of the Marian ducts so the transition from chromosomal sex to gatal sex is a very important distinction it's kind of a fork in the road that happens very early in development while fetuses are still in the embryo so we have to distinguish between chromosomal sex gonadal sex and then there's what we call hormonal sex which is the effects of the of the steroid hormones estrogen and testosterone and their and their derivatives on what we call morphological sex or the shape of the baby in the human and the genitalia and the jaw and all these other things and so it actually is quite complicated so you know it's a long distance from chromosomes to gender identity and gender identity has a lot of social uh influences and roles this is an area that right now is very Dynamic and in the discussion out there as you know but just getting from chromosomal sex to what we would call gonadal sex or and hormonal sex and morphological sex involves a number of steps So today we're going to talk about those steps and there's some fascinating things that do indeed relate to tools do indeed relate to some important behavioral choices important choices about things to avoid while pregnant and for those of you that are not pregnant things to avoid if you're thinking about eventually having children and that is not to drive development in One Direction or another but there are examples where there are some dilus things in our environment that can actually negatively impact what we call sexual development overall regardless of chromosomal background so let's get started with that let's talk a little bit more about what hormones do hormones generally have two categories of effects they can either be very fast or they can be very slow there are hormones like cortisol and adrenaline which act very fast and then there are hormones like what we like testosterone and estrogen which we refer to as the sex steroid hormones these molecules for those of you that are interested are what called lipophilic which just means that they like fatty stuff they can actually pass through fatty membranes and because the outside of cells as well as the What's called the nuclear envelope where all the DNA contents and stuff are are stuffed inside are made of a of a of lipid of fat these steroid hormones can actually travel into cells and then interact with the DNA of cells in order to control gene expression so they can change the sorts of things that cells will become and they can change the way that cells function in a long-term way and that's actually how the presence of these genes like Sr and mulian inhibiting hormone lead to reductions or elimination I should say of things like the mulian ducts and promote instead what's called in males the wolfian ducks or promote the uh the development of testes rather than ovaries so all you need to know is that hormones have short-term and long-term effects and the long-term effects are actually related to their effects on genes and how those genes are expressed or repressed not in order to prevent them from having particular proteins made so these hormones these steroid hormones are exceedingly powerful and if we're going to have a discussion about masculinization or feminization Etc you also need to think about the counterpart it's not just about masculinizing the body or feminizing the body and brain it's also about demasculinizing the brain in many cases as a normal biological function of of uh typically of XX females and defeminization the suppression of certain Pathways that are related to feminization of the body and brain so I've just thrown a lot of biology at you but this is where it all starts to get incredibly surprising you would think that it's straightforward right you have a y chromosome you suppress the female reproductive pathway like the like the mulian Ducks you promote this the development of testes and then testes make testosterone and then it organizes the brain male and it wants to do maleik things and then um in females you get estrogen and it wants to do female likee things and air quotes here for all of this it turns out that isn't how it works at all here's where it's interesting we have to understand that there are effects of these hormones testosterone and estrogen on what are called primary sexual characteristics which are the ones that you're born with secondary sexual characteristics which are the ones that show up in puberty and these are happening in the brain and body and spinal cord and so I'm going to disentangle all this for you by giving you some examples first let's talk about the development of primary sexual characteristics the ones that show up at Birth and one of the more dramatic examples of this comes from the role of testosterone in creating the external genitalia it turns out that it's not test testosterone that's responsible for the development of the penis in a baby that has an X chromosome and a y chromosome it's a different Androgen Androgen is just a category of hormones that includes testosterone but testosterone is converted in the fetus to something called dihydrotestosterone and that's accomplish through an enzyme called five Alpha reductase dihydrotestosterone is what we would call the do an androgen in males it's responsible for aggression it's responsible for a lot of muscular strength it's involved in beard growth and male pattern baldness we're going to talk about all of that but dihydrotestosterone has power powerful effects in determining the genitalia while the baby is still in the embryo so this ends there's testosterone that's made and that testosterone gets converted by this enzyme five Al reductase in a little structure called the tubercle that tubercle will eventually become the penis so you say Okay straightforward this testosterone's converted to dihydro testosterone and then if there's dihydro testosterone it controls penis growth and indeed that's the case so that's a primary sexual characteristic that baby will then grow up and later during puberty there will be the release of a molecule I talked about this last episode called kisspeptin k i SS p e p t i n kiss peptin which will cause the release of some other hormones katop releasing hormone luteinizing hormone will stimulate the testes to make testosterone so in puberty testosterone leads to further growth and development of the penis as well as the accumulation of or growth of pubic hair uh deepening of the voice all the secondary sexual characteristics there's a very interesting phenomenon that was published in the journal science in the 1970s for which now there's a wealth of scientific data and this relates to a genetic mutation where five Alpha reductase the enzyme that converts testosterone to dihydro testosterone doesn't exist it's mutated and this actually was first identified in the Dominican Republic what happens is baby is born if you were to look at that baby it would look female there would be very little or no external penis and what was observed is that from time to time that baby baby after being raised as a girl would around the age of 11 or 12 or 13 would start to sprout a penis there's actually a name for this it's called hosis which the translation is more or less penis at 12 and as strange as this might sound it makes sense if you understand the underlying mutation what happens in these children these whid dois is that the child is born it as testes which are not descended so up in the body they weren't able to convert testosterone to dihydro testosterone because they lack this enzyme 5 Alpha reductase as a consequence the primary sexual characteristic of external male genitalia penis doesn't develop and then what happens is the baby grows up and then testosterone starts getting secreted from the testes because kisspeptin in the brain signals through ganat tropin and izing hormone travels down to the testes the testes start churning out testosterone and there's a secondary growth of the penis and all of a sudden there's a penis and the point here is that dihydrotestosterone not testosterone is responsible for this primary growth of the penis and that testosterone later is involved in the secondary sexual characteristics deepening of the voice Etc now this is where the information gets even more interesting and applies to essentially everybody you might think that testosterone because it masculinizes the body in the in the secondary sexual characteristic way and because dihydrotestosterone another Androgen masculinizes the primary sexual characteristics the growth of the penis early on that testosterone must masculinize the brain but the masculinization of the brain is not accomplished by testosterone it is accomplished by estrogen testosterone can be converted into estrogen by an enzyme called aromatase there are neurons in the brain that make aromatase and convert testosterone into estrogen in other words it's estrogen that masculinizes the XY individual that masculinizes the brain and this has profound effects on all sorts of things on behavior on Outlook in the world Etc but I think most people don't realize that it's estrogen that comes from testosterone that masculinizes the male brain the XY brain not testosterone nor dihydro testosterone so I just want to mention some tools you might be asking yourself how could tools possibly come up at this stage of the conversation where we're talking about sexual development and we're talking about the differentiation of tissues in the body well this is true both for children and parents and adults I want to emphasize that there are things that are environmental and there are things that people use that actually can impact hormone levels and can impact sexual development in Fairly profound ways and I want to be very clear this is not uh me pulling from some rare Journal I've never heard of it this is pulling from textbooks in particular today I'm guiding a lot of the conversation on uh work that uh on behavioral Endocrinology is a book by um Randy Nelson and and Lance ccfi exp true experts in the field I'm going to talk about some of the work from Tyrone Hayes at from UC Burkley about environmental toxins and their impacts on some of these things like testosterone and estrogen I'm going to touch into them they're I'm going to give some anecdotal evidence that's grounded in studies which we will provide in the caption or that I'll reference here you know again I'm just going to highlight when one starts talking about environmental factors and how they're poisoning us or disrupting growth or fertility rates it can start to sound a little bit crazy except when you start to actually look at some of the real data data from quality research Labs funded by federal government funded not from companies or other sources that are really aimed at understanding what the underlying biology is and for that I I really we we should all be grateful to Tyrone Hayes um at UC Berkeley I remember way back when I was a graduate student in the uh late '90s goodness um at UC Berkeley and I remember him he was studying frogs he was talking about developmental um defects in these frogs that live in different Waters around it was California but also elsewhere um and he identified a substance which is present in a lot of waterways throughout this country and other countries so us and and and Beyond certainly not just restricted to California which is atrazine this is a a z i NE again this is the stuff of textbooks and it causes severe testicular malformations so again atrazine exposure is serious and what's interesting is if you look at the data what you find is that at sites in Western and Midwestern sections of the United States 10 to 92% of male frogs these were frogs mind you had testicular abnormalities and the most severe testicular malformations uh were in the testes rather than in the sperm so it's actually the organ itself the gonad itself now it's very well known now that atrazine is in many herbicides and so you know whereas I would say in the 80s and '90s the discussion around you know herbicides and their negative effects was considered kind of like hippie dippy stuff or the stuff you hear about it um you know the your local Community Markets and the these kind of new Agy communities now there's very solid data from federally funded Labs at major universities that have been peer- reviewed and published in excellent journals showing that indeed many of these herbicides can have NE negative effects primarily by impacting the ratios of these hormones in either the mothers or in the the the testes altering the testes of the fathers or Direct effects on developing young animals and potentially humans and so you ask well what about humans frogs are are wonderful but what about what about humans so here are the data on what's Happening um and this isn't all going to be scary stuff we're also going to talk about uh tools to amarate and offset some of these effects depending on your needs but across human populations sperm counts are indeed declining okay so in 1940 the average um the average density of human sperm was 113 million per milliliter of semen that's how it's measured how many sperm per milliliter of semen in 1990 this figure has dropped to 66 it went from 113 million per Mill to 66 million per milliliter in the United States and Western Europe so it's not just a us thing researchers Al also estimated that the volume of semen produced by men has dropped 20% in that time reduced sperm count per ejaculation even further so between 1981 in 1991 the ratio of normal spermatogenesis has decreased from 56.4% to 26.9% so there's a lot that's happening primarily because of the these herbicides that are in widespread use to reduce sperm counts and these are going to have profound effects not just on sperm counts but on development sexual development at the level of the gonads and the Brain because you need testosterone to get you uh dihydro testosterone for primary sexual characteristics you need estrogen that's come from testosterone to masculinize the brain and of course we're not just focusing on sperm and testosterones you of course also know that many of these herbicides are disrupting estrogens in a similar way which might explain why puberty is happening so much earlier in young girls these days so there are a lot of things that are happening now does this mean that you have to run around and neurotically um avoid anything that includes things like atrazine and should you be avoiding all kinds of herbicides I don't know that's up to you but it does seem that these have pretty marked effects in both the animal studies and in the in the human studies so let's talk about female sexual development and as always what we'll do is we'll talk about the normal biology then we'll talk a little bit about a kind of of extraordinary or unusual set of cases but we'll talk about them because they illustrate an important principle about how things work under typical circumstances so there is a mutation called Androgen insensitivity syndrome and understanding how Androgen and Sensitivity Syndrome works can help you really understand how hormones impact sexual development so here's how it works there are individuals who are XY so they have a y chromosome that are born that make testosterone they have testes and they don't have mulian ducts because they because on the Y chromosome is this mulian inhibiting hormone however these individuals look completely female and in general they report feeling like girls when they're young women when they're older but there's something unusual that's happening in these individuals because they have an XY chromosomal type and not XX so what's happening well what's happening is the testes are making testosterone but the receptor for testosterone is mutated and therefore the testes never descend they don't have ovaries they have testes but the testes are internal and so typically these individuals find out that they are actually XY chromosomes so that you know their chromosomal sex is male if you will and their gonadal sex is male but the gonads the testes are inside the body they don't actually develop a scrotum they don't make ovaries and when they don't menstrate around the time of puberty that's a sign that something is different and so they never menstrate around puberty and if they look into this deeply enough what you find is that they are actually XY they make testosterone but their body can't make use of the testosterone because they don't have the receptors and The receptors are vitally important for some for most all of the secondary sexual characteristics that we talked about body hair penis growth during puberty Etc so again we're talking about this in order to illustrate the principle that in order to have its effects a hormone doesn't just have to be present that hormone actually has to be able to bind its receptor and take action on the target cells perhaps the simplest way to understand how estrogen and testosterone impact masculinization or feminization of the brain and behavior is from a a statement it's actually the closing sentence of an abstract that my colleague Nar Shaw at Stanford School of Medicine uh published which is that estrogen again it's estrogen that is aromatized from testosterone by aromatase sets up the masculine repertoire of sexual and in animals and in humans territorial behaviors so it sets up the circuitry in the brain estrogen does that estrogen sets up the masculine circuitry in the brain and testosterone is then what controls the display of those behaviors later in life and I find that incredibly interesting you would think it was just testosterone did one thing and estrogen did another but it turns out that nature is far more interesting than that okay so what are some things that impact sexual development early in life and later in life let's talk about cannabis let's talk about alcohol first of all cannabis marijuana THC there are many studies that point to the fact that THC and other things in cannabis promote significant increases in aromatase activity now pot smokers aren't going to like this especially male pot smokers aren't going to like this but it's the reality here's the deal that cannabis and it's not clear if it's THC itself or other elements in the marijuana plant promote aromatase activity now this has been observed anecdotally where pot smokers have a higher incidence of developing something I mentioned before amastia breast Bud development or full-blown breast development in males now earlier I said that estrogen is what masculinizes the male brain in utero that's true but the way that cannabis seems to work at least from the studies I was able to identify is that it promotes circulating estrogen in the body and therefore can counteract some of the masculinizing effects of uh things like testosterone and dihydrotestosterone on primary and secondary sexual characteris istics so I mention this because um you know I think nowadays uh marijuana use is far more widespread and certainly during puberty it's it can have profound effects on these hormonal systems and so we'll do another episode that goes really deep into this but yes cannabis promotes estrogenic activity by increasing Aroma taste most everyone can appreciate that drinking during pregnancy is not good for the developing fetus fetal alcohol syndrome is a wellestablished uh negative out come of pregnancy and it's something that there cognitive effects that are that are really bad there there's actually physical malformation um Etc so drinking during pregnancy not good probably drinking during puberty not good either because alcohol in particular certain things like beer but other grain alcohols can increase estrogenic activity now this isn't just about protecting Young boys from estrogenic activity it's also protecting girls from from excessive or even hypoestrogenic effects of alcohol in puberty now many teenagers drink college students drink and it's important to point out that puberty doesn't start on one day and end on another day puberty has a beginning a middle and an end but development is really our entire lifespan okay so we talked about cannabis we talked about alcohol let's talk about cell phones first of all I use a cell phone I use it very often and I do not think they are evil devices I think that they require some discipline in order to make sure that it does not become a negative force in one's life so I personally restrict the number of hours that I'm on the phone and in particular on social media but what about the cell phone itself you know when I was a junior Professor so pre-tenure early Professor I taught this class on neural circuits and health and disease and one of the students asked me you know are cell phone safe for the brain and you know the all the data point to the fact that they were or at least there were no data showing that it wasn't I still don't have the answer on that frankly I'm not personally aware of any evidence in quality peer-reviewed studies showing that cell phones are bad for the brain or that holding the phone to the ear is bad or that Bluetooth is bad or any of that I'm just not aware of inequality studies however I was very interested in a particular study that was St that was published back in 2013 on rats it was basically took a cell phone and put it under a cage of rats and looked at basically testicular ovarian development in rats and saw minor but but still statistically significant defects in ovarian in testicular development since then and now returning to the literature I've seen a absolute explosion of studies some of which are in quality journals some of which are in what I would call not Blue Ribbon journals identifying defects in testicular Andor ovarian development by mere exposure to cell phone emitted waves let's just call that we don't know what they are and this sounds almost crazy right anytime somebody starts talking about EMF and things like that you kind of worry like is this person okay but look the literature are pointing in a direction where chronic exposure of the of the gonads to cell phones could be creating serious issues in terms of the health at the cell level and then in terms of the output so the output in for the testes would be sperm production um swimming speed in sperm is an important feature of sperm Health in the ovaries it would be estrogenic output um how how reg the Cycles are I think that it's fair to say based on the literature that there are effects of cell phone emitted waves on gonadal development the question is what is the proximity of the cell phone to the gonads so you have to take these sorts of studies with a grain of salt there's some interesting effects of hormones that actually you can observe on the outside of people that tell you something about not just their level of hormones but also about their underlying genetics and these relate to beard growth and baldness and it's fascinating the molecule the hormone dihydrotestosterone made from testosterone is the hormone primarily responsible for facial hair for Beard growth as well it's the molecule the hormone primarily responsible for lack of hair on the head for hair loss not incidentally the drugs that are designed to prevent hair loss are five Alpha reductase Inhibitors so remember five Alpha reductase from the hosis well the people that discovered the hosis went on to do a lot of research on the underlying biochemistry of this really interesting molecule dihydro testosterone they identified five Alpha reductase and five Alpha reductase Inhibitors are the basis of most of the anti-air loss treatments that are out there and so there are some interesting things here first of all the side effect profiles of those treatments for hair loss are quite severe in many individuals remember DHT is the primary Androgen for libido for strength and connective tissue um uh repair for uh aggression even if that aggression of course is held in check but just sort of ambition and aggression is related to dopamine but within the testosterone pathway less so pure testosterone although pure testosterone has its effects but DHT is at least in primate species including humans is the dominant Androgen for most of those sorts of effects and if you look at somebody everyone can predict whether or not they're going to go bald based on looking at their we're always taught our mother's father so if your mother's father was bald there's a higher probability that you're going to go bald the pattern of DHT receptors on the scalp will dictate whether or not you're going to go bald everywhere or just in the front or soal crown type baldness and the density of the beard tells you about the density of DHT receptors now this varies by by Background by genetic background there are areas of the world where all the men seem to be have the same pattern of baldness like a strip of baldness down the center with hair still on the sides and and full beards that's because these patterns of DHT receptors are genetically determined elsewhere testosterone levels can still be very high D D HT levels in the blood can be very high and yet people will have very light beards or no beards and that's because they don't have a lot of DHT receptors in the face there are a lot of effects of DHT that you can just see in male phenotypes and it's interesting that these hair loss drugs that are uh or to prevent hair loss drugs are directly aimed at preventing the conversion of testosterone into dihydro testosterone and that's why they to some extent prevent hair loss but also to some extent have a bunch of side effects that are associated with low DHT I want to tell you a story about hyenas and clitorises the size of penises so when I was a graduate student at UC Berkeley we had a professor in our department phenomenal scientist named Steve Glickman Steve Glickman had a colony of hyenas spotted hyenas that lived with en caged enclosures of course in Tien park behind the UC Berkeley campus the hyenas are no longer there hyenas exhibit an incredible feature to their body their hormones and their social structure hyenas unlike many species have a situation with their genitalia where the male penis is actually smaller than the female clitoris and I should say that the male penis itself having seen a fair number of hyena penises is not particularly small which means that the hyena clitorises are extremely large this was well known for some time it turns out that in these spotted hyenas the females are dominant so after a kill the females will eat then their young will eat and then the male hyenas will eat as well when the female hyena gives birth she gives birth not through the vaginal Canal that we're accustomed to seeing but through a very enlarged clitoris like phus although it's not a phus it's a clitoris and it literally splits open so the many fetuses di during the course of hyena development and birth the baby hyena actually comes through the the tissue and it's it's a very traumatic birth it was a mystery as to how the the female hyenas have this we'll call it masculinization but it's really a androgenization of the periphery of the genitalia and it turns out through a lot of careful research done by Steve Glickman Christine Dre uh and and others that it's interestin diione what is essentially a pror hormone to testosterone it's andrine diione at very high levels that's produced in female hyenas that creates this enlargement of their genitalia so if you want to read up on endin diione ersin diione is made into testosterone through this enzyme 17 beta Hydro hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase it's a complicated Pathway to to pronounce it's a fairly straightforward pathway biochemically you may recall during the '90s and 2000s there were a lot of uh performance-enhancing drug scandals in particular in Major League Baseball and it was purported although I don't know that it was ever verified but it was purported that the major um performance-enhancing drug of abuse at that time in particular Players whose names we won't mention but you can Google it if if you want to find out was andrein Dion and the last little anecdote about this which is also published in the scientific literature which is weird but I do find interesting hormones are so fascinating they're just incredible to me is going back to the marijuana plant you know the marijuana plant has these estrogenic properties and I asked a plant biologist whether or not this was unusual but this plant biologist told me oh yeah there are plants that make what is essentially the equivalent of testosterone like pine pollen as it looks a lot like testosterone and there are other plants that make what is essentially estrogen and I said well why would they do that he said that one of the reasons why some plants have evolved this capacity to increase estrogen levels in animals that smoke not smoke it but then animals that consume them I'm guessing that animals aren't smoking marijuana although I don't know send me the paper if you've heard of this is that plants have figured out ways they've adapted ways to push back on populations of rodents and other species of animals that eat them so plants are engaged in a kind of plant to animal Warfare where they increase the estrogen of the males in that population to lower the sperm counts to keep those populations clamped at certain levels so that those plants can continue to flourish and I find this just fascinating and hormones there aren't just impacting tissue growth and development within the individual and between the mother remember the placenta is an endocrine organ and The Offspring but plants and animals are in this communication so it's a fascinating area of biology and as you've noticed today none of this deals with the current controversies around gender and how many genders and sex Etc that's a separate conversation that is by definition grounded in the kind of Concepts we've been talking about today and needs to take place taking into consideration all of the aspects of Sex and the effects of hormones both on the body on the brain we didn't talk a lot about spinal cord but we will in the next episode on but we can just say on the brain and the periphery early effects late effects acute effects meaning effects that are very fast of levels of hormones going up or down something that absolutely happens during the and across the menstrual cycle as well as long-term effects like the effects of these hormones on gene expression so today as always we weren't able to cover all things things related to sex and hormones and sexual differentiation or development there's no way we could but we have covered a lot of material so once again I want to thank you for embarking on this journey through neuroscience and today neuroendocrinology with me and as always thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

